United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service April 2013  Forest Service Shield USDA LogoDraft Environmental Impact Statement  Stonewall Vegetation Project  Volume 1  Lincoln Ranger District, Helena National Forest Lewis & Clark and Powell Counties, Montana    The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Stonewall Vegetation Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement Lewis and Clark and Powell Counties, Montana  Lead Agency: USDA Forest Service Responsible Official: Kevin Riordan, Forest Supervisor Helena National Forest 2880 Skyway Drive, Helena, MT 59602 For Information Contact: Amber Kamps, District Ranger Lincoln Ranger District 1569 Highway 200, Lincoln, MT 59639 406-362-7000 Abstract: The Lincoln Ranger District of the Helena National Forest proposes to treat stands within an analysis area of about 24,010 acres to improve long-term forest health and reduce fuels within the Stonewall Vegetation project area. The Forest Service developed three alternatives, including: the no action (alternative 1), the proposed action (alternative 2) and an additional alternative created in response to issues raised during public scoping (alternative 3). Several other alternatives were considered but dropped from detailed analysis (see chapter 2). Treatments were designed to improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects, and modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Alternative 2 proposes a total of 8,564 acres (about 36 percent of analysis area) of commercial and noncommercial treatments. Harvest treatments (regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and precommercial thinning) are proposed on a total of 3,099 acres. Fuels treatments would follow timber removals, including slashing, pile burning, jackpot burning, and underburning. In addition to post-harvest burning, prescribed fire is also proposed within the inventoried roadless areas (IRAs) to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 4,182 acres (about 0.5 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area and on 664 acres (about 3.8 percent) within the Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Area. Outside of the IRAs, approximately 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither herd unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. This alternative would require a site-specific, nonsignificant forest plan amendment for standards 3 and 4(a) for the reductions in elk hiding cover and thermal cover. Alternative 3 proposes a total of 6,564 acres (about 27 percent of analysis area) of commercial and noncommercial treatments. Harvest treatments (regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and precommercial thinning) are proposed on a total of 2,298 acres. Fuels treatments would follow timber removals, including slashing, pile burning, jackpot burning, and underburning. In addition to post-harvest burning, prescribed fire is proposed within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 3,565 acres (about 0.4 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area. The Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Area would not be treated. Outside of the IRAs, approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Treatments proposed under alternative 3 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither herd unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a.This alternative would require a site-specific, nonsignificant forest plan amendment for standards 3 and 4(a) for the reductions in elk hiding cover and thermal cover. At this time, alternative 3 is my preferred alternative. Modifications to any or all of the alternatives may be considered for the final environmental impact statement (FEIS) depending on comments received regarding this draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) or to incorporate new information. The final decision may be different than my preferred alternative as presented in this document. This proposed project would implement the Helena National Forest, Forest Plan; it is not authorized under the Healthy Forest Restoration Act. This proposed project is subject to 36 CFR 218 subparts A and B, and will be subject to the objection process pursuant to 36 CFR part 218. It is important that reviewers provide their comments at such times and in such a way that they are useful to the Forest Service’s preparation of the FEIS. Therefore, comments should be provided prior to the close of the comment period and should clearly articulate the reviewer’s concerns and contentions. Only those who submit timely and specifically written comments regarding the proposed project or activity during a public comment period established by the responsible official are eligible to file an objection. For objection eligibility, each individual or representative from each entity submitting timely and specifically written comments regarding the proposed project must either sign the comments or verify identity upon request. Comments received in response to this solicitation, including names, addresses, email addresses, and phone numbers of those who comment, will be considered part of the public record and will be available for public inspection. Comments will be accepted for 45 days beginning on the first day after the date of publication of the notice of availability of this DEIS in the Federal Register. Send Comments to: Amber Kamps, District Ranger 1569 Highway 200, Lincoln, MT 59639  Summary The Helena National Forest, Lincoln Ranger District, is proposing the Stonewall Vegetation Project in response to public interest to work with the Forest Service conducting landscape management activities. The area affected by the proposal includes approximately 24,010 acres (approximately 23,670 acres are National Forest System lands) within Lewis and Clark and Powell Counties, Montana. The project area is on the Lincoln Ranger District, approximately 4 miles north and west of the town of Lincoln, Montana. Proposed activities would include using commercial and noncommercial treatments to move towards desired conditions. Proposed actions include: regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, precommercial thinning, and prescribed burning. The proposed action includes using prescribed fire and tree slashing to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan and Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRA). Prescribed fire is proposed on up to 4,182 acres (about 0.5 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area, and up to 664 acres (about 3.8 percent) within the Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Area. Commercial timber harvest and road construction would not occur in the two roadless areas. Outside the roadless areas, approximately 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. This action is needed to address differences between the existing conditions and desired conditions described in the Forest Plan (pg. II/1 and II/2 goals 4, 10, 11, 14 and 16) (USDA Forest Service 1986). See chapter 1 management direction and existing condition descriptions. Existing conditions within the greater watershed area includes declines of ponderosa pine, western larch, and aspen habitats, elevated fuels in the wildland urban interface, and a landscape-level departure from natural fire processes. After the 2003 Lincoln Complex Fires that burned approximately 36,000 acres and required a partial evacuation of the community of Lincoln, residents expressed a desire to see forest management designed to reduce the risk of future catastrophic events. The fire risk and fuels concerns for this area were also identified in the Community Wildfire Protection Plan (Tri-County Fire Working Group 2005) as the highest priority need for treatment. Development of the Proposed Action The Lincoln Restoration Committee (LRC) of the Montana Forest Restoration Committee (MFRC) is a group of private citizens with diverse community interests who came together in 2008 (formerly as the Lincoln Working Group) with the purpose of developing recommendations for restoration projects on the Lincoln Ranger District, while working within the framework developed by the MFRC. The Helena National Forest has been working with the LRC in compliance with Executive Order 13352 of August 2004—Facilitation of Cooperative Conservation. The proposed action was developed over time involving three areas. Two areas were brought forward to the Forest Service by the LRC, and the third area was developed after Forest Service specialists reviewed conditions within the entire watershed (Cole 2009a, b; Cole 2010; Farley 2009; Heinert 2009a, b; Ihle 2010; Kurtz 2009; Lundberg and Alvino 2006; Marr 2009; Milburn et al. 2006; Milburn 2009; Olsen 2010a, b, c; Randall 2009; Shanley 2009, 2010; Sitch 2009; USDA Forest Service 2010; Walch 2010; Wyatt 2009). This analysis covers all three areas. The recommended actions associated with the three areas are consistent with the goals in the Forest Plan (see table 1. Crosswalk of MFRC Principles with Forest Service direction). In addition, a Forestwide landscape-level assessment of insect conditions and predictions was done in 2008 (Gibson 2008) that identified the Stonewall area as a high priority for management. The Lincoln community is very aware of the mountain pine beetle epidemic and high levels of western spruce budworm activity across the landscapes in the Upper Blackfoot Valley and west side of the Continental Divide. Benefits anticipated as an outcome of proposed actions include: restoration of ponderosa pine, dry Douglas-fir, and western larch sites to a more natural fire regime; maintain or improve vigor and restore aspen groves and whitebark pine; and enhance wildlife habitat conditions. Public Involvement We published the Notice of Intent (NOI) in the Federal Register on January 13, 2010. The NOI asked for public comment on the proposal to be received by February 22, 2010. We sent about 700 letters explaining the proposal and asking for comment to interested individuals, groups and agencies on January 15, 2010. In addition, as part of the public involvement process, we held an open house on February 3, 2010, and project information was available on the Forest website at www.fs.usda.gov/helena/. The project has been listed in the Forest’s Schedule of Proposed Actions since April 1, 2010. Appendix A of the draft environmental impact statement includes the content analysis of the scoping comments received. We received a total of 80 scoping responses via email, public comment form and letters; 30 were in support of the proposed project activities. The majority of responses suggested information to include in the analysis documents, identified language to clarify, or listed elements pertaining to a specific resource to include in the effects analyses. The resource specialists’ reports include this information as well as the analysis of the project effects on the various resources. The resource specialists’ reports are filed in the project record and incorporated by reference and summarized in Chapter 3 – Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences, of this draft EIS. Eight responses expressed concerns or suggestions regarding travel management of area roads and motorized, winter recreation opportunities. The Stonewall Vegetation Project is not a travel planning project and does not propose to change the permanent road system in the project area. Travel management of existing routes is addressed in the “Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel Plan” and the “Blackfoot Travel Plan (Non-Winter)” analyses. A few responses included items of literature to be considered, some noted as opposing science information. As part of the analysis for this project, resource specialists reviewed and considered relevant scientific literature, including submitted articles. The literature review is included in the project record and available on the forest website www.fs.usda.gov/helena/. Using the comments from the public, and other agencies the interdisciplinary team developed a list of issues to address. Issues All of the comments received as a result of scoping and meetings were reviewed by the interdisciplinary team and responsible official and used to identify those which may have a significant cause-effect relationship with the proposal. Specialists analyzed effects in their report comparing trade-offs for the decision-maker and public to understand. These issues were used to: · Formulate alternatives · Prescribe specific design feature to reduce undesired effects · Provide clarification in specialist reports or evaluate the comparative merits of the effects of alternatives Formulate Alternatives These are issues regarding the action and its effects on a particular resource or group of resources that are unresolved or renders the action less effective in accomplishing the purpose and need for this project. Wildlife Habitat: Proposed vegetative removal and burning treatments may reduce the quality change structure and composition of vegetation or availability of habitat for threatened, endangered and sensitive species and designated critical habitat; management indicator species (MIS); big game hiding cover, thermal cover, and security cover. The public expressed concern with fragmentation of habitat from roads (habitat connectivity) and viability of old-growth and snag-dependent species. Indicators: · Changes in grizzly bear security cover and potential conflicts with humans. Core habitat, Open Road Density (ORD) and Total Road Density (TRD) are specific measures used to evaluate changes within the grizzly bear management units (Arrastra and Red Mountain sub units) that overlap the project area · Habitat suitability changes within the Lynx Analysis Units (LAU's bl-7 and bl-8) Acres of lynx habitat affected is evaluated according to the Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (NRMLMD) standards and guidelines. · Changes in availability of the number of snags and tons of downed woody debris · Acres of suitable MIS and sensitive species habitat impacted · Acres of elk hiding cover, thermal cover, and security habitat within the project area and elk herd units · Maintaining or providing habitat connectivity · Acres of old growth affected and effects to snag-dependent species Addressed by Design Features or Evaluated for Comparison In addition to the issue identified above, we analyzed the effects of the proposed action and alternatives based on implementing design criteria and disclose the differences of effects between alternatives for the following: Weed Spread/Infestation: Proposed actions, including harvest disturbance and use of haul routes in areas with weeds present, may disturb landscapes allowing existing weed populations to expand or allowing additional species to become established. Treatment of existing weed infestations would occur under the guidance of the Forest-wide effort and treatments to prevent the spread of weeds is included in design features to reduce potential spread. Use of roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, and use of existing roads: Comments indicated concern that roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, road reconstruction, and use of existing roads would adversely impact soils through compaction, water quality and fisheries through sedimentation, and associated wildlife habitat. Amount of Prescribed Fire: Concern that the Forest Service has limited experience implementing prescribed fire in mixed-severity fire regimes. Concern with the amount of acres proposed for prescribed burning; proximity to private land and timing of burns introduce risk to private lands (e.g., loss of homes, buildings, smoke effects to air quality). Pretreating areas with vegetation removal adjacent to private land boundaries is designed to remove potential fuels prior to prescribed burning. Pile burning is proposed to more closely manage areas to receive active burning. The issues led the agency to develop alternatives to the proposed action. Alternatives Considered in Detail Alternative 1 - No Action Under the no-action alternative, current management plans would continue to guide management of the project area. No timber removal, fuels reduction, or prescribed burning for forest restoration would be implemented to accomplish project goals. Alternative 2 - The Proposed Action This alternative represents the proposed action from scoping. Mapping corrections resulted in slight adjustments in acre and mile figures from scoping. Alternative 2 proposes a total of 8,564 acres of commercial and noncommercial treatments. Harvest treatments (regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and precommercial thinning) are proposed on a total of 3,099 acres. Fuels treatments would follow timber removals, including slashing, pile burning, jackpot burning, and underburning. In addition to post-harvest burning, prescribed fire is proposed within the inventoried roadless areas (IRAs) to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 4,182 acres (about 0.5 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area and on 664 acres (about 3.8 percent) within the Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Area. To help facilitate management, outside these IRAs approximately 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Alternative 3 – Preferred This alternative was developed to address issues raised during scoping regarding reducing potential impacts to habitat for threatened, endangered and sensitive species and designated critical habitat; management indicator species (MIS); big game hiding cover, thermal cover, and security cover. Treatments were reviewed and adjusted to reduce impacts to habitat (figure 14). Alternative 3 proposes a total of 6,564 acres of commercial and noncommercial treatments. Harvest treatments (regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and precommercial thinning) are proposed on a total of 2,298 acres. Fuels treatments would follow timber removals and include slashing, pile burning, jackpot burning, and underburning. In addition to post-harvest burning, prescribed fire is proposed within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 3,565 acres (about 0.4 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan IRA. The Lincoln Gulch IRA would not be treated. To help facilitate management, outside these IRAs approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Alternatives at a Glance Table S- 1. Acres of proposed harvest and fuels treatments by alternative GROUP #: BRIEF TREATMENT DESCRIPTION  HARVEST TREATMENT, FUELS TREATMENT ALT. 1 NO ACTION ACRES ALT. 2 ACRES ALT. 3 ACRES Group 1: Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests 0 974 232 Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn 0 36 0 Improvement Cut, Underburn 0 938 232 Group 2: Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests 0 1,132 822 Precommercial Thin 0 523 409 Precommercial Thin, Handpile Underburn 0 0 29 Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 0 78 50 Precommercial Thin, Underburn 0 289 141 Precommercial Thin, Underburn or Slash Treatment along PVT 0 242 193 Group 3: Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Seed and Shelter Trees 0 745 664 Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 0 29 29 Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 0 73 41 Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 0 18 18 Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 0 223 207 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 0 137 137 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 0 96 96 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Slashing, Handpile/Burn 0 25 0 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn 0 114 114 Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 0 30 22 Group 4: Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Rare Live Trees 0 223 152 Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 0 98 80 Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 0 53 0 Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 0 54 54 Clearcut with Reserves, Underburn 0 18 18 Group 5: Intermediate Harvest to Remove Minor Amounts of Dead/Dying Trees 0 25 25 Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 0 25 25 Total Harvest Treatments (acres) 0 3,099 1,895 Group 6: Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 acres 0 449 326 Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 0 326 326 Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 0 123 0 Group 7: Mixed Severity Fire to create mortality patches up to 5, 10, or 20 acres 0 410 36 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 0 36 36 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 0 48 0 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres 0 326 0 Group 8: Mixed severity fire to create mortality patches up to 30 or 75 acres 0 4,604 3,265 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 0 3371 2032 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 0 1233 1233 GROUP #: BRIEF TREATMENT DESCRIPTION  HARVEST TREATMENT, FUELS TREATMENT ALT. 1 NO ACTION ACRES ALT. 2 ACRES ALT. 3 ACRES Group 9: Low Severity Prescribed Fire 0 0 638 Jackpot Burn 0 0 326 Underburn 0 0 312 Group 10: Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests 0 0 403 Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn   403 Grand Total Project Treatments (acres) 0 8,564 6,564 Logging Systems    Tractor logging (total acres) 0 1,944 1,834 Skyline logging (total acres) 0 663 491 Hand treatments  Intermediate Harvest – Precommercial Thin (acres)  Prescribed fire (acres)  0 0  493 5,463  285 3,954 Burning Treatments    Total area proposed for burning treatments (acres) 0 8,041 6,155 Total area proposed for burning in designated IRAs (acres) 0 4,845 3,565 Roads    Roads Built for Project Use then Obliterated (miles) -- 2.6 0.4 Road Maintenance (miles) -- 45.6 43.8 Total Road Miles Used -- 48.2 44.2 Timber Volume (Ccf) -- 22,022 14,299 In addition to the alternatives considered in detail, public comments received in response to the proposed action provided suggestions for alternative methods for achieving the purpose and need. Six additional alternatives were considered, but dismissed from detailed consideration. Some of these alternatives were outside the scope of restoration, duplicative of the alternatives considered in detail, or determined to be components that would cause unnecessary environmental harm. Major Conclusions Include: · Effects related to the significant issues and project purpose and need A brief summary of the effects as related to the significant issues and purpose and need identified for the Stonewall Vegetation Project follows in the Comparison of Alternative Effects Section. Decision Framework The environmental impact statement is not a decision document; it discloses the environmental consequences of implementing action alternatives or no action at this time. Based upon the effect of the alternatives, the responsible official will decide on the following main points: · Whether or not to implement the proposed action or an alternative to the proposed action and appropriate mitigation · What monitoring requirements are appropriate to evaluate implementation of this project · Whether a Forest Plan amendment is necessary e.g. reductions in big game habitat In addition to deciding whether the above activities occur, the responsible official will also choose the degree to which (if at all) activities are implemented. The final decision will be based on the information in this document and the supplementary information contained in the project record, consideration of public comments, how well the selected alternative meets the purpose and need for the project and whether the selected alternative complies with agency policy, applicable State and Federal laws, and Forest Plan direction. At this time, alternative 3 is my preferred alternative. Modifications to all of the alternatives may be considered for the final environmental impact statement (EIS) depending on comments received regarding this draft EIS or to incorporate new information. The final decision may be different than my preferred alternative, as presented in the draft EIS. Comparison of Alternative Effects This section provides a summary of the effects of implementing each alternative. Vegetation Vegetative conditions within the project area are described in chapter 1 and chapter 3. Proposed treatments address the purpose and need of the project. Following is a summary of the vegetative effects Purpose and Need: Enhance and Restore Aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine species and habitats Whether a treatment would result in an increase in a particular tree species depends upon the type of treatment, the characteristics of the tree species, and the current presence of the tree species in the area receiving the treatment. Treatments vary widely in the opportunity they provide to manipulate the presence of a particular species. Intermediate treatments provide a great deal of control through tree selection preferences applied during thinning if the tree species is present and regeneration treatments provide a great deal of control through control of seed sources and planting of preferred species. Prescribe burns provide opportunities to increase fire-tolerant or shade-intolerant early seral species such as ponderosa pine, western larch, and quaking aspen through killing competing fire-intolerant species and through creating open areas for regeneration although the degree of control is not great simply due to the variable nature of prescribed burning. The effects of the three alternatives upon within-stand tree species compositions by treatment group and as a proportion of the landscape are displayed in chapter 3 (Table 29. Alternative comparisons for ponderosa pine, western larch, whitebark pine, and aspen). Alternative 1 would continue the current condition in which the four species have declined in presence within stands and upon the landscape due to succession and the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic. In the long-term, those four species would continue to decline as succession continues. Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in an increase in the presence of all four species, with alternative 2 leading to the greatest increase due to the greater treatment area involved, and the greater area in regeneration and intermediate treatments which have the greatest potential for modifying species composition at the stand level. Purpose and Need: Improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects The expected effects of the three alternatives on within-stand species compositions are displayed in chapter 3 (Table 30. Alternative comparisons for stand structures). Under alternative 1, the current condition would persist, and the general track of tree species on the landscape would be toward increases in Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce and decreases in the early seral species—ponderosa pine, quaking aspen, western larch, whitebark pine, and lodgepole pine. Lodgepole pine would regenerate in many areas in which it was a major component before the mountain pine beetle epidemic, becoming a component in mixed-species stands with Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir. Treatments in both alternatives 2 and 3 would modify the current condition and increase ponderosa pine, western larch, quaking aspen, and whitebark pine as discussed above. Both alternatives would improve the mix of tree species in treated areas, resulting in tree species mixtures that would be more diverse and resilient. Alternative 2 would result in greater effects than Alternative 3 due to the greater acreage treated, and the greater acreage treated with intermediate and regeneration treatments. The effects of the three alternatives on stand structures in terms of tree diameter distributions for proposed treatment type groups are displayed in chapter 3 (Table 30. Alternative comparisons for stand structures). Alternative 1 would continue the current condition in the short term and long term; stand understories would become denser and the stands more closed. Stand diameter distributions would remain the same in the short-term and in the long-term would tend to become more steeply weighted toward smaller diameters due to ingrowth and natural mortality of the larger diameter classes. Treatments in both alternatives 2 and 3 would modify the track that the stands are on with the degree and nature of the effects depending upon the type of treatment. Intermediate harvests (Groups 1 and 10) would “flatten” the diameter distributions by thinning small and mid-sized trees while retaining the largest trees—creating open multi-story structures. Precommercial thinning (Group 2) would create open, single-story stands by pre-commercially thinning even-aged, closed, single-story plantations. Regeneration treatments (Groups 3 and 4) would create even-aged stands with a small number of older and larger trees present as seed sources, shelter, or retention trees. Removing dead and dying trees and slashing undesirable understory trees (Group 5) would create stands that are open and almost single-story. Low-intensity prescribed burns (Groups 6 and 9) would flatten the diameter distributions due to killing many of the smaller diameter trees and would create stands that are more open and still multi-story. Mixed-severity prescribed burns (Groups 7 and 8) would create areas that are mosaics of structures including open and closed single-story, open and closed multi-story, and early-seral grass/forb/shrub openings. The effects of all treatments would last into the long-term but eventually the stands would become more closed and multi-story as trees grow and as the stand understories fill in. The effects of the three alternatives on stand structures at the landscape level by comparing the proportion of change within Biophysical Setting/vegetation fuel class combinations are displayed in chapter 3 (Table 31. Alternative comparisons for landscape-level stand structures). Under alternative 1 in the short-term the current condition would persist, which in general is below desired in (1) early seral and mid-seral open for all biophysical settings, (2) mid-seral closed in the two subalpine fir biophysical settings, and (3) in late-seral open for the two Douglas-fir and the ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir Biophysical Settings. Vegetation-fuel classes are above desired in all other combinations. Long-term trends under Alternative 1 would be: decreasing early seral, mid-seral closed, mid-seral open, and late-seral open in almost all biophysical settings due to tree growth and filling in of stand understories. Both alternative 2 and alternative 3 would: (1) increase area in early seral for all BpS, (2) decrease area in mid-seral closed for all BpS, (3) increase area in mid-seral open for all but upper subalpine BpS, (4) increase area in late-seral open for all BpS, and (5) decrease area in late-seral closed in all Bps. Alternative 2 would bring about greater change than alternative 3 due largely to the greater acreage treated. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would move the vegetation-fuel classes toward the reference condition, but largely due to the small portion of the analysis area proposed for treatment there would still be relatively great differences between present and reference condition for many BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations. Purpose and Need: Forest health in terms of reduced susceptibility (increased resistance) of individual stands and the landscape to diseases and insects found within the project area of concern In chapter 3, table 32 (Alternative comparison for insects and diseases) we compare the three alternatives in terms of susceptibility to several insects and diseases that are impacting stands in the project area Under alternative 1, in the short term there would be little change from the current condition, which in general is (1) low and long-term decreasing risk for those insects and diseases dependent upon early seral trees such as the pines (e.g., mountain pine beetle), (2) higher and long-term increasing risk and impacts from those dependent upon Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce, and (3) relatively low but long-term increase in susceptibility to armillaria which affects all conifers but for which pines and western larch are more resistant than the other conifers. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would generally reduce susceptibility to insects and diseases in treated stands and on the landscape. Exceptions to this would be white pine blister rust, for which we cannot say that the treatments would directly reduce the disease and Douglas-fir beetle for which the prescribed burning may increase risk in the treated areas to a small degree and short period of time. Over the landscape, both alternatives would increase resistance to insects and diseases by increasing tree species diversity and age class diversity, reducing stocking and so increasing individual tree resistance, and modifying structures. Alternative 2 would reduce susceptibility to a greater degree than alternative 3, largely because a greater area is being treated. Transportation Under the no-action alternative, no changes would be made to the existing transportation network on and adjacent to the project area. There would be no changes to effects or impacts on the project transportation network. Alternatives 2 and 3 would use approximately 48.2 and 44.3 miles, respectively, of roads would access vegetation treatment units and connect with Montana State Highway 200. Existing roads would serve as project access and haul routes on nearly 45.6 miles under alternative 2 and 44.3 miles under alternative 3. Under alternative 2 another 2.6 miles of new roads would be constructed to access treatment units. Under alternative 3 approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. These roads would be closed (e.g., gates, barricades) during operations to limit use to operators only, and obliterated or rehabilitated immediately following vegetation treatments. Cumulative effects of past, present, and foreseeable actions are expected to have minor impacts on the project transportation network. Project haul routes would be maintained and improved in accordance with BMPs to accommodate haul vehicles. Sediment sites would be mitigated to reduce long-term sediment delivery. Annual road maintenance activities would also occur on National Forest System roads and also on adjacent State and private roads. Fire and Fuels The mechanical treatments proposed would reduce surface fuels, raise canopy base heights by reducing ladder fuels and stand density, resulting in modified fire behavior potential. The result would be safer, more efficient and direct initial attack of unwanted fires by fire suppression forces. The prescribed burn treatments would reduce fuels and break up contiguous vegetation to create a heterogeneous fuelscape so that areas with high fire behavior potential are interspersed with areas of mixed and low fire behavior potential, thereby limiting the potential for high-intensity crown fire to spread towards the WUI. Fire management has evolved over time and fire managers look for opportunities to manage fire for multiple objectives. Reintroducing fire to the landscape and allowing it to occur as a natural process is desired in order to move the landscape toward the desired condition as outlined in the LRMP. The Stonewall Vegetation Project would be important to the success of future fire suppression efforts and complements past treatments and those currently occurring or being proposed on adjacent federal, state and private lands. The following analysis issues or concerns were identified for this project during the scoping period. The alternatives will address the issues as follows. 1. Wildland Fire and Homes: Proposed treatments may be inefficient and ineffective in reducing home losses due to fire. Proposed treatments would reduce surface, ladder and crown fuels and change the fuel model profile, thereby decreasing the area with potential for flame lengths greater than four feet and reducing potential crown fire risk. In addition, alternative 2 or 3 would reduce the risk of wildfire impacts to adjacent private lands and other resource values. By treating these areas, they become more resilient to stand-replacing wildfire and allow greater protection within the WUI zone. 2. Fire Behavior: Proposed fuels reduction work would not reduce fire behavior. Fire modeling suggests the proposed treatments would effectively reduce fire behavior. Following implementation of a chosen alternative, the treated areas should exhibit surface fire under the modeled conditions, making fire suppression efforts safer and more effective. With these alternatives, desired fuel loadings and fire behavior characteristics would be achieved and natural or prescribed fire could occur with less risk. 3. Prescribed Burning: Concerns over risk of fire escaping burn boundaries during prescribed burning operations. All prescribed burning would occur when weather and fuel conditions are favorable. All burning would take place under the guidelines in the prescribed fire burn plan developed specifically for project-related burning activities. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality, contingency resources and potential escapes. Air Quality Wildfires are known to result in high levels of emissions and associated National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) violation and worst visibility. Vegetation management treatments provide the opportunity on a long-term basis to reduce the magnitude of wildfire air quality problems. According to (Wiedinmyer and Hurteau 2010) wide-scale prescribed fire application can reduce CO2 fire emissions for the western US by 18 to 25 percent. The total amount of pollutants released by prescribed burning under alternative 2 and 3 would be spread out over several years and would occur when emissions would be unlikely to have significant adverse effects on human health and visibility. After implementation, it is estimated that subsequent wildfires in the project area could produce less pollutants due to less fuel available to burn. All prescribed burning would be implemented in full compliance with Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) air program with coordination through the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group. All action alternatives would meet Forest Plan Standards for air quality by following coordination requirements. The project complies with the Federal Clean Air Act. Habitats of Special Concern Snags The forested landscape will experience additional bark beetle mortality from the ongoing mountain pine beetle (MPB) epidemic. The levels of additional mortality are a matter of speculation, but available research indicates that mountain pine beetle epidemics continue until the available bark beetle habitat is sufficiently reduced that epidemic levels can no longer be sustained (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980, Klein et al. 1978, Mitchell and Preisler 1991). Mountain pine beetles strongly favor infesting the trees of larger diameter each year and over the life of the infestation infesting smaller trees each year until the average host tree diameter declines to a point that the tree habitat cannot produce sufficient numbers of beetles to maintain the outbreak (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980). The outbreaks are relatively short, lasting about 6 years (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980). Given the magnitude of the mortality that has occurred in the project area as of the writing of this report, we suspect that the epidemic is declining. The lodgepole pine snags would start falling in 3 to 5 years after death (Bull 1983, Mitchell and Preisler 1998). Snag fall rates depend on tree species, tree size, cause of death, and environmental conditions that could affect the speed of bole decay (Bull 1983, Mitchell and Preisler 1998). For lodgepole pine, Bull (1983) found that 8 years after death about 75 percent of the snags less than 25 cm had fallen and 42 percent of the snags greater than 25 cm had fallen. Mitchell and Preisler (1998), in their study of mountain pine beetle-killed snags in Oregon, found that tree size was not a factor in unthinned stands and that in unthinned stands, 50 percent were down in 9 years and 90 percent were down in 14 years. In the short term, snag numbers would be very high, but in the long term, snag numbers would decline greatly as the lodgepole pine snags fall down. As discussed and displayed above, given the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic, snags in the project area are abundant and far exceed forest plan requirements. Under alternative 2, the intermediate and regeneration treatments would reduce snag levels to the forest plan requirements within the treatment units and the mixed-severity prescribed burns would increase snag levels within the burn units. After the treatments are done, snag levels would slightly decrease in the 3rd-order drainage 0203, slightly increase in the 3rd-order drainage 0204A, and slightly increase in the project area. They would still exceed 19 times the forest plan requirements. Under alternative 3, the intermediate and regeneration treatments would reduce snag levels to the forest plan requirements and the prescribed burns would increase snag levels. After the treatments are done, snag levels would slightly decrease in the 3rd-order drainage 0203, slightly increase in the 3rd-order drainage 0204A, and slightly increase in the project area. They would still exceed 20 times the forest plan requirements. Old Growth Effects to designated old growth in the two 3rd-order drainage are the same under all alternatives because no activities are proposed in designated old growth in these drainages. Following the process described above, about five percent of each 3rd-order drainage is designated to manage as old growth. All old growth would continue to develop successionally under all alternatives. Changes would be slight in the short term, but could be substantial in the long term. Single-story and two-story stands would become more multi-story. Closed canopies would remain closed, and open stands would become closed over time. Down woody fuels would continue to accumulate. About 63 percent of the designated old growth is Douglas-fir type. With continuing succession, more small trees would become established with the species composition trending toward subalpine fir (Fischer and Clayton 1983). These stands are susceptible to Douglas-fir beetle (DFB), western spruce budworm (WSB), and root disease. ADS data appears to indicate that DFB has consistently declined in recent years, while WSB infestation was extensive in 2009, substantially less was recorded in 2010 (Amell 2012). Douglas-fir beetle tends to infest large and old Douglas-fir and heavily stocked stands. Their impacts can also be affected by weather conditions, for example droughts that reduce host tree vigor. With increasing stocking, tree size and age over time, we can expect DFB to continue to impact the stands to some degree, increasing with the next droughty period. Since forests in the area, including the old growth stands, are progressing toward dominance by Douglas-fir and subalpine fir, we can expect the impacts of WSB to continue if not increase. Diseases would continue to impact stands at current levels. In the long term, dense forest conditions with multiple-layer stands and increasing surface fuels would support increasingly intense fire behavior and severe fire effects (Buhl 2012). Stand replacement fire would become more likely on the landscape and old growth stands more susceptible to the impacts. No designated old growth in 3rd-order drainages would be treated under any alternative. Forest Plan direction regarding old growth would be met. Under alternative 2 outside of the 3rd-order drainages, three stands (42201139, 42201147, and 42201152) that may potentially be old growth would be prescribed burned; one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (41502089) would be prescribed burned, and one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (42303103) would be thinned and prescribed burned. Under alternative 3 outside of the 3rd-order drainages, one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (41502089) would be prescribe burned, and one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (42303103) would be partially thinned and the fuels burned. Stands proposed for treatment would be changed by the treatments, with species compositions “pushed” toward dominance by seral fire-tolerant conifers, and stand structures “pushed” to or toward open, but still multi-story, structures with relatively flat diameter distributions. Treated potential and verified old growth stands would still qualify as old growth following the treatments. Wildlife Overview of Issues The following issues were identified as a result of public scoping and used to develop alternatives to the proposed action. Also, these issues as well as other issue indicators identified to measure potential impacts to wildlife from alternatives considered in the project environmental impact statement are displayed in the following table. Effect indicators are collectively used to assess species viability or population changes. · Restoration of vegetation communities · Grizzly bear habitat impacts · Elk security cover and the LRMP standard. · Lynx habitat: Designated Critical Habitat and Stand Initiation Phase acreage · Wildfire hazard, risk, and fuels · Habitats including ponderosa pine, western larch and aspen: maintenance or restoration · Road impacts to elk and grizzly bear habitat as well as disturbance factors  Species Indicator Threatened and Endangered Species Grizzly Bear Effects to individuals and changes in security cover and potential conflicts with humans. Security Core habitat, Open Road Density (ORD) and Total Road Density (TRD) are specific measures used to evaluate changes within the recovery area, whereas changes in cover and forage within and outside the NCDE are assessed. Canada Lynx Effects to individuals and acres of stand initiation, multi-story and mid-seral habitat affected in Lynx Analysis Units (LAUs bl-7 and bl-8). Compliance with the Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD) standards and guidelines. Wolverine Effects to individuals and acres of natal denning and foraging habitat. Availability of remote and dispersal habitat and changes in connectivity and human access. Sensitive Species Gray Wolf Effects to individuals and changes in big game. Den, rendezvous and foraging habitat affected. Fisher Effects to individuals and acres of den, rest and foraging habitat. Changes in human access. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat Effects to individuals and acres of and effect to foraging habitat. Bald Eagle Effects to individuals, suitable nest habitat affected, effects to reproduction and nest and foraging habitat availability. Black-backed Woodpecker Effects to individuals, acres of suitable habitat, changes in quality and distribution of suitable snag habitat. Flammulated Owl Effects to individuals and acres of suitable habitat. Short and long-term changes in the quality of suitable open-canopy habitat, availability of large diameter (>=19 inches) snags. Western Toad Effects to individuals, acres of breeding and upland habitat affected. Management Indicator Species Northern Goshawk Effects to individuals and reproduction. Acres of nest and foraging habitat, nest, foraging and post-fledgling habitat affected, landscape level changes in habitat. Ability of the project area to support nesting pairs. Pileated Woodpecker Effects to individuals and reproduction. Acres of old growth habitat, existing and affected suitable habitat, changes in quality of foraging and nesting habitat, large snag (>=20 inches d.b.h.) availability and changes in project area distribution and use. Hairy Woodpecker Effects to individuals and reproduction, acres of suitable habitat, acres of suitable habitat affected, changes in quality of suitable habitat, snag (all size classes) availability. Changes in project area distribution and use American Marten Effects to individuals and reproduction. Existing and affected suitable habitat. Changes in the quality of den and foraging habitat, project area distribution and use, and snag and downed woody debris (DWD) availability. Species Indicator Commonly Hunted Species Elk Acres of hiding and thermal cover, habitat effectiveness, acres of security habitat, changes in access and mortality, acres of foraging habitat, and compliance with the Montana logging study. Changes in hunting opportunity. Mule Deer Acres of hiding and thermal cover, acres of foraging habitat, changes in project area distribution and use and hunting opportunities. Migratory Species Migratory Birds Changes (acres) in available habitat (Biophysical settings), compliance with MBTA.  Effects Determinations Effects determinations for wildlife species by alternative are displayed in the following table SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Threatened and Endangered Species    Grizzly Bear The risk of stand replacing wildfire remains high, but no direct effects are anticipated and in the absence of wildfire, grizzly habitat would be largely unchanged. Because whitebark pine would likely continue to decline, implementation of alternative 1 may affect but is not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Improve landscape level foraging habitat, maintain whitebark pine, result in short and long-term reductions in cover and increase the risk of bear/human interaction. However, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may affect, but not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Improve landscape level foraging habitat, maintain whitebark pine, result in short and long-term reductions in cover and increase the risk of bear/human interaction. However, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may affect, but not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Canada Lynx No effect. The risk of wildfire remains high, however, because there are no direct effects and considering winter foraging and den habitat remains largely unchanged, implementation of alternative 1 would have no effect on Canada lynx. All treatments fall within a WUI, meet exceptions for VEG 05 and VEG 06, and comply with VEG 10. Treatments comply with VEG 01 and VEG 02, and fuel treatment projects that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5 and VEG S6 occur on less than 6 percent of the available habitat on the Helena Forest. Proposed treatments comply with Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007b), and there are no effects anticipated that were not considered in the BO (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). As a result implementation of alternative 2 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect Canada lynx. All treatments fall within a WUI, meet exceptions for VEG 05 and VEG 06, and comply with VEG 10. Treatments comply with VEG 01 and VEG 02, and fuel treatment projects that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5 and VEG S6 occur on less than 6 percent of the available habitat on the Helena Forest. Proposed treatments comply with Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007b), and there are no effects anticipated that were not considered in the BO (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). As a result implementation of alternative 3 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect Canada lynx. Canada Lynx Critical Habitat No effect. All treatments are consistent with the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). While some treatments within winter foraging habitat would occur within the WUI, treatments were designed considering standards to promote lynx conservation and collectively application of the standards for vegetation management are expected All treatments are consistent with the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). While some treatments within winter foraging habitat would occur within the WUI, treatments were designed considering standards to promote lynx conservation and collectively application of the standards for vegetation management are expected to avoid SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 to avoid adverse effects to lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b p. 43). May affect, not likely to adversely affect Critical Habitat adverse effects to lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b p. 43). May affect, not likely to adversely affect Critical Habitat Wolverine Although recent fires have reduced wolverine foraging and den habitat, suitable habitat would continue to be available. While the risk of future wildlife is greatest under this alternative, there is no way to predict if or when wildfire would occur. As a result and based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 1 would not jeopardize the wolverine. The Stonewall project was analyzed for effects to wolverines based on vegetation changes, movements across the landscape, and the distribution from human activities associated with the project. Based on the analysis provided and the following rationale, it is determined that implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project would not jeopardize the wolverine. The Stonewall project was analyzed for effects to wolverines based on vegetation changes, movements across the landscape, and the distribution from human activities associated with the project. Based on the analysis provided and the following rationale, it is determined that implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project would not jeopardize the wolverine. Sensitive Species    Gray Wolf Suitable wolf habitat, including remote areas for denning and big game populations would remain largely unchanged. As a result, and considering that human use and access is not expected to increase, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on wolves. No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Disturbance to foraging wolves during implementation could occur, but would involve short-term disturbance during implementation. Big game populations and wolf foraging opportunities would be maintained in the short term and increased in the long term. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Alternative 2 has the potential for short-term impacts to foraging or dispersing wolves. However, based on the analysis and the above rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for the gray wolf. No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Disturbance to foraging wolves during implementation could occur, but would involve short-term disturbance during implementation. Big game populations and wolf foraging opportunities would be maintained in the short term and increased in the long term. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced across the landscape, but at a reduced level from that of alternative 2. Alternative 3 has the potential for short-term impacts to foraging or dispersing wolves. However, based on the analysis and the above rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for the gray wolf. Fisher Suitable habitat would be largely maintained. Risk of stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Because there are no direct effects anticipated and considering suitable fisher habitat would remain relatively Approximately 88 percent of the existing suitable habitat would be maintained. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors as well as prey availability would be maintained and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is Approximately 91 percent of the existing suitable habitat would be maintained. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors as well as prey availability would be maintained and the risk of stand replacing wildfire would be SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 unchanged, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on fisher. lowest under this alternative. The action alternatives would reduce fisher habitat by 11 to 12 percent and alter the structural conditions on approximately 38 percent of the existing fisher habitat. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for fisher. reduced under this alternative when compared to no action. The action alternatives would reduce fisher habitat by 9 to 10 percent and alter the structural conditions on approximately 24 to 25 percent of the existing fisher habitat. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for fisher. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat No impact. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected and foraging habitat would be largely unchanged. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. The action alternatives would affect suitable habitat on 35 percent of the project area. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend towards federal listing for the Townsend’s big-eared bat. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected A total of 8,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat would be affected by treatment. No mortality is anticipated although short-term disturbance from smoke to foraging bats could occur. Available foraging habitat would be widespread and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. The action alternatives would affect suitable habitat on 27 percent of the project area. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend towards federal listing for the Townsend’s big-eared bat. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected. A total of 6,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat would be affected by treatment. No mortality is anticipated although short-term disturbance from smoke to foraging bats could occur. Available foraging habitat would be widespread and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. Bald Eagle No impact. No anticipated impacts to the existing eagle nest, although the risk of wildfire is highest under this alternative. Existing habitat in the project area habitat would be largely unaffected. As a result alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend toward federal listing for the bald eagle. No direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Approximately 100 acres of potentially suitable nest habitat would be reduced. Foraging habitat would not be treated, although Existing habitat in the project area habitat would be largely unaffected. As a result alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend toward federal listing for the bald eagle. No direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Approximately 100 acres of potentially suitable nest habitat would be reduced. Foraging habitat would not be treated, although SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 short-term disturbance to foraging birds could occur. Untreated nest and foraging habitat would continue to be widely available. Risks of wildfire are lowest under this alternative. short-term disturbance to foraging birds could occur. Untreated nest and foraging habitat would continue to be widely available. Risks of wildfire would be reduced when compared to no action. Black-backed Woodpecker No impact. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. Flammulated Owl May impact individuals, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing or cause a loss of viability. Suitable flammulated owl habitat would continue to decline under this alternative. While large diameter nest trees would increase in the short term, availability would decline over the long term. The likelihood of high intensity wildfire is greatest under this alternative. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the flammulated owl. Owl habitat would be restored or created on almost 4,200 acres or 31 percent of the dry forest community. Treatments would promote ponderosa pine and potential nest trees across the landscape and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the flammulated owl. Owl habitat would be restored or created on almost 2,800 acres or 21 percent of the dry forest community. Treatments would promote ponderosa pine and potential nest trees across the landscape and reduce the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire when compared to no action. Western Toad No impact. Western boreal toads and their habitat would not be affected. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a long-term reduction in breeding and upland habitat is highest under this alternative. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. Suitable habitat would continue to occur on sites treated and long-term foraging habitat would be improved. The likelihood of impacts to breeding and upland habitat from high severity wildfire is lowest under this alternative. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. Suitable habitat would continue to occur on sites treated and long-term foraging habitat would be improved. The likelihood of impacts to breeding and upland habitat from high severity wildfire would be reduced when compared to no action. Management Indicator Species    Northern Goshawk Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Suitable nest habitat would increase, although landscape diversity associated with foraging and post-fledging habitat would be largely unchanged. Risk of Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Suitable nest, forage and PFA habitat would occur in all affected drainages and landscape conditions resulting from treatment are consistent with goshawk Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Suitable nest, forage and PFA habitat would occur in all affected drainages and landscape conditions resulting from treatment are consistent with goshawk SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable nest habitat is highest under this alternative. use. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat is lowest under this alternative. use. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat would be reduced. Pileated Woodpecker and Hairy Woodpecker Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated or hairy woodpeckers. Suitable snags and nesting and foraging habitat would be maintained and continue to be widely available. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated or hairy woodpeckers. A long-term reduction in habitat would occur on 540 acres, whereas the quality of suitable habitat would be reduced for 10 to 20 years on 2,666 acres. Over the long term restoration of open grown ponderosa pine and western larch may improve habitat on 5,700 acres and the risk of stand replacing wildfire Is lowest under this alternative. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated or hairy woodpeckers. A long-term reduction in habitat would occur on 200 acres, whereas the quality of suitable habitat would be reduced for 10 to 20 years on 1,920 acres. Over the long term restoration of open grown ponderosa pine and western larch may improve habitat on 4,500 acres and the risk of stand replacing wildfire Is reduced under this alternative. American Marten Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Existing habitat would be maintained. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Treatments would improve species and landscape diversity, and maintain 93 percent of the suitable habitat over the long-term. Also the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Treatments would improve species and landscape diversity, and maintain 96 percent of the suitable habitat over the long term. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. Commonly Hunted Species    Elk In the Beaver Creek unit hiding cover would continue to be available to meet the 50 percent level of Forest Plan standard 3. Due to the effects of the 2003 Snow Talon fire, the Keep Cool unit is below and would continue to be below the 50 percent level of Forest Plan standard 3. With continued MPB mortality, hiding and thermal cover within both units would continue to decline. While forage availability may increase in some areas, due to continued fire suppression and overstocked stand conditions, overall Treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. This alternative would require a site-specific, nonsignificant forest plan amendment for standards 3 and 4(a) for the reductions in elk hiding cover and thermal cover. Hunting opportunities would be maintained and based on the analysis presented above and the following Treatments proposed under alternative 3 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. This alternative would require a site-specific, nonsignificant forest plan amendment for standards 3 and 4(a) for the reductions in elk hiding cover and thermal cover. Hunting opportunities would be maintained and based on the analysis presented above and the following SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 forage availability would continue to be low. Due to the reduced cover conditions, neither herd unit meets Forest Plan standard 4a for big game security. Cover would continue to decline, however, it is expected that available habitat would continue to support desired levels of elk. Finally, due to increased fuel loading, the risk of a long-term loss of cover from stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Herd numbers would be largely unchanged. Effects of predation would be largely unchanged. The risk of a long-term reduction in cover from wildfire is highest under this alternative. rationale, adequate elk habitat would continue to be available within both units to support desired levels of elk. · Implementation would result in both short- and long-term increases in available forage on approximately eleven percent of the combined herd units, including increases on summer, transition and winter range. The increase in forage is expected to maintain or improve herd health. · There would be no increase in public access or changes to elk security habitat. · Within the combined herd units approximately 89 percent of the existing hiding cover and 86 percent of the existing thermal cover would be maintained. Cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment units and across the landscape. Past wildfires have greatly reduced project area elk habitat and much of the remaining habitat is at risk. Implementation of alternative 2 would reduce future wildfire risk. It is believed that active management is necessary to address fuel loading, species diversity and insect and disease concerns. Due to the predominance of mature forest, limited disturbance and reduced forage, some management is necessary to maintain herd health and increase elk populations within the elk management unit (MFWP 2004). Collectively, the treatments proposed under this alternative are designed to address these concerns and the long-term benefits associated with the increased rationale, adequate elk habitat would continue to be available within both units to support desired levels of elk. · Implementation would result in both short- and long-term increases in available forage on approximately eleven percent of the combined herd units, including increases on summer, transition and winter range. The increase in forage is expected to maintain or improve herd health. · There would be no increase in public access or changes to elk security habitat. · Within the combined herd units, approximately 93 percent of the existing hiding cover and 86 percent of the existing winter range thermal cover would be maintained. Cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment units and across the landscape. Past wildfires have greatly reduced project area elk habitat and much of the remaining habitat is at risk. Implementation of alternative 3 would reduce future wildfire risk. It is believed that active management is necessary to address fuel loading, species diversity and insect and disease concerns. Due to the predominance of mature forest, limited disturbance and reduced forage, some management is necessary to maintain herd health and increase elk populations within the elk management unit (MFWP 2004). Collectively, the treatments proposed under this alternative are designed to address these concerns and the long-term benefits associated with the increased forage availability and reduced wildfire risk, are believed to outweigh the SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 forage availability and reduced wildfire risk, are believed to outweigh the risks associated with the anticipated reduction in cover risks associated with the anticipated reduction in cover Mule Deer Deer cover on winter, transition and summer ranges would be altered due to continued MPB mortality. Forage availability would increase somewhat but would continue to remain low, and over the long-term, herd health would not be expected to improve. Adequate forage and cover would continue to be available to support existing populations and maintain hunting opportunities. Treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce deer hiding and thermal cover and increase deer forage. Based on the analysis presented previously and the following rationale, adequate cover would continue to be available to support existing populations, whereas foraging availability would increase over the short and long term. Hunting opportunities would be maintained. Treatments proposed under alternative 3 would reduce deer hiding and thermal cover and increase deer forage. Based on the analysis presented previously and the following rationale, adequate cover would continue to be available to support existing populations, whereas foraging availability would increase over the short and long term. Hunting opportunities would be maintained. Migratory Species    Migratory Birds Migratory bird habitat would remain largely unchanged. This alternative complies with the MBTA. Project design features are in place to maintain migratory bird habitat and reduce potential mortality. This alternative complies with the MBTA. Project design features are in place to maintain migratory bird habitat and reduce potential mortality. This alternative complies with the MBTA.  Plants Alternative 1 would have no new soil disturbing activities that would disturb sensitive plant populations. However, alternative 1 does not propose activities that modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Consequently, there remains a higher risk of a large, stand-replacing fire that could result in effects to herbaceous sensitive species habitat. Under alternative 1 whitebark pine would not increase in the short term and is expected to decline from present levels in the long term. Alternatives 2 and 3 include soil disturbing activities with the potential to affect unknown herbaceous sensitive plant populations. Alternatives 2 and 3 address the purpose and need by proposing activities that modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Alternative 2 would affect more acres than alternative 3. The proposed actions are designed to reduce potential for stand-replacing wildfire events in the treated stands. Reducing potential for stand replacing events may reduce wildfire impacts to specific resources. Proposed activities under alternatives 2 and 3 are consistent with recommendations for restoration of whitebark pine ecosystems, and in treated areas whitebark pine would increase in the short term with the increase extending into the long term. There are no known occurrences of herbaceous sensitive plants in the project area and there is a project design feature in place to protect whitebark pine; therefore, direct and indirect effects are limited. Cumulative effects are not expected to contribute to change in status or viability of sensitive plants, under any of the alternatives. No downward trend in population numbers or density, or downward trend in habitat capability that would reduce the existing distribution of any of the sensitive plant species discussed in this analysis, is expected under any of the alternatives. Summary of determination of effects to sensitive plant species are displayed in the following table. Species Common name Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Roundleaf orchid MII* MII MII Scalloped moonwort MII MII MII Peculiar moonwort MII MII MII Lesser yellow lady’s slipper MII MII MII Sparrow egg lady’s slipper MII MII MII Howell’s gumweed MII MII MII Hall’s rush MII MII MII Missoula phlox MII MII MII Whitebark pine MII MII MII *May impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss of viability to the population or species. Noxious Weeds While the spread of noxious weeds would continue under all alternatives, the rate of spread could potentially be faster in areas proposed for treatments, particularly areas to be thinned and burned. Potential impacts would be greatest under alternative 2 followed by alternative 3. Weed management would continue as in the past, however, activities proposed for the Stonewall Project add a layer of ground disturbance and therefore requires additional management for weeds. Areas of ground disturbance would be monitored for weed infestations and treated as appropriate, in accordance with the Helena National Forest Weed Treatment Project FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006) and Best Management Practices (BMPs) as specified in FSM 2080 (USDA Forest Service 2001), and the Forest Plan. Chemical weed treatment would be the primary treatment method in areas that are accessible by spray equipment. Biological control would apply in areas where the biological agents have optimal conditions for survival and expansion. In riparian areas, biological control would be emphasized where conditions for insect establishment are met. The effect of all treatment methods would be to control and contain existing and new infestations related to vegetation treatments. Soil The project area has a long management history that includes mining, grazing, and timber harvesting, which contributed to past ground disturbing activities that lead to the current conditions. The amount of detrimental soil disturbance in the units is mixed, but primarily is the result of past log landings and skid trails with the exception of four units that have residual effects from mining. The soils in the project area are generally coarse textured and resilient to compaction and erosion if operations take place during dry or frozen conditions. Ground cover is generally high in the project area and trending toward recovery where a thin organic layer exists. Coarse woody debris (CWD) levels also vary across units but are mostly within forest standards. There are multiple areas and units where large amounts of CWD signal a build-up of “locked-up” nutrients that are not plant or soil available. Alternative 2 has the most proposed treatment acres, followed by alternative 3. The action alternatives would result in potentially detrimental soil disturbance. However, based on research and professional experience, the positive effects of reintroducing fire far outweigh negative potential effects from disturbing a larger acreage of land. Watershed Resources Primary water resource concerns stemming from this project include potential sediment conveyance to streams from project treatment units, and potential increased water yield due to removal of vegetation. Field sediment surveys identified road segments that were capable of delivering sediment to ephemeral, intermittent, or perennial stream channels. Under all project alternatives, overall reductions in sediment delivery to stream channels due to application of road BMPs and road obliteration are expected. Results suggest that under existing conditions, roughly 11 tons of sediment is delivered from roads to Lincoln, Beaver, and Keep Cool Creeks in an average year. With design features proposed in this project, sediment delivery from roads would remain one ton per year for Lincoln Creek, and reduce by about one ton each for Beaver and Keep Cool Creeks. Overall sediment delivery reduction for alternatives 2 and 3 during the project is estimated to be about 2 tons. While road improvement and road obliteration activities proposed in alternatives 2 and 3 may temporarily increase sediment delivery to stream channels, the design features proposed in this project would reduce sediment delivery to project area tributaries of the Blackfoot River over the long term, leading to improved conditions in project watersheds. The project has the potential to increase water yield in Lincoln Creek, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek. A water yield increase above 10 to 15 percent may be of concern in that the flow increase could accelerate bank erosion. Water yield increase modeling results suggest a potential increase of 2 to 8 percent in the affected watersheds. The project, when combined with other recent past and reasonably foreseeable actions was predicted to result in a theoretical combined increase in water yield from project watersheds of about 5 percent at the confluence with the Blackfoot River. These levels are within State DEQ recommendations for TMDL and non-TMDL streams elsewhere on the Helena National Forest. If predicted water yield increases did occur, the modest additional flow would likely improve stream temperature and in-stream physical habitat, rather than cause any degradation. The project is unlikely to significantly affect the condition of riparian areas in the project area, given the 50- to 100-foot riparian no-ignition buffers in place for all action alternatives. The project is unlikely to affect the condition of any wetlands found in the project area, in that these areas would either be avoided entirely, or would be treated only by hand crews or by equipment during winter operating conditions. In summary, the proposed project would have relatively minor impacts to water resources in the project watersheds under the action alternatives. Through implementation of design features and application of BMPs, the project alternatives would most likely reduce short- and long-term sediment delivery to stream channels, improving or maintaining water quality in the Blackfoot River headwaters watershed. Alternatives 2 and 3 would also reduce long-term sediment delivery through improving road BMPs at stream crossings. Water yield change due to proposed project activities is predicted to be at the margins of detectability and is not anticipated to have any deleterious effects on channel stability or water quality. Fish Habitat Alternative 1 (no action) would not promote a change in existing conditions within the analysis area. While this alternative meets the Forest Plan direction of “no measurable effect”, it does nothing to help ensure movement toward desired conditions. Because many streams are currently nonfunctioning or functioning at risk, alternative 1, when considered with other current, past and reasonably foreseeable actions could work cumulatively with the management activities/natural events discussed above to limit the potential to achieve healthy population densities in certain populations. Alternatives 2 and 3 would promote improvement in stream conditions through long-term reductions in sediment delivery and physical impacts to stream channels, which would promote positive shifts in stream function across the analysis area. Therefore, the effects of the Stonewall Vegetation Project proposed actions when considered cumulatively with other past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions should promote the attainment of better habitat conditions, and more abundant and resilient aquatic populations. The analysis used a practical approach outlined in Ruggiero et al. (1994) and Region 1 guidance (Draft 01/30/2004) in conjunction with criteria established by Rieman et al. (1993). Selected habitat attributes considered both ecologically significant to fish and sensitive to land management disturbances are borrowed from Overton et al. (1995) and Region 1 guidance (Draft 1/30/2004). The population consists of both fluvial and resident components Pierce et al. (1997). Radio tracking of WCT indicates wide-ranging movements and use of various tributaries for spawning (Pierce et al. 2004). This analysis predicts a short-term change in substrate composition risks, some minor downward trend in incubation and fry emergence success (birth rate) to the population before recovering to an improved trend over baseline after 3 years. Western cutthroat trout recruitment is likely more than adequate to offset minor short-term sediment increases near the populations in Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek. In the long term, treating hydrologically connected roads helps recover gravel quality slightly over baseline conditions. Therefore, there is some minimal risk to viability for this western cutthroat trout population in the short-term with a long-term trend of maintaining reproductive habitat within the acceptable range of variation. The Biological Effects Determination for westslope cutthroat trout and western pearlshell mussel, if implementing alternative 2 or 3 is: May impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss of viability to the population or species. The Biological Analysis Determinations for bull trout and bull trout critical habitat is: May effect, not likely to adversely affect. Recreation Alternative 1, no action would have no direct or cumulative effects to recreation resources. The purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project “…improving the mix of vegetation and structure across the landscape so that it is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects; modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape; enhancing and restoring aspen, western larch and ponderosa pine species and habitats; utilizing the economic value of trees through removal; and integrating restoration with socioeconomic considerations” would not be addressed. Potential long-term indirect effects to recreation resources would be due to the ongoing risk of severe wildfire that could lead to changes in the recreation settings, visual qualities and naturalness within the roadless expanse. Alternatives 2 and 3 propose activities that would have short-term direct effects to recreation resources during project implementation such as limited access to specific areas and increased presence of people and noise within the project area. Project design features are in place to limit potential affects. The proposed treatments would address the purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, resulting in a more diverse, resilient and sustainable Forest ecosystem with reduction in risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire. Alternative 2 treats more acres and would have more effects than alternative 3. The long-term indirect effects to recreation would be generally beneficial and help to maintain the existing recreation settings and scenic qualities within the project area. Cumulative effects to recreation resources would generally be short term, occurring during project implementation, and would relate to an increased presence of people, vehicles and the associated noise that may affect the recreation experience. Longer-term cumulative effects would impact the Pine Grove dispersed camping area, such as hazard tree removal and fence construction for a riparian exclosure, in addition to the actions proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project. These effects would remain until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the vegetation treatment activities, approximately 3-5 years, but would remain consistent with Roaded Natural ROS class (p.5). There would be no effects to the Lincoln Gulch IRA and fewer acres treated within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA. Inventoried Roadless Areas Alternative 1, no action would have no direct or cumulative effects to roadless resources. Potential long-term indirect effects to roadless resources would be due to the ongoing risk of severe wildfire that could lead to changes in the recreation settings, visual qualities and naturalness within the roadless expanse. Alternatives 2 and 3 would have short-term direct impacts to roadless resources during project implementation such as increased presence of people and noise within the project area. Project design features are in place to limit potential effects. The proposed treatments would result in a more diverse, resilient and sustainable forest ecosystem with a reduction in risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire. The long-term indirect effects from the action alternatives to roadless resources would be generally beneficial and help to maintain the existing recreation settings and scenic qualities within the project area. Alternative 2 would treat more acres than alternative 3. Cumulatively there may be short-term impacts to solitude and undeveloped character with long-term benefits to naturalness throughout the IRA. Additional management activities within the IRA including travel planning, weed treatments and livestock grazing would also occur. These activities are compatible with the management of roadless resources and may cumulatively represent short-term impacts to solitude throughout the IRA due to the presence of people. Visual The characteristic landscape is expected to continue to perpetuate. Management activity viewed disturbances would increase when considering all viewed units proposed for treatment. However, with the project design features the VQOs would be met. Units where dead trees would be removed would ultimately look similar to the end result of the natural decay cycle. This alternative would decrease the length of time the dead trees are viewed in the landscape. Cumulative effects for this alternative are expected to be similar to alternative 2, with fewer acres impacted by alternative 3. Both action alternatives would allow the VQOs to be met and would be in compliance with the Forest Plan and other regulations with the implementation of the visual design features. Cultural The no-action alternative would have an undesired effect on cultural resources. Most significant of these is the increased risk of damage to cultural resources from catastrophic wildfires resulting in artifact damage, wooden structure and feature loss, and loss of site integrity through erosion. Alternatives 2 and 3 could have both negative and positive impacts on cultural resources within the project area. There would be no adverse or negative effects with implantation of project design features and mitigation measures. The negative effects are the possibility of cultural resources damage from ground disturbance from the use of heavy machinery, log and tree removal, road construction, and the heat damage to resources from prescribed fires. The loss of vegetation can indirectly lead to vandalism to cultural resources because of the increased visibility. Project design features would mitigate adverse effects to cultural resources within the project area. Positive effects include the reduction of fuels that could result in fire damaged cultural resources and increased erosion of archaeological sites. Alternatives 2 or 3 would meet the Helena National Forest management goals for cultural resources by reducing the risk of fire. Damages to cultural resources from wildfires, suppression efforts and erosion, are irreversible losses of cultural resources. With project design features the project is anticipated to have no adverse effect. If additional cultural resources are discovered during implementation of this project, work should cease in the area and a Forest Archaeologist would be contacted. Work in the area could only resume if mitigation measures can be determined and/or re-evaluated if necessary. Economic Financial Efficiency Project feasibility and financial efficiency indicates that both action alternatives are financially inefficient (negative Present Net Value (PNV)) when including all activities associated with the analysis. Both action alternatives are feasible when considering only timber harvest and the required design criteria. Alternative 2 has the highest PNV for the timber harvest and required design criteria at positive $178 thousand, and negative $1.2 million when considering all proposed activities. For alternative 3, the PNV for the timber harvest and required design criteria is positive $68 thousand, and negative $1.1 million for all proposed activities. The no-action alternative has no costs or revenues associated with it. A reduction of financial PNV in any alternative as compared to the most efficient solution is a component of the economic trade-off, or opportunity cost, of achieving that alternative. The no-action alternative would not harvest timber or take other restorative actions and, therefore, incur no costs. As indicated earlier, many of the values associated with natural resource management (e.g., reduced fuel loadings for future reduced fire severity, improving vegetative species mix across the landscape) are nonmarket benefits. Economic Impact The no-action alternative would not change jobs or income because there are no proposed project activities associated with this alternative. Alternative 2 proposes harvest of 22,022 hundred cubic feet (Ccf) of timber products and could result in a total of 171 jobs and labor income at $7.7 million over the life of the project. On an annual basis, this would amount to approximately 38 jobs per year over a period of 10 years. Annual effects are greatest with this alternative since it has the most timber harvest. If the harvest takes longer than anticipated, the total impacts would remain the same, but the annual contributions would be reduced. Approximately 134 direct, indirect and induced jobs and $6.6 million of labor income are associated with the proposed timber harvest activities, with the rest associated with restoration activities. Alternative 3 proposes harvest of 14,299 Ccf of timber products could result in a total of 118 jobs and $5.2 million in total labor income over the life of the project. On an annual basis, this would amount to approximately 25 jobs per year over a period of 10 years, and $1.2 million annually in total labor income. Approximately 87 direct, indirect and induced jobs and $4.3 million of labor income would be associated with the timber harvest activities, with the rest associated with restoration activities. Environmental Justice More employment and labor income opportunities would be created by alternatives 2 and 3 when compared to no action. Implementation of any of the action alternatives would not likely adversely affect minority or low-income populations. Implementation of the no-action alternative maintains the status quo and provides no additional employment or income in the economic impact area. The Executive Order also directs agencies to consider patterns of subsistence hunting and fishing when an action proposed by an agency has the potential to affect fish or wildlife. There are no Native American Reservations or designated Native American hunting grounds located in or near the analysis area. None of the alternatives restrict or alter opportunities for subsistence hunting and fishing by Native American tribes. Tribes holding treaty rights for hunting and fishing on the Helena National Forest are included on the project mailing list and have the opportunity to provide comments on this project.  Acronyms ADS Aerial Detection Surveys BD Bulk Density BMPs Best Management Practices BpS Biophysical Settings CE Cumulative Effects CWD Coarse Woody Debris d.b.h. Diameter Breast Height DEIS Draft Environmental Impact Statement DFB Douglas-fir Beetle DSD Detrimental Soil Disturbance DWD Down Woody Debris EIS Environmental Impact Statement ESA Endangered Species Act FEIS Final Environmental Impact Statement FIA Forest Inventory Analysis FP Forest Plan FRCC Fire Regime Condition Class FS Forest Service GHG Greenhouse Gasses HNF Helena National Forest INFISH Inland Native Fish Strategy IRA Inventoried Roadless Area LAU Lynx Analysis Unit LRMP Land and Resource Management Plan MAAQS Montana Ambient Air Quality Standards MDEQ Montana Department of Environmental Quality MFRC Montana Forest Restoration Committee MFWP Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks MPB Mountain Pine Beetle NAAQS National Ambient Air Quality Standards NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NFMA National Forest Management Act NFS National Forest System NNIS Nonnative Invasive Species NRLMD Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction PFA Post Fledgling Area SWCC Southwestern Crown Collaborative TMDL Total Maximum Daily Load TPA Trees per Acre USDA United States Department of Agriculture USDI United States Department of the Interior USFWS United States Department of Fish and Wildlife Service WSB Western Spruce Budworm WUI Wildland Urban Interface   Table of Contents Summary ........................................................................................................................................................ i Development of the Proposed Action ........................................................................................................ i Public Involvement ................................................................................................................................... ii Issues ........................................................................................................................................................ ii Formulate Alternatives ......................................................................................................................... iii Addressed by Design Features or Evaluated for Comparison.............................................................. iii Alternatives Considered in Detail ............................................................................................................ iv Decision Framework ................................................................................................................................ vi Comparison of Alternative Effects ......................................................................................................... vii Vegetation ........................................................................................................................................... vii Transportation ...................................................................................................................................... ix Fire and Fuels ....................................................................................................................................... ix Air Quality ............................................................................................................................................ x Habitats of Special Concern ................................................................................................................. xi Wildlife ............................................................................................................................................... xii Plants ................................................................................................................................................. xxii Noxious Weeds ................................................................................................................................. xxii Soil ................................................................................................................................................... xxiii Watershed Resources ....................................................................................................................... xxiii Fish Habitat ...................................................................................................................................... xxiv Recreation ......................................................................................................................................... xxv Inventoried Roadless Areas .............................................................................................................. xxv Visual ............................................................................................................................................... xxvi Cultural ............................................................................................................................................ xxvi Economic Financial Efficiency ........................................................................................................ xxvi Economic Impact ............................................................................................................................ xxvii Environmental Justice ..................................................................................................................... xxvii Acronyms ............................................................................................................................................... xxviii Chapter 1. Purpose of and Need for Action .................................................................................................. 1 Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 1 Project Area .......................................................................................................................................... 2 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................................................................. 4 Helena National Forest, Forest Plan of 1986, as amended; Forest Plan Management Direction.......... 8 Purpose and Need for Action .................................................................................................................... 9 Desired Condition ............................................................................................................................... 12 Vegetation-Fuel Classes ...................................................................................................................... 16 Existing Condition .............................................................................................................................. 18 Proposed Action ..................................................................................................................................... 25 Development of the Proposed Action ................................................................................................. 25 Decision Framework ............................................................................................................................... 28 Public Involvement ................................................................................................................................. 28 Issues ...................................................................................................................................................... 29 Formulate Alternatives ........................................................................................................................ 29 Addressed by Design Features or Evaluated for Comparison............................................................. 29 Other Issues ......................................................................................................................................... 31 Chapter 2. Alternatives, Including the Proposed Action............................................................................. 33 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................ 33 Alternatives Considered in Detail ........................................................................................................... 33 Alternatives at a Glance .......................................................................................................................33 Alternative 1 – No Action ...................................................................................................................35 Alternative 2 – The Proposed Action ..................................................................................................35 Alternative 3 – Preferred .....................................................................................................................41 Project Design Features, Best Management Practices and Mitigation for the Action Alternatives ....44 Monitoring ...........................................................................................................................................60 Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Detailed Study ................................................................61 Comparison of Alternative Effects..........................................................................................................64 Vegetation ...........................................................................................................................................64 Transportation .....................................................................................................................................66 Fire and Fuels ......................................................................................................................................66 Air Quality ...........................................................................................................................................67 Habitats of Special Concern ................................................................................................................68 Wildlife ................................................................................................................................................69 Plants ...................................................................................................................................................80 Noxious Weeds ....................................................................................................................................80 Soil.......................................................................................................................................................81 Watershed resources ............................................................................................................................81 Fish habitat ..........................................................................................................................................82 Recreation ............................................................................................................................................83 Inventoried Roadless Areas .................................................................................................................83 Visual ...................................................................................................................................................84 Cultural ................................................................................................................................................84 Economic Financial Efficiency ...........................................................................................................84 Economic Impact .................................................................................................................................85 Environmental Justice .........................................................................................................................85 Chapter 3. Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences ........................................................87 Introduction .............................................................................................................................................87 Analyzing Environmental Consequences ............................................................................................87 Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects .............................................................................................87 Vegetation ...............................................................................................................................................89 Introduction .........................................................................................................................................89 Methodology .......................................................................................................................................89 Overview of Issues Addressed ............................................................................................................91 Affected Environment .........................................................................................................................92 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................119 Effects Common to All Alternatives .................................................................................................120 Effects Common to All Action Alternatives .....................................................................................121 Alternative 1 – No-Action .................................................................................................................130 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action .......................................................................................................132 Alternative 3 ......................................................................................................................................143 Alternative Comparison .....................................................................................................................156 Transportation .......................................................................................................................................162 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................162 Methodology .....................................................................................................................................162 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................163 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................163 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................163 Alternative 1 – No Action .................................................................................................................164 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action .......................................................................................................165 Alternative 3 ......................................................................................................................................168 Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans .............. 171 Other Relevant Mandatory Disclosures ............................................................................................ 171 Summary of Effects .......................................................................................................................... 171 Fire and Fuels ....................................................................................................................................... 172 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 172 Methodology and Limitations ........................................................................................................... 172 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................ 173 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 174 Environmental Consequences ........................................................................................................... 188 Alternative 1 – No Action ................................................................................................................. 189 Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 ......................................................................................................... 190 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action ....................................................................................................... 196 Alternative 3 ...................................................................................................................................... 200 How the Alternatives Meet the Identified Issues .............................................................................. 203 Summary ........................................................................................................................................... 203 Air Quality ............................................................................................................................................ 204 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 204 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 204 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................ 205 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 205 Environmental Consequences ........................................................................................................... 209 Effects Common to All Action Alternatives ..................................................................................... 209 Alternative 1 – No Action ................................................................................................................. 209 Alternative 2 and 3 ............................................................................................................................ 211 Habitats of Special Concern ................................................................................................................. 215 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 215 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 215 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 220 Environmental Consequences ........................................................................................................... 228 Effects Common to All Alternatives ................................................................................................. 229 Alternative 1 – No Action ................................................................................................................. 230 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action ....................................................................................................... 231 Alternative 3 ...................................................................................................................................... 236 Wildlife ................................................................................................................................................. 240 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 240 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 241 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................ 246 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 248 Threatened and Endangered Species ................................................................................................. 261 Sensitive and Federal Candidate Species .......................................................................................... 277 Management Indicator Species ......................................................................................................... 287 Commonly Hunted Species ............................................................................................................... 302 Migratory Birds ................................................................................................................................. 315 Environmental Consequences ........................................................................................................... 318 Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives ........................................................................................... 339 Habitat Effects .................................................................................................................................. 343 Species Effects .................................................................................................................................. 367 Threatened and Endangered Species ................................................................................................. 367 Sensitive and Federal Candidate Species .......................................................................................... 410 Management Indicator Species ......................................................................................................... 428 Commonly Hunted Species ............................................................................................................... 449 Migratory Birds .................................................................................................................................474 Plants .....................................................................................................................................................475 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................475 Methodology .....................................................................................................................................477 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................479 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................479 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................480 Alternative 1– No Action ..................................................................................................................482 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action .......................................................................................................484 Alternative 3 ......................................................................................................................................485 Summary of Effects ...........................................................................................................................486 Noxious Weeds .....................................................................................................................................493 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................493 Methodology .....................................................................................................................................494 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................495 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................496 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................498 Soil ........................................................................................................................................................502 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................502 Methodology .....................................................................................................................................502 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................504 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................504 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................511 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action .......................................................................................................518 Alternative 3 ......................................................................................................................................524 Hydrology .............................................................................................................................................529 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................529 Methodology .....................................................................................................................................529 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................535 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................535 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................541 Fisheries ................................................................................................................................................552 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................552 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................552 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................553 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................553 Analysis Area ....................................................................................................................................553 Existing Condition .............................................................................................................................553 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................561 Species Determinations .....................................................................................................................565 Recreation .............................................................................................................................................567 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................567 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................567 Methodology .....................................................................................................................................568 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................568 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................572 Inventoried Roadless Areas...................................................................................................................580 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................580 Overview of Issues Addressed ..........................................................................................................580 Affected Environment .......................................................................................................................586 Environmental Consequences ...........................................................................................................596 Scenery ................................................................................................................................................. 603 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 603 Overview of Issues Addressed .......................................................................................................... 603 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 605 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 609 Environmental Consequences ........................................................................................................... 614 Cultural Resources ................................................................................................................................ 626 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 626 Overview of Issues ............................................................................................................................ 627 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 627 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 628 Alternative 1 – No Action ................................................................................................................. 629 Alternative 2 – Proposed Action ....................................................................................................... 630 Alternative 3 ...................................................................................................................................... 630 Alternatives 2 and 3 .......................................................................................................................... 631 Economics ............................................................................................................................................ 632 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 632 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 632 Affected Environment ....................................................................................................................... 635 Alternative 1 – No Action ................................................................................................................. 638 Alternatives 2 and 3 .......................................................................................................................... 638 Environmental Justice ....................................................................................................................... 643 Other Disclosures .............................................................................................................................. 644 Chapter 4. Consultation and Coordination ................................................................................................ 649 Preparers and Contributors ................................................................................................................... 649 Interdisciplinary Team Members ...................................................................................................... 649 Reviewers and Specialists Consulted ................................................................................................ 650 Federal, State, and Local Agencies ................................................................................................... 650 Distribution of the Environmental Impact Statement ........................................................................... 658 References ............................................................................................................................................ 659 Glossary ................................................................................................................................................ 725 Index ..................................................................................................................................................... 729 List of Tables Table S- 1. Acres of proposed harvest and fuels treatments by alternative _________________________________ v Table 1. Crosswalk of MFRC Principles with Forest Service direction ______________________________________ 2 Table 2. Management Areas ______________________________________________________________________ 9 Table 3. Biophysical setting acres and percent of project area __________________________________________ 12 Table 4. Desired vegetation-fuel classes for each Biophysical Setting ____________________________________ 17 Table 5. Current and desired vegetation-fuel classes by BpS____________________________________________ 19 Table 6. Aerial Detection acres of mortality (M) and defoliation (D) in project area by year __________________ 20 Table 7. Accumulated TPA mortality from ADS 2001-2010 _____________________________________________ 22 Table 8. Treatment Summary by Alternative ________________________________________________________ 33 Table 9. Project design features, best management practices and mitigation ______________________________ 45 Table 10. Existing condition data for proposed treatment units _________________________________________ 93 Table 11. Habitat types for each prescription group and treatment unit _________________________________ 100 Table 12. Unit biophysical setting acreages ________________________________________________________ 104 Table 13. Treatment group biophysical settings ____________________________________________________ 109 Table 14. Alternative 1 BpS and vegetation-fuel class current and future direction of change ________________ 130 Table 15. Alternative 2 proposed treatments by prescription group and unit _____________________________ 133 Table 16. Alternative 2 total treatment acres by prescription group _____________________________________ 136 Table 17. Alternative 2 post-treatment, current and desired vegetation-fuel classes by BpS _________________ 138 Table 18. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on ponderosa pine __________________________________ 139 Table 19. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on quaking aspen ___________________________________ 140 Table 20. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on western larch ___________________________________ 140 Table 21. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on whitebark pine __________________________________ 141 Table 22. Alternative 3 proposed treatments by group and unit ________________________________________ 144 Table 23. Alternative 3 total treatment acres by prescription group _____________________________________ 147 Table 24. Alternative 3 post-treatment, current and desired vegetation-fuel classes by BpS _________________ 151 Table 25. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on ponderosa pine __________________________________ 152 Table 26. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on quaking aspen ___________________________________ 153 Table 27. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on western larch ___________________________________ 154 Table 28. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on whitebark pine __________________________________ 154 Table 29. Alternative comparison for ponderosa pine, western larch, whitebark pine, and aspen _____________ 157 Table 30. Alternative comparison for stand structures _______________________________________________ 159 Table 31. Alternative comparison for landscape-level stand structures __________________________________ 160 Table 32. Alternative comparison for insects and diseases ____________________________________________ 161 Table 33. Stonewall project area roads summary by jurisdiction _______________________________________ 163 Table 34. Summary of proposed action haul route miles by Forest Plan Management Area __________________ 168 Table 35. Summary of Alternative 3 haul route miles by Forest Plan Management Area ____________________ 171 Table 36. The three condition classes as described in FRCC ____________________________________________ 175 Table 37. Current FRCC Rating for Biophysical Settings in Stonewall Project Area __________________________ 176 Table 38. Fire frequency and severity by biophysical settings in the Stonewall Project area __________________ 178 Table 39. Number of fires in the Stonewall Project area per decade by size class __________________________ 180 Table 40 Current distribution of fire behavior fuel models in the project area. _____________________________ 183 Table 41. Fireline intensity interpretations _________________________________________________________ 184 Table 42. Potential fire behavior characteristics modeled with 25 mph upslope 20-foot winds. _______________ 184 Table 43. Wildland Urban Interface classifications within Stonewall Project area __________________________ 187 Table 44. Prescription group acres by alternative ___________________________________________________ 193 Table 45 Proposed burning treatments and approximate acres of prescription group for alternative 2 _________ 198 Table 46 Fire behavior potential under alternative 2 _________________________________________________ 198 Table 47. Proposed burning treatment and total acres of prescription groups under alternative 3 ____________ 201 Table 48. Fire behavior potential under alternative 3 ________________________________________________ 201 Table 49. Summary of sensitive receptors adjacent to or near the project area ____________________________ 209 Table 50. PM2.5 concentrations from wildfire burning under no action alternative _________________________ 210 Table 51. Acre comparison by treatment for each alternative __________________________________________ 211 Table 52. Alternatives 2 and 3 prescribed burning concentrations ______________________________________ 211 Table 53. Alternative 2 and 3 pile burn concentrations _______________________________________________ 212 Table 54. Snags per acre by d.b.h. class from 2008 FIA intensification plot data ___________________________ 220 Table 55. 3rd-order drainage designated old growth data _____________________________________________ 222 Table 56. Third-order drainage designated old growth type and acres ___________________________________ 223 Table 57. Outside 3rd-order drainage verified old growth data _________________________________________ 224 Table 58. Verified and potential old growth not within the 3rd-order drainages ___________________________ 225 Table 59. Acres and percent of area within 3rd-order drainage and project area by treatment classes _________ 231 Table 60. Alternative 3, acres and percent of area within 3rd-order drainage and project area by treatment classes ___________________________________________________________________________________________ 237 Table 61. Wildlife issue indicators ________________________________________________________________ 246 Table 62. Wildlife species considered _____________________________________________________________ 248 Table 63. Wildlife species eliminated from detailed analysis ___________________________________________ 249 Table 64. Wildlife species evaluated in detail _______________________________________________________ 249 Table 65. Snag distribution data by size class from 2008 FIA plots ______________________________________ 258 Table 66. Lynx analysis unit ownership and habitat __________________________________________________ 266 Table 67. Mapped lynx habitat __________________________________________________________________ 266 Table 68. Project area bear management units _____________________________________________________ 272 Table 69. Grizzly core and den habitat within the project area _________________________________________ 273 Table 70. Arrastra and Red Mountain bear subunit road density and core _______________________________ 273 Table 71. Existing project area old growth _________________________________________________________ 288 Table 72. Existing goshawk nesting and foraging habitat (Samson 2006a) _______________________________ 294 Table 73. Percent of goshawk nesting and foraging habitat recommendations3 ___________________________ 296 Table 74. Post-fledgling habitat Summary _________________________________________________________ 296 Table 75. Existing pileated woodpecker habitat ____________________________________________________ 299 Table 76. Snag distribution data by size class from 2008 FIA plots ______________________________________ 300 Table 77. Forest Plan hiding cover on elk summer range _____________________________________________ 305 Table 78. Elk herd unit summer open road density __________________________________________________ 306 Table 79. Forest Plan thermal cover on elk winter ranges1 ____________________________________________ 307 Table 80. Forest thresholds for hunting season elk security ___________________________________________ 309 Table 81. Elk herd unit data comparing hiding cover and open road density ______________________________ 309 Table 82. Existing elk security by herd unit ________________________________________________________ 310 Table 83. Project area migratory birds ____________________________________________________________ 316 Table 84. Project area birds of conservation concern ________________________________________________ 317 Table 85. Wildlife effects summary by alternative ___________________________________________________ 319 Table 86. Alternative treatment acres by biophysical setting __________________________________________ 343 Table 87. Dry forest wildlife habitat summary by alternative __________________________________________ 344 Table 88. Wildlife species associated with closed-canopy forests _______________________________________ 348 Table 89. Snag and DWD effect and treatment summary _____________________________________________ 361 Table 90. Forested size and age class diversity by alternative _________________________________________ 363 Table 91. Blackfoot 07 alternative lynx habitat _____________________________________________________ 371 Table 92. Blackfoot 08 alternative lynx habitat _____________________________________________________ 372 Table 93. Lynx amendment alternative comparison of objectives, standards and guidelines _________________ 382 Table 94. Action alternative cumulative effects summary_____________________________________________ 391 Table 95. Grizzly habitat treated1 ________________________________________________________________ 398 Table 96. Alternative grizzly bear access/core habitat summary _______________________________________ 399 Table 97. Grizzly bear habitat changes____________________________________________________________ 401 Table 98. Action area cumulative effects __________________________________________________________ 404 Table 99. Past, ongoing and future activities within the wolverine cumulative effect area ___________________ 406 Table 100. Fisher cumulative effect summary ______________________________________________________ 413 Table 101. Fisher habitat proposed for treatment ___________________________________________________ 414 Table 102. Alternative Treatment of Flammulated Owl Habitat ________________________________________ 423 Table 103. Goshawk habitat proposed for treatment ________________________________________________ 430 Table 104. Project area foraging diversity by alternative _____________________________________________ 432 Table 105. Active nest PFA habitat treated ________________________________________________________ 432 Table 106. Stonewall east PFA conditions by alternative _____________________________________________ 433 Table 107. Stonewall west PFA conditions by alternative _____________________________________________ 433 Table 108. Alternative treatments within pileated and hairy woodpecker habitat1 ________________________ 439 Table 109. Alternative treatments in American marten habitat ________________________________________ 446 Table 110. Post-treatment effects to marten habitat by alternative ____________________________________ 446 Table 111. Alternative Elk herd unit summary and Forest Plan compliance _______________________________ 450 Table 112. Alternative elk herd unit summary of habitat effectiveness and elk security _____________________ 450 Table 113. Alternative 1 elk cumulative effects _____________________________________________________ 452 Table 114. Proposed treatments within project elk hiding cover _______________________________________ 454 Table 115. Alternative 1 mule deer cumulative effects _______________________________________________ 469 Table 116. Treatments within deer hiding cover by alternative ________________________________________ 470 Table 117. Region 1 sensitive plant species that occur or may occur on the Helena National Forest ___________ 475 Table 118 Treatment units with whitebark pine present – Alternative 2 _________________________________ 484 Table 119 Comparison of potential weed infestation due to proposed activities ___________________________ 485 Table 120. Summary of determination of effects ____________________________________________________ 492 Table 121. Mapped noxious weed infestation in the analysis areas _____________________________________ 497 Table 122. Treatment type and cost to treat one-third of the currently infested acres - all alternatives_________ 499 Table 123. Annual weather data for the project area ________________________________________________ 504 Table 124. Soil characteristics and limitations for the Stonewall Vegetation project units ___________________ 506 Table 125. Current conditions by unit in the Stonewall Vegetation Project _______________________________ 509 Table 126. Acres of treatment and road miles for each action alternative ________________________________ 511 Table 127. WEPP modeling results for the Stonewall Project, erosion and sedimentation ____________________ 515 Table 128. Expected recovery rates for proposed activities in the action alternatives _______________________ 516 Table 129. Projected detrimental soil disturbance for the proposed action in the Stonewall Project ___________ 520 Table 130. Projected detrimental soil disturbance for alternative 3 in the Stonewall Project _________________ 525 Table 131. Watersheds, stream miles, and acres of watershed area ____________________________________ 535 Table 132. Summary of water quality impairments in project area 303(d)-listed streams ____________________ 537 Table 133. Road information for the project area by 6th-HUC watershed ________________________________ 538 Table 134. Summary of mean percent fines (less than 0.25 inches diameter) in select streams as an indicator of cumulative effects from past and ongoing activities by 6th-field HUC ____________________________________ 539 Table 135. Riparian condition and bank alteration information for the project area, by 6th-HUC watershed _____ 540 Table 136. Estimated average annual sediment delivery from roads to stream channels for existing condition __ 541 Table 137. Existing condition equivalent clearcut area (ECA) due to past alterations in vegetation cover in the project area _________________________________________________________________________________ 542 Table 138. Road obliteration and maintenance for project ____________________________________________ 547 Table 139. Estimated average annual sediment delivery from roads to stream channels by sub-drainage for existing conditions and alternatives 2 and 3 ______________________________________________________________ 547 Table 140. Equivalent clearcut area (ECA) by alternative _____________________________________________ 548 Table 141. Estimated percent water yield increase by action alternatives ________________________________ 549 Table 142. Percent estimated cumulative water yield increase over baseline conditions (%) _________________ 549 Table 143. WEPP W3 module predicted flow increases for the project area _______________________________ 550 Table 144. Analysis area species _________________________________________________________________ 552 Table 145. Fish species by stream in the Stonewall Project area ________________________________________ 554 Table 146. Summary of mean percent fines (<1/4 inch dia.) in spawning habitat of select streams as an indicator of cumulative effects from past and ongoing cumulative effects by 6th-field HUC ____________________________ 560 Table 147. WCT habitat variables from Overton and Region 1 guidance that may be influenced by proposed management in the Stonewall Project area ________________________________________________________ 566 Table 148. Stonewall Project area trails ___________________________________________________________ 570 Table 149. Alternative 2 – proposed treatments and potentially impacted recreation resources ______________ 575 Table 150. Alternative 3 – proposed treatment and potentially impacted recreation resources _______________ 578 Table 151. Wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics crosswalk _____________________________ 585 Table 152. Inventoried Roadless Area Acreage______________________________________________________ 587 Table 153. Past harvest and fuel activities since 1986 in the portion of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA managed by the Helena National Forest __________________________________________________________ 592 Table 154. Alternative 2 - Proposed treatment within inventoried roadless areas __________________________ 597 Table 155. Alternative 3 - proposed treatment within inventoried roadless areas __________________________ 600 Table 156. Distance zones viewed into the project area from travel routes, use areas, and water bodies from sensitive areas _______________________________________________________________________________ 613 Table 157. Proposed action viewed units and their VQO from travel routes, use areas, and water bodies _______ 614 Table 158. Viewed treatment units with proposed vegetation treatment, prescriptions, logging systems, distance zone, and VQO for the alternatives 2 and 3 ________________________________________________________ 618 Table 159. Distance zone viewed VQO acres for alternatives 2 and 3 ____________________________________ 619 Table 160. Cultural resources within the Stonewall Vegetation project boundary __________________________ 629 Table 161. Estimated Population Change 1990 to 2009 ______________________________________________ 635 Table 162. Racial Composition of 2000 Population __________________________________________________ 635 Table 163. Project Feasibility and Financial Efficiency Summary (2011 dollars) ____________________________ 639 Table 164. Activity Expenditures by Alternative (not included in appraisal) _______________________________ 641 Table 165. Proportion of Timber Harvest by Product Type _____________________________________________ 642 Table 166. Economic Impacts (Employment and Labor Income), Total and Annual ($2011) __________________ 642 List of Figures Figure 1. Stonewall Vegetation Project Area Vicinity Map ______________________________________________ 3 Figure 2. Stonewall Project management areas _____________________________________________________ 11 Figure 3. Biophysical settings within the Stonewall Project area ________________________________________ 13 Figure 4. Ponderosa pine - Douglas-fir (unit 48) existing condition_______________________________________ 14 Figure 5. Douglas-fir interior dry (unit 35) existing condition ___________________________________________ 15 Figure 6. Desired condition ponderosa pine - Douglas-fir after regeneration ______________________________ 15 Figure 7. Desired condition Douglas-fir interior ______________________________________________________ 16 Figure 8. Aerial Damage Survey tree mortality estimates summed from 2001 to 2010_______________________ 21 Figure 9. Percent of project area in tree canopy-cover classes __________________________________________ 22 Figure 10. VMAP tree canopy-cover classes _________________________________________________________ 24 Figure 11. Alternative 2 – proposed action, treatment unit development map _____________________________ 26 Figure 12. View looking towards units 88 and 84 proposed for group 8 treatment __________________________ 37 Figure 13. Alternative 2 – proposed action treatments ________________________________________________ 39 Figure 14. Alternative 3 treatments _______________________________________________________________ 43 Figure 15. Proposed Action treatments with INFISH buffers ____________________________________________ 58 Figure 16. Alternative 3 treatments with INFISH buffers _______________________________________________ 59 Figure 17. Stonewall project area habitat types and units _____________________________________________ 99 Figure 18. Stand 42303130 current condition diameter distributions ____________________________________ 114 Figure 19. Plantation current condition diameter distributions ________________________________________ 115 Figure 20. Stand 41502088 current condition diameter distributions ____________________________________ 115 Figure 21. Stand 41502089 current condition diameter distributions all d.b.h. classes ______________________ 116 Figure 22. Stand 41502089 current condition diameter distribution without 1-inch d.b.h. class ______________ 116 Figure 23. Stand 415020066 current condition diameter distributions ___________________________________ 117 Figure 24. Stand 41502043 current condition diameter distribution ____________________________________ 117 Figure 25. Stand 41501056 current condition diameter distributions ____________________________________ 118 Figure 26. Stand 42303130 post thin and burn treatment ____________________________________________ 123 Figure 27. Stand 42303130 post thin and burn treatment ____________________________________________ 123 Figure 28. Plantation post-thinning diameter distribution ____________________________________________ 124 Figure 29. Stand 41502088 post-shelterwood ______________________________________________________ 126 Figure 30. Stand 41020066 post-treatment ________________________________________________________ 127 Figure 31. Stand 41502089 post-underburn treatment _______________________________________________ 128 Figure 32. Alternative 2 (proposed action) harvest and fuels treatments_________________________________ 137 Figure 33. Alternative 3 harvest and fuels treatments _______________________________________________ 148 Figure 34. Stand 41502043 post underburn ________________________________________________________ 149 Figure 35. Stand 41501056 post underburn ________________________________________________________ 150 Figure 36. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46a) post-treatment in alternative 3 __________________________________ 150 Figure 37. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46a) post-treatment in alternative 3 __________________________________ 151 Figure 38. Transportation system for alternative 2-proposed action ____________________________________ 166 Figure 39. Transportation system for alternative 3 __________________________________________________ 169 Figure 40. Fire History Map of the Stonewall Project Area ____________________________________________ 181 Figure 41. Photo showing understory ladder fuel component combined with overstory conifers ______________ 183 Figure 42. Existing condition fire behavior potential displayed as flame length____________________________ 185 Figure 43. Existing condition fire behavior potential displayed by fire type _______________________________ 186 Figure 44. Fire risk ratings for Wildland Urban Interface within the Stonewall Project boundary ______________ 188 Figure 45. Alternative 2 – proposed action fire behavior potential displayed as flame length ________________ 199 Figure 46. Alternative 2 – proposed action fire behavior potential displayed by fire type ____________________ 199 Figure 47. Alternative 3 fire behavior potential displayed as flame length _______________________________ 202 Figure 48. Alternative 3 fire behavior potential displayed by fire type ___________________________________ 202 Figure 49. Montana Class 1 Area Map ____________________________________________________________ 207 Figure 50. Stonewall Project potential smoke impact map ____________________________________________ 213 Figure 51. Aerial damage survey estimated mortality for 2009 and 2010 ________________________________ 221 Figure 52. Stand 42201139 (Unit 81) current condition _______________________________________________ 226 Figure 53. Stand 42201147 (Unit 81) current condition _______________________________________________ 226 Figure 54. Stand 42201152 (Unit 81) current condition _______________________________________________ 227 Figure 55. Stand 42201089 (Unit 2) current condition ________________________________________________ 227 Figure 56. Stand 423031130 (Unit 46) current condition ______________________________________________ 228 Figure 57. Alternative 2 (proposed action) Units and old growth stands _________________________________ 232 Figure 58. Stand 42201139 (Unit 81) post-underburn condition ________________________________________ 233 Figure 59. Stand 42201147 (Unit 81) post-underburn ________________________________________________ 233 Figure 60. Stand 42201152 (Unit 81) post-underburn ________________________________________________ 234 Figure 61. Stand 41502089 (Unit 2) post-underburn _________________________________________________ 234 Figure 62. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment ________________________________________________ 235 Figure 63. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment ________________________________________________ 235 Figure 64. Alternative 3 Units and old growth stands ________________________________________________ 238 Figure 65. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment in alternative 3____________________________________ 239 Figure 66. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment in alternative 3____________________________________ 239 Figure 67. Project area snag distribution __________________________________________________________ 259 Figure 68. Description of different structural stages and their contribution to lynx forage and den habitat conditions ___________________________________________________________________________________________ 265 Figure 69. Existing project area lynx habitat by LAU _________________________________________________ 267 Figure 70. Stonewall Lynx LAU – Tri-County WUI ____________________________________________________ 269 Figure 71. Project and Combined Boundary Old Growth ______________________________________________ 289 Figure 72. Project area goshawk habitat and nest sites _______________________________________________ 295 Figure 73. Existing pileated woodpecker habitat ____________________________________________________ 299 Figure 74. Percent Elk habitat effectiveness curve (Lyon 1983) _________________________________________ 306 Figure 75. Existing hiding cover in Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd unit ________________________________ 306 Figure 76. Elk winter range, thermal cover and security habitat ________________________________________ 308 Figure 77. Mule Deer Fluctuations in Montana from 1970 to 2011 (Montana Field Guide) ___________________ 313 Figure 78. Mule deer range and cover within the project area _________________________________________ 314 Figure 79. Elk cover and forage within elk winter range and associated treatment areas ____________________ 461 Figure 80. Elk thermal and hiding cover and proposed treatments in management area T-1 _________________ 463 Figure 81. Elk thermal cover, hiding cover and proposed treatments in MA T-3 ___________________________ 465 Figure 82. Elk cover and proposed treatments in management area W-1 ________________________________ 467 Figure 82. General location of noxious weeds in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area _____________________ 494 Figure 83. Sediment source areas and proposed road treatments for alternative 2- project watersheds ________ 546 Figure 84. Summer Recreation Opportunity Spectrum ________________________________________________ 571 Figure 85. Winter Recreation Opportunity Spectrum _________________________________________________ 572 Figure 86. Associated inventoried roadless areas ____________________________________________________ 588 Figure 87. Management areas in the inventoried roadless areas _______________________________________ 590 Figure 88. Stonewall Project visual resource ________________________________________________________ 604 Figure 89. Stonewall Visual Resource Photo Points Map ______________________________________________ 610 Figure 90. Photo Point 1-View looking northwest from Forest Route 1040 towards the project area (Approximately 5 miles east of Lincoln, near the Aspen Grove Campground. This is approximately 4 miles southeast of the project area, not displayed in figure 56) _________________________________________________________________ 611 Figure 91. Photo Point 2-View looking north from State Highway 200 into unit 2 __________________________ 611 Figure 92. Photo Point 3-View north down Forest Route 626 __________________________________________ 611 Figure 93. Photo Point 4-View northeast into the project area from Lincoln Gulch cemetery _________________ 611 Figure 94. Photo Point 5-View North from the Lincoln District Office. Due to topography, distance, and vegetative screening, the project area is not seen from the Lincoln District Office. __________________________________ 612 Figure 95. Photo Point 6-View northwest on County Route 433 into the project area _______________________ 612 Figure 96. Photo Point 7-View west down State Highway 200 with the project area in the middleground _______ 612 Figure 97. Photo Point 10-View south from Forest Route 330 towards Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA. Due to topography, the project area is not seen from Forest Route 330. _______________________________________ 612 Figure 98. Photo Point 8-View looking southwest from Forest road 330 of Snowbank Lake __________________ 613 Figure 99. Photo Point 9-View within Pine Grove campground _________________________________________ 613 Figure 100. Stonewall visual resource proposed action viewed units ____________________________________ 617 Figure 101. Stonewall visual resource alternative 3 viewed units _______________________________________ 623 Figure 102. Economic impact area _______________________________________________________________ 634 Figure 103. Volume display for R1, Montana, Idaho and HNF from 1980-2010 ____________________________ 638  Chapter 1. Purpose of and Need for Action Introduction The Forest Service has prepared this environmental impact statement (EIS) in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other relevant Federal and State laws and regulations. This EIS discloses the direct, indirect, and cumulative environmental impacts that would result from the proposed action and alternatives. Within the Stonewall Vegetation Project area, fire suppression and growing conditions over the last century resulted in a loss of open forest conditions and seral species (aspen, ponderosa pine and western larch). This created a more uniform landscape comprised of dense forests (Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine) susceptible to insect and wildfire mortality. In addition, a large-scale mountain pine beetle epidemic has killed most of the mature lodgepole pine and ponderosa pine. These conditions are elevating fuel levels that pose a wildfire threat to nearby homes and communities in the wildland urban interface (WUI). In 2006, the Forest Service initiated the planning process for the Stonewall Vegetation project, (at that time referred to as the Stone-Dry area) with reviews of database information and ground conditions within the watershed. Due to an interest in management of the Lincoln Ranger District, the Lincoln Restoration Committee (LRC), a group of private citizens with diverse community interests, was formed in 2008 (formerly the Lincoln Working Group) as part of the Montana Forest Restoration Committee (MFRC). The MFRC is a collaborative group with representatives from diverse interests who came together in 2007 to address forest stewardship issues. This group adopted 13 restoration principles for on-the-ground treatments. The LRC came together with the purpose of developing recommendations for restoration projects on the Lincoln Ranger District, while working within the framework developed by the MFRC. Typically with projects, the Forest Service develops a proposed action for an area and then distributes it to the public for comment. On the Stonewall Project, the Helena National Forest has been working with the LRC in compliance with Executive Order 13352 of August 2004—Facilitation of Cooperative Conservation. The LRC developed recommendations for the Stonewall area considering several of the 13 restoration principles. These principles are consistent with the goals and standards of the Helena Forest Plan and current Forest Service policy and direction (table 1). Overall, the Stonewall Vegetation Project focuses on restoration of tree species diversity for improvement of wildlife habitat and reducing fuels allowing for the reintroduction of fire.  Table 1. Crosswalk of MFRC Principles with Forest Service direction MFRC Principles Forest Plan (FP)/Forest Service Manual (FSM) /Forest Service Handbook (FSH)/ Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) direction 1. Restore functioning ecosystems FSM 2020 Ecological restoration and resilience 2. Apply adaptive management FSH 1909.15 14.1 Adaptive management strategy 36 CFR 220.3 – Definitions (Adaptive Management) and 36 CFR 220.5(2) 3. Use appropriate scale of analysis to prioritize and design activities FSH1909.15 11 scoping; 40 CFR 1501.7 36 CFR 220.4(e) Scoping. Possibly 36 CFR 220.4(a) 4. Monitor restoration outcomes FP (pp. III/96-987) management area monitoring; FP (pp. IV/3-20); R/7 monitoring and evaluation ) 5. Reestablish fire as a natural process FP (Goal p. II/2). 14. Provide a fire protection and use program which is responsive to land and resource management goals and objectives. FP (standards and guidelines pp. II/33-34; R/1-8). Prescribed fire provides the opportunity to manipulate vegetation for the benefit of timber, wildlife, and range management and reduces the potential for damaging wildfire. Appendix R 6. Consider social constraints and seek public support for reintroduction of fire FP (standards and guidelines pp. II/33-34; R/1-8). Prescribed fire provides the opportunity to manipulate vegetation for the benefit of timber, wildlife, and range management and reduces the potential for damaging wildfire. Appendix R; FSH1909.15 11 scoping 7. Engage the community and interested parties FSH1909.15 11 scoping; 40 CFR 1501.7 36 CFR 220.4(e)-Scoping, 36 CFR 215.5 & 215.6 8. Improve habitat and connectivity FP (Goals p. II/1). 4. Maintain and improve the habitat over time to support big game and other wildlife species. 9. Emphasize ecosystem goods and services, and sustainable land management FP (Goals pp. II/1-I/2). . 10. Integrate restoration with socioeconomics FSM 1970 Economic and social evaluation; FSH 1909.17 economic and social analysis 11. Enhance education and recreation activities to build support for restoration FP (Forest-wide standard p. II/14). 4. Whenever possible, use public education and information programs as well as public involvement to help gain support and understanding of our management objectives and activities. 12. Protect and improve overall watershed health FP Goal #10, and riparian standards and guidelines (pp. II/34-35) 13. Establish and maintain a safe road and trail system that is ecologically sustainable FP (standards and guidelines pp. II/31-33) Road management, maintenance, and trails Project Area The Stonewall Vegetation Project area (project area) covers approximately 24,010 acres (approximately 23,670 acres are National Forest System lands) within Lewis and Clark and Powell Counties, Montana. The project area is on the Lincoln Ranger District, approximately 4 miles north and west of the town of Lincoln, Montana. The legal description for the project area is all or portions of Township (T) 14 North (N), Range (R) 9 West (W), sections 5-8, 17, 18, 20, 29; T14N, R10W, sections 1, 2, 11-13; T15N, R8W, sections 19, 20, 29, 30-32; T15N, R9W, sections 7, 8, 10, 11, 14-36; T15N, R10W, sections 25, 35 and 36; Principle Meridian, Lewis and Clark and Powell Counties, Montana ( figure 1).1 1 Note: All acreage and mileage figures in this document are approximate.   Title: Stonewall Vegetation Project Area Vicinity Map - Description: Vicinity Map displaying location of Stonewall Vegetation Project Area. Project is located in the central western portion of Montana, in the northwest portion of the Helena National Forest, north and northwest of Lincoln, Montana. Figure 1. Stonewall Vegetation Project Area Vicinity Map Regulatory Framework National Forest management is guided by various laws, regulations, and policies that provide the framework for all levels of planning. The laws, regulations and policies relevant to this proposed project analysis are discussed in the individual specialist reports and include (but are not limited to): The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA 1969). The Forest Service has prepared this environmental impact statement (EIS) in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other relevant Federal and State laws and regulations. This EIS discloses the direct, indirect, and cumulative environmental impacts that would result from the proposed action and alternatives. The National Forest Management Act (NFMA) of 1976 governs vegetation management on national forest lands. Several sections in the act, and its accompanying regulations (USDA Forest Service, 1982), specifically address terms and conditions relevant to the vegetation resource. These include sections on timber suitability and management requirements for vegetative manipulation, including tree regeneration timeframes and opening size limits. The Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (ESA 1973, 16 U.S.C. 1531) provides direction to the Forest Service to establish objectives for habitat management and recovery through the Forest Plan for the conservation and protection of endangered and threatened species. This project is consistent with the Forest Plan for listed species and is therefore consistent with these guidelines. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service was consulted to determine which species required evaluating for the project. An analysis of effects on listed species was conducted and documented in a Biological Evaluation. Consultation is ongoing and will be completed prior to issuing a decision on this project. The Migratory Bird Treaty Act, Presidential Executive Order 13186 10 January 2001. Migratory birds are included under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) and incorporate most species of birds present in the project area. In December 2008, the Forest Service entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the United States Department of Interior (USDI) Fish and Wildlife Service on the Migratory Bird Treaty Act to further clarify agency responsibilities (USDA Forest Service and USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2008). Four key principles embodied in the MOU direct the Forest Service to (1) focus on bird populations; (2) focus on habitat restoration and enhancement where actions can benefit specific ecosystems and migratory birds dependent on them; (3) recognize that actions taken to benefit some migratory bird populations may adversely affect other migratory bird populations; and (4) recognize that actions that may provide long-term benefits to migratory birds may have short-term impacts on individual birds. The parties agreed that through the NEPA process, the Forest Service would evaluate the effects of agency actions on migratory birds, focusing first on species of management concern along with their priority habitats and key risk factors. Executive Order 13186 directs departments and agencies to take certain actions to further implement the MBTA. Specifically, the Order directs Federal agencies, whose direct activities will likely result in the “take” of migratory birds, to develop and implement a memorandum of understanding with the USFWS that shall promote the conservation of bird populations. Under Executive Order 13186 the USFWS is responsible to ensure that environmental analyses of Federal actions evaluate the effects of actions and agency plans on migratory birds, with emphasis on species of concern. In 1963 Congress passed the Federal Clean Air Act and amended the act in 1970, 1977, and 1990. The purpose of the act is to protect and enhance air quality while ensuring the protection of public health and welfare. The 1970 amendments established National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), which must be met by most state and federal agencies, including the Forest Service. States are given the primary responsibility for air quality management. Section 110 of the Clean Air Act requires states to develop State Implementation Plans (SIPs) that identify how the state will attain and maintain NAAQS. The Montana Clean Air Act (MCAA)(1967) promulgates the SIP and created the Montana Air Quality Bureau (now under the Montana Department of Environmental Quality-MDEQ). The Clean Air Act also allows states, and some counties, to adopt unique permitting procedures and to apply more stringent standards. The Environmental Protection Agency’s 1980 visibility rules (40 CFR 51.301-307) protect mandatory class 1 areas from human-caused impairments reasonably attributable to a single or small group of sources. In 1999, EPA adopted the Regional Haze Rule (40 CFR 51.308-309), mandating each state to develop a Regional Haze State Implementation Plan (SIP) to incorporate measures necessary to make reasonable progress towards national visibility goals. It calls for states to establish goals for improving visibility in mandatory class I areas and to develop long-term strategies for reducing the emissions of air pollutants that cause visibility impairment. The Regional Haze Rule also requires states to address visibility impairment in mandatory class 1 areas due to emissions from fire activities. The preamble to the rule emphasizes the “implementation of smoke management programs to minimize effects of all fire activities on visibility.” The rule requires states to address visibility effects from all fire sources contributing to visibility impairment in mandatory class 1 areas (Story 2005). Visibility impairment is a basic indicator of air pollution concentrations and is recognized as a major air quality concern in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977. Visibility variation occurs as a result of the scattering and absorption of light by particles and gases in the atmosphere. The Interim Air Quality Policy on Wildland and Prescribed Fires (U.S. EPA 1998) suggests that air quality and visibility impact evaluations of fire activities on Federal lands should consider several different items during planning (EPA 1998). In a project-level NEPA document, it is appropriate to consider and address to the extent practical, a description of applicable regulations, plans, or policies, identification of sensitive areas and the potential for smoke intrusions in those sensitive areas. Other important disclosure items include applicable smoke management techniques, participation in a basic smoke management program, and potential for emission reductions. Typically ambient air quality, visibility monitoring, and cumulative impacts of fires on regional and sub-regional air quality are not explained to the same level of detail. Ambient air quality and visibility monitoring (for class 1 areas) are typically done collaboratively with the states. Impacts to regional and sub-regional air are addressed operationally through a coordinated smoke management program. The EPA urges states to develop, implement, and certify smoke management programs that meet the recommended requirements of the Interim Policy. This project meets the intent of the Interim Policy through the NEPA analysis process. The General Conformity Rule implements the Clean Air Act conformity provision, which mandates that the Federal government not engage, support, or provide financial assistance for licensing or permitting, or approve any activity not conforming to an approved Clean Air Act implementation plan. In 2010, EPA promulgated revised General Conformity Rules (75 FR 17254). In the revised rules, prescribed fire activities are considered to “presume to conform” in states that have an EPA-certified state smoke management program. Since Montana’s smoke management program is EPA-certified, prescribed fire activities are presumed to meet Clean Air Act General Conformity Rule requirements. The Western Regional Air Partnership (WRAP) (1997) is a voluntary partnership of states, tribes, local air agencies, federal land managers and EPA. The Partnership recognizes the unique legal status and jurisdiction of tribes and seeks to promote policies that ensure fair and equitable treatment of all participating members of the WRAP. The Partnership also recognizes state, tribal and local air agency authority and responsibility to develop, adopt, and implement individual air quality plans within their jurisdictions. The WRAP revised their charter in 2009. The new purposes of the WRAP are as follows: The MDEQ issues an annual burn permit to all entities defined as major open burners, including the Forest Service. As required in the burning permit, burners implement Best Available Control Technologies (BACT) on each prescribed fire. BACT means “those techniques and methods of controlling emission of pollutants from an existing or proposed open burning source to limit emissions to the maximum degree that MDEQ determines, on a case-by-case basis, is achievable for that source, MDEQ takes into account impacts on energy use, the environment, and the economy, and any other costs, including the cost to the source” (Montana/Idaho Airshed Group Operating Guide 2010) The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, is commonly referred to as the Clean Water Act (CWA). This required each state to develop its own water quality standards, subject to the approval of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Section 303(d) of the CWA required each state to assess all water bodies within its borders in order to identify water quality impairments that exceeded state standards. Under the CWA, water bodies identified as impaired generally require the development of a “Total Maximum Daily Load” (TMDL—a water quality restoration plan). The state is required to systematically develop these plans in collaboration with the EPA. A water body’s status on Montana’s 303(d) list dictates, to a certain extent, the water quality standards under state law. Points of sediment delivery to “waters of the U.S.” from haul roads may require National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) discharge permits prior to hauling. A TMDL and water quality restoration plan for the Blackfoot River was completed in 2004. Executive Order 11988 requires that agencies avoid adverse impacts associated with occupancy and modification of floodplains. It generally applies to the 100-year floodplain. Executive Order 11990 states that agencies shall minimize destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands and shall preserve and enhance their natural and beneficial values. Agencies are to avoid construction in wetlands unless it is determined that there is no practicable alternative and that all practicable measures are taken to minimize harm to wetlands. Montana Code Annotated (MCA) 75-5-303: Non-Degradation Policy mandates that “existing uses of state waters and the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses must be maintained and protected,” although activities existing as of April 1993 that generate non-point-source pollution are exempted from this policy (MCA 75-5-303[1-2], MCA 75-5-317[2][a]). This exemption would apply to most Helena National Forest System roads. Montana Code Annotated (MCA) 75-5-703: Development and Implementation of TMDLs: In water bodies for which a TMDL has been developed and implemented, Montana law supports a “voluntary program of reasonable land, soil, and water conservation practices for nonpoint source activities for water bodies” in order to achieve compliance with water quality standards (MCA 75-5-703 [8]). In water bodies identified as impaired and in need of TMDL development, but for which no TMDL has been completed, “new or expanded nonpoint source activities affecting a listed water body may commence and continue if those activities are conducted in accordance with reasonable land, soil, and water conservation practices” (MCA 75-5-703 [10][c]). Roads proposed for treatment in this project fall under both categories. Montana Code Annotated (MCA) 77-5-301: Streamside Management Zone (SMZ) Act governs what harvest-related activities may occur in riparian and wetland areas adjacent to streams. Administrative Rules of Montana (ARM) 17.30.6: In the Administrative Rules of the Montana Water Quality Act (17.30.622(f) –17.30.624(f)), no increases are allowed above naturally occurring concentrations of sediment or suspended sediment, settable solids, oils or floating solids detrimental or injurious to public health, recreation, safety, welfare, livestock, wildlife, birds and fish. The goal is to protect designated beneficial uses and meet or exceed Montana surface water quality standards. See the Hydrology Report (McNamara 2012) for more information on the administration of applicable state direction. Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act of 1980: It is the purpose of this act to provide (1) financial and technical assistance to the states for development and implementation of conservation plans and programs for nongame fish and wildlife; and (2) to encourage all Federal agencies and departments to utilize their statutory and administrative authority, to the maximum extent practicable, to conserve and promote conservation of nongame fish and wildlife and their habitats. The Plant Protection Act (2000) defines a noxious weed as, "any plant or plant product that can directly or indirectly injure or cause damage to crops (including nursery stock or plant products), livestock, poultry, or other interests of agriculture, irrigation, navigation, the natural resources of the United States, the public health, or the environment" (7 U.S.C. 104 § 7702, 2000). The Federal Noxious Weed Act (1974) provides for the control and management of non-indigenous weeds that injure or have the potential to injure the interests of agriculture and commerce, wildlife resources, or the public health. The Act requires that each federal agency: develop a management program to control undesirable plants on federal lands under the agency's jurisdiction; establish and adequately fund the program; implement cooperative agreements with state agencies to coordinate management of undesirable plants on federal lands; establish integrated management systems to control undesirable plants targeted under cooperative agreements. A federal agency is not required to carry out management programs on federal lands unless similar programs are being implemented on state or private lands in the same area. The Montana Weed Control Act (1948) was established to protect Montana from destructive noxious weeds. This act, amended in 1991, has established a set of criteria for the control and management of noxious weeds in Montana. Noxious weeds are defined by this act as being any exotic plant species which may render land unfit for agriculture, forestry, livestock, wildlife or other beneficial uses, or that may harm native plant communities. National Historic Preservation Act, Section 106 (1966 as amended) provides direction for Federal agencies to establish a program for preservation of historic properties. In compliance with this ac, a review was conducted to determine if cultural resources surveys had been conducted with in the project area, and if cultural resources sites had been record. Potential impacts to sites eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), as well as for those not yet evaluated, were considered in this analysis. In accord with 36 CFR 800, Protection of Historic Properties, it is the policy of the Forest Service to protect those sites determined NRHP eligible, as well as those sites not yet formally evaluated. The result of the Heritage Resource analysis conducted is in the specialist report in the project record (Nolan 2012). Project design features developed to protect heritage resources are listed in chapter 2. Consultation with the State Historic Preservation Office for concurrence will be completed prior to issuing a decision on this project. The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, and the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978 require Federal agencies to consult with culturally affiliated tribes and determine possible effects to sties another culturally significant resources resulting from activities within a proposed project area. Forest Service Manual (FSM) and Forest Service Handbook (FSH): The Forest Service Manuals and Handbooks provide management direction and guidance for Forest Service analysis and activities. See the individual specialist reports for the applicable sections. Helena National Forest, Forest Plan of 1986, as amended; Forest Plan Management Direction The Forest Plan provides guidance for managing National Forest System lands. Guidance from the Record of Decision for Amendments to the Forest Plan (1986) is incorporated in the Forest Plan. The actions proposed in this project are designed to be consistent with the Forest Plan, including all plan amendments currently in effect, to the extent possible given the existing conditions. Where Forest Plan direction may not be met, a site-specific Forest Plan amendment would be proposed. Forest Management must also consider direction in the Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFISH 1995) which provides direction to protect habitat and populations of resident native fish outside of anadromous fish habitat. Other pertinent direction including the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction is also considered The Forest Plan provides two types of management direction, Forestwide direction and management area (MA) direction. Forestwide direction, which applies to all MAs, is located on pages II/14 through II/36 of the Forest Plan.Table 2 lists the acres of each MA found within the project boundary, and relevant goals by MAs as described in the Forest Plan. The project area overlaps with two inventoried roadless areas (IRAs) (figure 2). 2 2 Note: All Forest Plan page references in this document refer to the versions of the Forest Plan and amendments as of March 2012; these can be found at: http://www.fs.fed.us/r1/helena/projects/plans/hnf-forestplan.pdf and http://www.fs.fed.us/r1/helena/projects/plans/hnf-forestplan-amend1-28.pdf.  Table 2. Management Areas MANAGEMENT AREA (ACRES) PAGES IN FOREST PLAN GOALS RELEVANT TO THIS PROPOSAL M1 (8,097 acres) M-1 III/5-III/7 Maintain the present condition with minimal investment for resource activities, while protecting the basic soil, water, and wildlife resources. T1 (2,682 acres) T-1 III/30-III/33 Provide healthy timber stands and optimize timber growing potential over the planning horizon. Emphasize cost-effective timber production, while protecting the soil productivity. Maintain water quality and stream bank stability. Provide for dispersed recreation opportunities, wildlife habitat, and livestock use, when consistent with the timber management goals. T2 (1,655 acres) T-2 III/34-III/37 Provide for the maintenance and enhancement of big game winter range. Harvest timber on a programmed basis, consistent with big game winter range values. Emphasize cost-effective timber production, while protecting the soil productivity. Maintain water quality and stream bank stability. Provide for other uses as long as these uses are compatible with timber and big game winter range management goals. T3 (5,649 acres) T-3 III/38-III/41 Maintain and/or enhance habitat characteristics favored by elk and other big game species. Provide healthy timber stands and a timber harvest program compatible with wildlife habitat goals for this area. Emphasize cost-effective timber production, while protecting the soil productivity. Maintain water quality and stream bank stability. Provide for other resource objectives where compatible with the big game summer range and timber goals T4 (900 acres) T-4 III/42-III/45 Maintain healthy stands of timber within the visual quality objective of retention and partial retention. Provide for other resource uses as long as they are compatible with visual quality objectives. Emphasize cost-effective timber production, while protecting the soil productivity. Maintain water quality and stream bank stability. W1 (4,685 acres) W1 III/50-III/52 Optimize wildlife habitat potential, including old growth, over the long term. Provide for other resource uses, if they are compatible with wildlife management goals. Purpose and Need for Action The purpose and need for action is determined by the extent and intensity of differences between the existing and desired conditions. Where there is little difference between these two conditions, the need for action is low. However, the need for action in this analysis area is compelling. Due to vegetation conditions in the project area being relatively homogenous by type, the area has not been very resilient to insects and disease. Stands were and are susceptible to insect attack and the mountain pine beetle outbreak has spread through the project area and many other stands remain highly susceptible to Douglas-fir beetle. Different types of proposed treatments would create more diverse vegetative structure moving the area towards more heterogeneous than homogeneous conditions. By taking actions now, a more diverse and sustainable forest may result moving the area towards meeting the Forest Plan direction of having a healthy and productive forest ecosystem. From 2006 through 2009, the Lincoln Ranger District conducted broad scale assessments of the Stone Dry/Stonewall project area to identify, develop, and prioritize management recommendations for the 6th code Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC) area (Cole 2009a, b; Cole 2010; Farley 2009; Heinert 2009a, b; Ihle 2010; Kurtz 2009; Lundberg and Alvino 2006; Marr 2009; Milburn et al. 2006; Milburn 2009; Olsen 2010a, b, c; Randall 2009; Shanley 2009, 2010; Sitch 2009; USDA Forest Service 2010; Walch 2010; Wyatt 2009). The assessments characterized trends in the human, terrestrial, and aquatic features as well as vegetative conditions and ecological processes. The Stonewall area was shown to have a high departure from desired resource conditions. The purpose of this initiative is to · Improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. . Enhance and restore aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine species and habitats. · Modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. · Integrate restoration with socioeconomic considerations. . Utilize economic value of trees with economic removal. Action is needed to reduce insect mortality related fuels within the wildland urban interface and move the landscape towards desired conditions described in the Forest Plan. This action responds to the goals and objectives outlined in the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest, and helps move the project area towards desired conditions described in that plan (USDA Forest Service 1986).  Title: Stonewall Project Management Areas - Description: Map displaying the project area with distribution of management areas M1, T1, T2, T3, T4, and W1 with hatching for the overlap with the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan and Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas.Figure 2. Stonewall Project management areas Desired Condition The Lincoln Ranger District completed a vegetation report as part of an ecosystem analysis at the watershed scale for the Stone-Dry area that includes the Stonewall project area (Milburn et al. 2006). In the analysis, they used the Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) system to describe reference vegetative, fuel and fire conditions and to compare them to current conditions (Milburn et al. 2009, FRCC 2005). The FRCC analysis for the area was updated in 2010 (Olsen 2010) including updates to the Biophysical Settings and vegetation-fuel classifications. Biophysical Settings Biophysical Settings (BpS) are land delineations based on the physical setting, (e.g. elevation and aspect) and the potential vegetation community that can occupy the setting. A national team has established in the FRCC system a set of descriptions for BpS found within regions of the United States (FRCC 2005). HNF ecologists, fuel specialists, and silviculturists reviewed the BpS descriptions applicable to the Stone Dry area and determined that the descriptions could be used for the Stone Dry area without modification (Milburn et al. 2009). For the Stone Dry analysis, HNF personnel spatially assigned BpS based upon habitat type (Milburn et al. 2009). Detailed descriptions for each BpS can be found in project records and a more detailed discussion of each BpS can be found in Milburn et al. (2009). Figure 3 displays biophysical settings found in the Stonewall Project area with the proposed treatment unit locations. Table 3 displays the acres and percent of area represented by each biophysical setting within the project area. Table 3. Biophysical setting acres and percent of project area Biophysical Setting Project Area Acres Percent of Project Area Barren 68 <1 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 5,579 23 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 5,862 24 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 678 3 Mountain Shrubland 138 <1 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 7,742 32 Riparian 24 <1 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 3,331 14 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 580 2 Water 2 <1 Figure 3. Biophysical settings within the Stonewall Project area Title: Biophysical settings within the Stonewall Project area - Description: Map displaying the biophysical settings within the Stonewall Project area. The lower elevations (along the south and southwest edges) are ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir, and as elevation increases biophyysical setting changes to Douglas-fir interior Northern and Centrl Rocky Mountains (dry) then Douglas-fir interior Northern and Centrl Rocky Mountains (moist), with Interior West Lower subalpine forest occupying the uppermost elevation areas. Mountain grassland with shrubs, mountain shrubland, and Interior West upper subalpine forest occur in patches in the highest elevation areas. Small patches of barren, Riparian, and water areas are scattered in the north and western portions of the proejct area.Several of the biophysical settings (e.g., water) constitute a very small portion of the project area or are not within proposed treatment units so we are not going to address them further in this analysis. This analysis addresses the following forested biophysical settings (Amell 2012): Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest: Primarily dry, upper elevation whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) along with subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa). The majority of this stratum is found from 6,900 to 8,000 feet elevation (Milburn et al. 2009). The current fire frequency in this BpS is not different from the reference fire frequency (143-year mean fire return interval) but potential wildfire severity is higher than what would be expected under the reference conditions. Title: Ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir (unit 48) existing condition - Description: Shows brush, ground fuels and ladder fuelsPonderosa Pine-Douglas-fir: Mostly ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and limber pine (Pinus flexilis), but other species can be present (Milburn et al. 2009). The majority of this stratum is within the 4,800- and 6,000-foot elevation range. The reference fire regime for this setting was one of high frequency (22-year mean fire return interval) and low intensity and severity (24 percent overstory mortality). Figure 4. Ponderosa pine - Douglas-fir (unit 48) existing condition Currently, the fire frequency is much higher (70 years) than the reference and expected severity is higher than reference (70 percent). Title: Douglas-fir interior dry (unit 35) existing condition - Description: Shows ground and latter fuelsDouglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry and Moist): Characterized as a transition from the warmer and drier forest types to cooler and moister forest types where lodgepole pine begins to dominate the stand composition (Milburn et al. 2009). This BpS is subdivided into dry and moist strata (Milburn et al. 2009). The dry Douglas-fir strata found at mid-elevations are stands dominated by Douglas-fir mixed with pine and other species. Figure 5. Douglas-fir interior dry (unit 35) existing condition The moist Douglas-fir stratum is primarily Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine mixed forests on mid- to high elevations. The reference fire regime was one of high frequency (30 year mean fire return interval) and low intensity and severity (10 percent overstory mortality). Currently, the fire frequency is much higher (70 years), and the expected severity is higher (70 percent) than the reference condition. Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest: Primarily lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) and subalpine fir/spruce (Abies lasiocarpa/Picea Engelmannii) forest on cool and moist climates. The reference fire regime was one of infrequent high-intensity and mixed-severity fires. The current frequency and severity is not substantially different from the reference condition. However, due to changes in species composition, stocking, and fuel loads that have taken place as the stands progressed from mid-seral to late-seral, greater overstory mortality than reference conditions (67 percent reference and 75 percent current) would most likely occur during wildfires. Desired conditions for the BpS addressed in this analysis are as follows (Milburn et al. 2006, Milburn et al. 2009): Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest: The desired condition is to have open stand conditions resembling the reference conditions in which open forests, both mid- and late-seral, constitute about 40 percent of the biophysical setting and early-seral about 20 percent. It is desired to have whitebark pine present in a variety of size/age classes, including openings with regenerating whitebark pine. Forests within the BpS would include a diverse mixture of tree species, with a complex structure (i.e., a mixture of size/age classes) and would be resilient to impacts from wildfires and insects. Title: Desired condition ponderosa pine - Douglas-fir after regeneration - Description: Open-storied patchy stands dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, with minor components of other speciesPonderosa Pine-Douglas-fir: The desired condition is to have open-storied, patchy stands dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, with minor components of other species, that are resistant to crown fires, insects, and diseases. The stands would be nearly all-aged, multi-story with open understories and slightly sloping to flat diameter distributions and dominated by fire-resistant tree species. This would be consistent to what research indicates can be expected to occur given the species present and the desired and expected future fire regime. Figure 6. Desired condition ponderosa pine - Douglas-fir after regeneration  Title: Desired condition Douglas-fir interior - Description: Open-storied patchy stands dominated by Douglas-fir with components of other species.Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains: The desired condition is to have open-storied, patchy stands dominated by Douglas-fir–with components of other species–that are resistant to crown fires, insects, and disease. Species compositions would vary between the dry Douglas-fir, which would be mostly Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine with minor components of other species and the moist Douglas-fir in which other species such as lodgepole pine and western larch would have greater presence.  Figure 7. Desired condition Douglas-fir interior Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest: The desired condition is to have a mixture of vegetation fuel classes resembling the reference conditions in which early seral, mid-seral closed overstory canopy, mid-seral open and late-seral closed overstory canopy are well and relatively evenly represented. Forests within the BpS would be a diverse mixture of tree species and age/size classes making them resilient to impacts from wildfires and insects. Vegetation-Fuel Classes The FRCC Guidebook lists 15 characteristic and uncharacteristic vegetation-fuel classes FRCC (2005). Five characteristic vegetation-fuel classes from the Fire Regime Condition Classification Workbook, V 1.2 were used (Milburn et al. 2006), and are described as follows: · AESP is an early seral stage with various dominant lifeforms, depending on the Bps setting. This stage is the first vegetative response to a disturbance such as fire, insects, disease or logging which has removed or killed the overstory. · BMSC is a mid-seral stage that is dominated by conifers that are in a forested setting, or dominated by perennial grasses or shrubs in a nonforest setting. This class represents a closed overstory canopy with trees that are 5 to 9 inches diameter at breast height (d.b.h.). “Closed” is defined differently for various settings. For example, PPDF1 (dry ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir) is considered closed when canopies cover greater than 30 percent of the forested area, or stand. DFIR2 (dry Douglas-fir) is considered closed when canopies are greater than 50 percent closed. · CMSO is a mid-seral stage similar to BMSC, but is an “open” canopy. Again, the canopy cover varies by biophysical setting. · DLSO is a late seral, open canopy stand. In a forested setting this type is dominated by trees that are greater than 9 inches d.b.h. and is older than a mid-seral stand. · ELSC is a late seral closed canopy stand. The desired composition for the landscape is discussed in terms of vegetation-fuel classes for each BpS (Milburn et al. 2009). The desired composition is displayed in table 4 for each BpS. Table 4. Desired vegetation-fuel classes for each Biophysical Setting BIOPHYSICAL SETTING AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 15 25 20 25 15 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 15 25 20 25 15 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 15 10 25 40 10 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 20 40 10 5 25 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 20 25 25 15 15 AESP- Early-seral BMSC- Mid-seral Closed CMSO- Mid-Seral Open DLSO- Late-seral Open ELSC- Late-seral Closed  Habitat Types The project area is heavily dominated by subalpine habitat types which cover about 69 percent of the area. Second in presence are Douglas-fir habitat types which cover about 18 percent of the area. Whitebark pine-subalpine fir and spruce habitat types each cover only about 0.3 percent of the area. The rest of the area is covered by rock, grass, meadows, water or private land. With the habitat type coverage in the project area species such as ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, quaking aspen, western larch, and whitebark pine are always or almost always a seral species, and as such which would decline in presence and eventually die out of the stands without disturbance (Pfister et al.1977, Fischer and Bradley 1987). Douglas-fir would be seral to subalpine fir on about 69 percent of the area. Ponderosa Pine (Pinus ponderosa) As displayed and discussed above: (1) about 32 percent of the project area is classified to be in the “ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir” BpS with the desired condition for the BpS to be open-storied, patchy stands dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir and (2) about 23 percent of the project area is in the dry “Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains” BpS with a desired condition of mostly Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine with minor components of other species. The desired condition for ponderosa pine in the project area then can be stated as being the major dominant species with Douglas-fir as co-dominant on 32 percent of the project area and Douglas-fir as the major dominant species with ponderosa pine as the co-dominant on about 23 percent of the project area. Quaking Aspen (Populus tremuloides) The Forest Plan does not contain specific direction for management areas in the project area concerning quaking aspen. Quaking aspen exists in the project area as generally small clones seral to a climax-dominant conifer species. It is difficult to quantify how much is currently on the landscape because of their small size (figure 3), and it is also difficult to quantify the desired presence of aspen as a portion of the landscape. Aspen is considered an important component of the landscape because of its value as wildlife habitat and aesthetics, and in general the desired condition is to have aspen available as a minor but substantial component of the landscape at levels greater than currently exists. Several age classes of aspen should be present on the landscape from young to old and decadent. Western Larch (Larix occidentalis) The Forest Plan does not contain specific direction for the management areas in the project area concerning western larch management, but as displayed above, there is a Forest-wide standard indicating that western larch is the most preferred species as snag habitat. As with aspen, because of its value as wildlife habitat and aesthetics, we do consider western larch to be an important component of the landscape and in general can say that the desired condition is to have it available as a minor, but substantial, component of the landscape at levels greater than currently exists. Whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) The Forest Plan does not contain specific direction for the management areas in the project area concerning whitebark pine management, but it is widely recognized for its importance as wildlife habitat and that due to the impacts of insects (mountain pine beetle) and diseases (white pine blister rust) the species has been in a state of relatively rapid decline for several decades. The desired condition for whitebark pine is generally to be present in the upper elevations-in the subalpine fir biophysical settings-as a major seral species component and to have it present as a minor component in the moist Douglas-fir BpS. The desired condition is to have whitebark pine present in a variety of size/age classes, including openings with regenerating whitebark pine. Existing Condition The existing condition of the 24,000 acre project area has been shaped by management activities including: (1) many years of fire suppression, (2) 3,473 acres of harvest/regeneration treatments that created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area (appendix R figure 13), and (3) 1,660 acres of other tree-cutting from 1950 to present. In natural fire events, 87 acres were burned in the Snow/Talon Fire (2003), and 261 acres were burned in the Keep Cool Fire (2006). In addition, natural processes such as succession and natural events such as droughts are always occurring (Amell 2012). Biophysical Settings and Vegetation-fuel Classes Biophysical settings as discussed above are based on physical setting and the potential vegetation community that can occupy the setting. Although it can be argued that long-term changes in BpS would occur due to changes in climate, there is very little information to base any predictions of change on and the degree of change within the time frame stated above for this analysis can be expected to be very small. Therefore BpSs would not change for this analysis. We discuss the current and future conditions for the landscape in terms of changes in vegetation-fuel classes for each BpS. Table 5 displays the current (Cur) and desired (Ref) percent of BpS in each vegetation-fuel setting in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area (Milburn 2009). The mountain pine beetle mortality is ongoing and changes in the vegetation-fuel classes caused by the epidemic are continuing. Table 5 cells that are colored red and orange are BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations that are under-represented on the landscape and those that are yellow and green are over-represented, and white is close to that desired.  Table 5. Current and desired vegetation-fuel classes by BpS BpS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC Cur/ Desired Cur/ Desired Cur/ Desired Cur/ Desired Cur/ Desired Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 2/15 31/25 4/20 8/25 55/15 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 1/15 35/25 5/20 10/25 50/15 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 1/15 31/10 0/25 1/40 67/10 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 1/20 21/40 7/10 25/5 46/25 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 0/20 22/25 11/25 22/15 46/15 Green – Very High (Greater than or equal to 180 percent of desired) Yellow – High (Greater than desired but less than 180 percent of desired) No Color – Close (Within 20% of desired) Orange – Low (Greater than or equal to 20 percent 0f desired but less than desired) Red – Very Low (less than 20 percent of desired) AESP- Early-seral BMSC- Mid-seral Closed canopy CMSO- Mid-Seral Open canopy DLSO- Late-seral Open canopy ELSC- Late-seral Closed canopy To achieve the desired vegetation-class composition on the landscape we can conclude from table 5 the following needs by BpS: · Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) – move late-seral closed canopy into early-seral and late-seral open canopy and move mid-seral open canopy to mid-seral open canopy · Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) – move late-seral closed canopy into early-seral and late-seral open canopy and move mid-seral open canopy to mid-seral open canopy · Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir – move late-seral closed canopy into early seral and late-seral open canopy and move mid-seral open canopy to mid-seral open canopy · Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest – move late-seral closed canopy into early-seral Insects and Diseases Bark beetles and defoliating insects have substantially impacted conifer forests in the project area, as in many other locations in the intermountain western states in recent years. The insects of primary concern in the project area are mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae), Douglas-fir beetle (Dendroctonus pseudotsugae) and western spruce budworm (Choristoneura occidentalis) although other bark beetles and defoliators are recorded as affecting forests in the area. We can also expect a number of diseases generally found in the forest types represented can be found in the project area. Stand data indicates armillaria root rot (Armillaria ostoyae) and lodgepole pine dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium americanum) are present in some stands. White pine blister rust (Cronartium ribicola) is certainly also present in the whitebark pine. Annual aerial insect and disease detection surveys (ADS) show areas affected by mortality attributed to mountain pine beetle and defoliation of Douglas-fir and true firs attributed to western spruce budworm have greatly increased since 2001 (table 6). Table 6 shows the acres within the Stonewall project area on which mortality was recorded, but does not directly display the magnitude of the mortality or defoliation. Douglas-fir beetle mortality was shown on a relatively small acreage. The ADS flights did not cover the project area in the years 2004 and 2007. Areas mapped in each year’s aerial survey show mortality considered to have occurred in the year before the flight, defoliation is recorded in the year of the flight. Each survey indicates the general magnitude and location of new mortality and damage. Each year’s mapped mortality and damage can be new pockets of mortality or damage that do not overlap previously mapped areas, or can be ongoing mortality or damage in an area mapped in previous years. The acreage values by a single damage-causing agent are not accumulative over years, nor can acreage be summed for all agents in each year because areas of damage or mortality per agent can overlap in any year. The surveys show greatly increased acreage of mountain pine beetle mortality since 2002 and increased acreage of western spruce budworm defoliation since 2006. Table 6. Aerial Detection acres of mortality (M) and defoliation (D) in project area by year YEAR 2001 2002 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2010 DAMAGE CAUSAL AGENT ACRES ACRES ACRES ACRES ACRES ACRES ACRES ACRES Mountain pine Beetle (M) 94 30 2,373 1,063 2,554 11,154 19,403 12,859 Douglas-fir beetle (Dendroctonus pseudotsugae) (M) 133 117 69 131 46 33 9 2 Western balsam bark beetle (Dryocoetes confusus) (M) 32 30 2 320 31    Hemlock looper (Lambdina fiscellaria lugubrosa) (D) 198 26 2084      Western spruce budworm (D)      2,393 13,765 1,483 Subalpine fir mortality (M)        6 M – Mortality, D - Defoliation The ADS annual estimated numbers of dead trees per acre (TPA) in an area can be summarized to give general accumulative magnitude and location of mortality due to a prolonged bark beetle event. Tree mortality and damage for proposed units was also assessed during site visits and is discussed below. In figure 8, we display a map of accumulated TPA mortality by TPA class. In table 7 we display acres and proportion of project area by accumulated estimated TPA mortality. Over one-half of the project area has greater than an estimated 10 TPA in mortality (estimated from 2001 to 2010). Figure 8. Aerial Damage Survey tree mortality estimates summed from 2001 to 2010 Title: Aerial Damage Survey tree mortality estimates summed from 2001 to 2010 - Description: Trees per acre of tree mortalityTable 7. Accumulated TPA mortality from ADS 2001-2010 TPA MORTALITY CLASS ACRES PERCENT OF PROJECT AREA 0-5 3,514 15 5-10 5,602 23 10-20 6,195 26 20-30 2,826 12 30-40 1,974 8 40-50 766 3 50+ 1,368 6 Horizontal Diversity Desired conditions stated above include a relatively high degree of horizontal structural diversity, that is, patchiness within stands and over the landscape. As a result of fire exclusion, areas that were maintained by relatively low-intensity fires have become more homogenous (Milburn et al. 2006). Title: Percent of project area in tree canopy-cover classesFigure 9displays the percent of area by tree canopy cover class from VMAP data, and figure 10 displays the spatial location of the tree canopy cover classes. The canopy cover distribution displayed in figure 9 is relatively narrow, with over 60 percent of the area within the 25-39.9 percent canopy cover class, and about 82 percent of the area is within or above that class. The VMAP data was edited by Helena National Forest personnel to account for the recent bark beetle mortality. VMAP data preceding the bark beetle epidemic shows a similar narrow range with the peak in the 40-59.9 percent class with over 79 percent within or above that class.  Figure 9. Percent of project area in tree canopy-cover classes In addition, we noted most of the shrub cover and a portion of the herb cover in the classification are in young tree plantations, and a large portion of the herb cover is in an area burned in 2003 by the Snow/Talon Fire that was forested prior to the fire. In general, figure 10 shows a landscape relatively uniformly covered by forest with little horizontal structural diversity both within stand and over the landscape. Figure 10. VMAP tree canopy-cover classes Title: VMAP tree canopy-cover classes - Description: Percent of tree canopy within the project areaProposed Action The proposed action includes using commercial and noncommercial treatments on approximately 8,560 acres (36 percent) of the 24,010-acre project area to move towards desired conditions. These actions include: regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, precommercial thinning, and prescribed burning. Treatments are briefly described by “group.” Group 1: Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests Group 2: Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests Group 3: Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Seed and Shelter Trees Group 4: Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Rare Live Trees Group 5: Intermediate Harvest to Remove Minor Amounts of Dead/Dying Trees Group 6: Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 acres Group 7: Mixed Severity Fire to create mortality patches up to 5, 10, or 20 acres Group 8: Mixed severity fire to create mortality patches up to 30 or 75 acres The proposed action includes using prescribed fire and tree slashing in two roadless areas, Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan and Lincoln Gulch. Figure 13 displays the proposed activities in relation to inventoried roadless areas. More detailed treatment descriptions are found in chapter 2 and appendix B. Outside the roadless areas, approximately 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Commercial timber harvest and road construction would not occur in the two roadless areas. Implementing the proposed action could include the use of chainsaws, feller-bunchers, and cable logging equipment. Post treatment activities would include underburning, site preparation burning, jackpot burning, hand piling and burning, tree planting, and monitoring of regeneration. In all the areas proposed for burning, the opening size may exceed 40 acres due to the amount of mortality created by the bark beetles and the resulting need for regeneration. Development of the Proposed Action The Lincoln Restoration Committee (LRC) of the Montana Forest Restoration Committee (MFRC) is a group of private citizens with diverse community interests who came together in 2008 with the purpose of developing recommendations for restoration projects on the Lincoln Ranger District, while working within the framework developed by the MFRC. The Helena National Forest has been working with the LRC in compliance with Executive Order 13352 of August 2004—Facilitation of Cooperative Conservation. The proposed action was developed over time as three areas. Two areas were brought forward to the Forest Service by the LRC, formerly the Lincoln Working Group, and the third area was developed after Forest Service specialists reviewed conditions within the entire watershed (Cole 2009a, b; Cole 2010; Farley 2009; Heinert 2009a, b; Ihle 2010; Kurtz 2009; Lundberg and Alvino 2006; Marr 2009; Milburn et al. 2006; Milburn 2009; Olsen 2010a, b, c; Randall 2009; Shanley 2009, 2010; Sitch 2009; USDA Forest Service 2010; Walch 2010; Wyatt 2009). This analysis covers all three areas. The recommended actions associated with the three areas are consistent with the goals in the Forest Plan. (see table 1 Crosswalk of MFRC Principles with Forest Service Direction  Title: Treatment Unit development, proposed action - Description: Displays the LWG treatment units and WA units for the proposed actionFigure 11. Alternative 2 – proposed action, treatment unit development mapThe first area recommended by the LRC to the Forest Service was called “Lincoln Gulch Fuels Reduction and Forest Restoration.” The LRC chose to focus on the Lincoln Gulch area for their first recommended project because they felt it offers opportunities for restoration work benefitting ponderosa pine, quaking aspen, fish and wildlife habitat, and separately, fuels reduction in proximity to private residences. Recommended treatments were built with consensus to meet multiple goals consistent with the 13 Montana Forest Restoration Committee principles. The LRC spent almost 1 year, including field verification, devoted to assessing where and how these principles might be applied in ways that are beneficial to the Lincoln community, the broader public, and the health of the land. Their recommended treatments include prescribed fire, ponderosa pine and aspen restoration, and fuels reduction. This area includes approximately 1,049 acres of total treatment (figure 11). The second area recommended to the Forest Service is called “Beaver to Stonewall” or “Project 2”. The LRC, in looking for another area to apply principles for restoration, adopted a process recommended by The Wilderness Society where specific criteria were utilized using a mapping technique to locate where low-severity fire regime and the presence of ponderosa pine occurred. This area was identified and endorsed by the LRC after a field trip to verify the sites met their restoration goals and had a need for restoration treatment. The recommended treatments were similar to Lincoln Gulch, benefiting ponderosa pine, aspen, fish and wildlife habitat, and separately, fuels thinning in proximity to private land. This area includes approximately 1,240 acres of total treatment (figure 11). In addition to the restoration recommendations from the LRC the Helena National Forest identified restoration needs and opportunities based on information from field reviews and surveys within the greater watershed area (Cole 2009a, b; Cole 2010; Farley 2009; Heinert 2009a, b; Ihle 2010; Kurtz 2009; Lundberg and Alvino 2006; Marr 2009; Milburn et al. 2006; Milburn 2009; Olsen 2010a, b, c; Randall 2009; Shanley 2009, 2010; Sitch 2009; USDA Forest Service 2010; Walch 2010; Wyatt 2009). The developed proposed actions were found to be consistent with the Helena National Forest’s Land Management objectives in the Helena National Forest Plan (figure 11). The findings from the field reviews and surveys within the greater watershed area included declines of ponderosa pine, western larch, and aspen habitats, elevated fuels in the wildland urban interface, and a landscape-level departure from natural fire processes. The fire risk and fuels concerns for this area were also identified in the Community Wildfire Protection Plan (Tri-County Fire Working Group 2005) as the highest priority need for treatment. After the 2003 Lincoln Complex Fires that burned approximately 36,000 acres and required a partial evacuation of the community of Lincoln, residents expressed a desire to see forest management designed to reduce the risk of future catastrophic events. In addition, a Forestwide landscape-level assessment of insect conditions and predictions was done in 2008 (Gibson 2008) which identified the Stonewall area as a high priority for management. The Lincoln community is very aware of the mountain pine beetle epidemic and high levels of western spruce budworm activity across the landscapes in the Upper Blackfoot Valley and west side of the Continental Divide. Preliminary issues considered during development of the proposed action included restoration of vegetation communities, potential impacts to grizzly bear and lynx habitat, reduction of fuels and wildfire hazard risks, and potential impacts to habitats including ponderosa pine, western larch and aspen. Benefits anticipated as an outcome of proposed actions include: restoration of ponderosa pine, dry Douglas-fir, and western larch sites to a more natural fire regime; maintain or improve vigor and restore aspen groves; and enhance wildlife habitat conditions. Decision Framework Given the purpose and need, the deciding official reviews the proposed action, the other alternatives, and the environmental consequences in order to make the following decisions: · Whether or not to implement the proposed action or an alternative to the proposed action and appropriate mitigation · What monitoring requirements are appropriate to evaluate implementation of this project · Whether a Forest Plan amendment is necessary e.g. reductions in big game habitat Public Involvement The Notice of Intent (NOI) was published in the Federal Register on January 13, 2010. The NOI asked for public comment on the proposal to be received by February 22, 2010. The agency sent about 700 letters explaining the proposal and asking for comment to interested individuals, groups and agencies on January 15, 2010. In addition, as part of the public involvement process, we held an open house on February 3, 2010, and project information was available on the Forest website at www.fs.usda.gov/helena. The project has been listed in the Forest’s Schedule of Proposed Actions since April 1, 2010. Appendix A includes the content analysis of the scoping comments received. Appendix A: Scoping Summary – June 7, 2011, table 2 includes a full listing of comments received during scoping, by letter (L) (includes email memos, public meeting comment forms and letters) and comment number (c) (denoted by L#, c#). We received a total of 80 scoping responses via email, public comment form and letters; 30 were in support of the proposed project activities. The majority of responses suggested information to include in the analysis documents, identified language to clarify, or listed elements pertaining to a specific resource to include in the effects analyses. The resource specialists’ reports include this information as well as the analysis of the project effects on the various resources. The resource specialists’ reports are filed in the project record and incorporated by reference and summarized in Chapter 3 – Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences, of this EIS. Eight responses expressed concerns or suggestions regarding management of area roads and motorized, winter recreation opportunities. The Stonewall Vegetation Project is not a travel planning project and does not propose to change the permanent road system in the project area. Travel management of existing routes is addressed in the “Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel Plan” and the “Blackfoot Travel Plan (Non-Winter)” analyses. A few responses included items of literature to be considered, some noted as opposing science information. As part of the analysis for this project, resource specialists reviewed and considered relevant scientific literature, including submitted articles. The literature review is included in the project record and posted on the forest website at www.fs.usda.gov/helena/ Using the comments from the public, and other agencies the interdisciplinary team developed a list of issues to address. Issues All of the comments received as a result of scoping and meetings were reviewed by the interdisciplinary team and Responsible Official and used to identify those which may have a significant cause-effect relationship with the proposal. Specialists analyzed effects in their report comparing trade-offs for the decision-maker and public to understand. These issues were used to: · Formulate alternatives · Prescribe specific design feature to reduce undesired effects, or · Provide clarification in specialist reports or evaluate the comparative merits of the effects of alternatives Formulate Alternatives These are issues regarding the action and its effects on a particular resource or group of resources that are unresolved or renders the action less effective in accomplishing the purpose and need for this project. Wildlife Habitat: Proposed vegetative removal and burning treatments may reduce the quality change structure and composition of vegetation or availability of habitat for threatened, endangered and sensitive species and designated critical habitat; management indicator species (MIS); big game hiding cover, thermal cover, and security cover. The public expressed concern with fragmentation of habitat from roads (habitat connectivity) and viability of old-growth and snag-dependent species. Scoping comments pertaining to this issue (denoted by letter [L]#, comment [c]#): L5, c22; L66, c2, 3, 5, 6, 27, 28, 38; L74, c74 Indicators: · Changes in security cover and potential conflicts with humans. Core habitat, Open Road Density (ORD) and Total Road Density (TRD) are specific measures used to evaluate changes within the grizzly bear management units (Arrastra and Red Mountain) that overlap the project area. · Habitat suitability changes within the Lynx Analysis Units (LAUs bl-7 and bl-8) Acres of lynx habitat affected is evaluated according to the Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (NRMLMD) standards and guidelines. · Changes in availability of the number of snags and tons of downed woody debris · Acres of suitable MIS and sensitive species habitat impacted · Acres of elk hiding cover, thermal cover, and security habitat within the project area and elk herd units · Maintaining or providing habitat connectivity · Acres of old growth affected and effects to snag-dependent species Addressed by Design Features or Evaluated for Comparison In addition to the issue identified above, we analyzed the effects of the proposed action and alternatives based on implementing design criteria and disclose the differences of effects between alternatives for the following: Weed Spread/Infestation: Proposed actions, including harvest disturbance and use of haul routes in areas with weeds present, may disturb landscapes allowing existing weed populations to expand or allowing additional species to become established. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L5, c2, 3, 4, 5, 29; L33, c33; L48, c17; L62, c1; L71, c10 Treatment of existing weed infestations would occur under the guidance of the Forest-wide effort and treatments to prevent the spread of weeds is included in design features to reduce potential spread. Indicators: · Predicted acres of noxious weed infestation due to the proposed treatments; · Associated management cost for weed control activities. Use of roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, and use of existing roads: Comments indicated concern that roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, road reconstruction, and use of existing roads would adversely impact soils through compaction, water quality and fisheries through sedimentation, and associated wildlife habitat. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L3, c12; L66, c34, 35, 36; L71, c9 Indicators: · Existing road mileage and road density within the project area · Proposed activities involving the existing transportation network for project implementation Amount of Prescribed Fire: Concern that the Forest Service has limited experience implementing prescribed fire in mixed-severity fire regimes. Concern with the amount of acres proposed for prescribed burning; proximity to private land and timing of burns introduce risk to private lands (e.g., loss of homes, buildings, smoke effects to air quality). Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L1, c3; L57, c1; L75, c4; L79, c1; and public meetings. Pretreating areas with vegetation removal adjacent to private land boundaries is designed to remove potential fuels prior to prescribed burning. Pile burning is proposed to more closely manage areas to receive active burning. Indicators: · Acres of prescribed fire immediately adjacent to private land and the qualitative values of risk and potential consequences · Acres of prescribed fire by fire regime within the project area · Acres and type of pretreatment prior to use of prescribed fire · Estimated emissions from burning Other Issues There were also other comments and nonsignificant issues categorized as: (1) outside the scope of the proposed action, or decision to be made; (2) already decided by law, regulation, Forest Plan, or other higher-level decision; (3) comments pertaining to disclosing the effects to various resources, which are addressed by the specialists’ analyses and the discussions in the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS); or (4) comments in support of the project. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA regulations explain this process in 40 CFR 1501.7, “There shall be an early and open process for determining the scope of issues to be addressed and for identifying the significant issues related to a proposed action” and in converse the CEQ further suggests “Identify and eliminate from detailed study the issues which are not significant or which have been covered by prior environmental review (Sec. 1506.3)….” Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. This page left blank intentionally  Chapter 2. Alternatives, Including the Proposed Action Introduction This chapter describes and compares the alternatives considered for the Stonewall Vegetation Project. It includes a description and map of each alternative considered. This section also presents the alternatives in comparative form, sharply defining the differences between each alternative and providing a clear basis for choice among options by the decision maker and the public. Some of the information used to compare the alternatives is based upon the design of the alternative (i.e., building roads then obliterating versus the use of skid trails) and some of the information is based upon the environmental, social and economic effects of implementing each alternative (i.e., the amount of erosion caused by helicopter logging versus skidding). Alternatives Considered in Detail The Forest Service developed three alternatives, including the no action and proposed action alternatives, in response to issues raised by the public. Table 8 displays treatments proposed by alternative. Alternatives at a Glance Table 8. Treatment Summary by Alternative GROUP #: BRIEF TREATMENT DESCRIPTION  HARVEST TREATMENT, FUELS TREATMENT ALT. 1 NO ACTION ACRES ALT. 2 ACRES ALT. 3 ACRES Group 1: Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests 0 974 232 Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn 0 36 0 Improvement Cut, Underburn 0 938 232 Group 2: Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests 0 1,132 822 Precommercial Thin 0 523 409 Precommercial Thin, Handpile Underburn 0 0 29 Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 0 78 50 Precommercial Thin, Underburn 0 289 141 Precommercial Thin, Underburn or Slash Treatment along PVT 0 242 193 Group 3: Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Seed and Shelter Trees 0 745 664 Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 0 29 29 Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 0 73 41 Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 0 18 18 Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 0 223 207 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 0 137 137 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 0 96 96 Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Slashing, 0 25 0 GROUP #: BRIEF TREATMENT DESCRIPTION  HARVEST TREATMENT, FUELS TREATMENT ALT. 1 NO ACTION ACRES ALT. 2 ACRES ALT. 3 ACRES Handpile/Burn Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn 0 114 114 Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 0 30 22 Group 4: Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Rare Live Trees 0 223 152 Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 0 98 80 Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 0 53 0 Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 0 54 54 Clearcut with Reserves, Underburn 0 18 18 Group 5: Intermediate Harvest to Remove Minor Amounts of Dead/Dying Trees 0 25 25 Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 0 25 25 Total Harvest Treatments (acres) 0 3,099 1,895 Group 6: Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 acres 0 449 326 Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 0 326 326 Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 0 123 0 Group 7: Mixed Severity Fire to create mortality patches up to 5, 10, or 20 acres 0 410 36 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 0 36 36 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 0 48 0 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres 0 326 0 Group 8: Mixed severity fire to create mortality patches up to 30 or 75 acres 0 4,604 3,265 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 0 3371 2032 Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 0 1233 1233 Group 9: Low Severity Prescribed Fire 0 0 638 Jackpot Burn 0 0 326 Underburn 0 0 312 Group 10: Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests 0 0 403 Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn   403 Grand Total Project Treatments (acres) 0 8,564 6,564 Logging Systems    Tractor logging (total acres) 0 1,944 1,834 Skyline logging (total acres) 0 663 491 Hand treatments  Intermediate Harvest – Precommercial Thin (acres)  Prescribed fire (acres)  0 0  493 5,463  285 3,954 Burning Treatments    Total area proposed for burning treatments (acres) 0 8,041 6,155 Total acres proposed for burning in designated IRAs 0 4,845 3,565 Roads    Roads Built for Project Use then Obliterated (miles) -- 2.6 0.4 Road Maintenance (miles) -- 45.6 43.8 Total Road Miles Used -- 48.2 44.2 Timber Volume (Ccf) -- 22,022 14,299 Alternative 1 – No Action Under the no-action alternative, current management plans would continue to guide management of the project area. No timber removal, fuels reduction, or prescribed burning for forest restoration would be implemented to accomplish project goals. Alternative 2 – The Proposed Action This alternative represents the proposed action from scoping. Mapping corrections resulted in slight adjustments in acre and mile figures from scoping. Alternative 2 proposes a total of 8,564 acres of commercial and noncommercial treatments. Harvest treatments (regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and precommercial thinning) are proposed on a total of 3,099 acres. Fuels treatments would follow timber removals, including slashing, pile burning, jackpot burning, and underburning. In addition to post-harvest burning, prescribed fire is proposed within the inventoried roadless areas (IRA) to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 4,182 acres (about 0.5 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Areas and on 664 acres (about 3.8 percent) within the Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas. To help facilitate management, outside of these IRAs approximately 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Figure 15 displays the proposed action with INFISH buffers. This alternative represents the proposed action from scoping. Mapping corrections resulted in slight adjustments in acre and mile figures from scoping. Project design features are displayed in table 9. Treatment Descriptions This section explains the treatments proposed for alternative 2 – proposed action by groups. See Figure 14 for a visual display. Group 1. This group includes 18 treatment units comprising about 974 acres. Treatment objectives for this group are to develop mature, open forests comprised mostly of fire-resistant species. The proposed treatments would thin live trees, remove dead trees, and prescribe burn surface fuels. All tree thinning would be "from below" to favor retaining larger trees over smaller trees except that thinning regimes would favor retaining smaller trees of a more desirable species over larger trees of a less desirable species, and would favor keeping smaller, healthier and disease-free trees over larger, diseased trees. In general, the species preference for retention would be aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir in descending order. This general order of preference may be modified for individual stands to address management objectives such as retaining species diversity, site factors, and other stand-specific factors such as relative species presence as noted in individual stand/unit prescriptions. Trees would be thinned to an average spacing of 20 to 40 feet (109 to 27 TPA), but spacing could vary widely. Thinning would be by hand or machine. All cut, live trees of a merchantable size would be removed for utilization. All merchantable dead trees would be removed, except those needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements). Following thinning and removal, units would be underburned or jackpot burned to reduce fuels. Group 2. This group includes 25 treatment units comprising about 1,132 acres. Treatments would thin small-diameter trees of little to no merchantable value. The thinning regime would generally be as described above for Group 1, except that post-thinning average tree spacing would range from 12 to 20 feet (109 to 303 TPA). Thinning would be by hand and/or machine, depending upon tree size. In several units, thinning slash would be piled by hand and burned. Group 3. This group includes 19 treatment units comprising about 745 acres. Treatments proposed are seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration systems (appendix B). Most trees, except as needed for shelter and seed production would be removed. In some of the shelterwood treatments, trees would be retained in groups; in others the remaining trees would be relatively evenly distributed. All cut, live trees of a merchantable size would be removed for utilization. All merchantable dead trees would be removed, except those needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements). Many of the units would be burned to reduce fuel loads and prepare sites for natural regeneration or planting. Many of the units may be planted with some combination of ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and western larch where needed to regenerate the stands to the desired seral and fire-resistant species. Group 4. This group includes 11 treatment units comprising about 223 acres. Treatments proposed are clearcut harvest/regeneration systems in which all trees would be removed except for scattered clumps or individuals. Retained trees would mostly be Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, or western larch. Remaining live and dead merchantable trees would be removed for utilization, except for those identified for other resource needs. Following cutting and removal, units would be prescribe burned, the type of burn varying by individual unit fuels reduction and site preparation treatment need. Natural regeneration by Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine is expected to occur to some degree and Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, and western larch may be planted, the mixture differing by individual unit. Group 5. This group includes two treatment units comprising about 25 acres. The treatments would remove dead and dying trees, slash non-commercial-sized trees, and reduce fuels by handpiling and burning. All cut merchantable trees would be removed for utilization using ground-based equipment except as needed to meet other resource concerns. Group 6. This group includes three treatment units comprising about 449 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. The prescribed burning would create openings less than 5 or 10 acres, the opening size depending upon the unit. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and preparing sites for natural regeneration. Group 7. This group includes three treatment units comprising about 410 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. Where the opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around available whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir trees to enhance the regeneration of those species. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. The treatments would create patches of mortality up to 5, 10, or 20 acres depending upon the treatment unit. Title: View looking towards units 88 and 84 - Description: These units are proposed for group 8 treatmentsGroup 8. This group includes seven treatment units comprising about 4,604 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. Where opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around available whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir to enhance regeneration of those species.  Figure 12. View looking towards units 88 and 84 proposed for group 8 treatment Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. The treatments would create patches of mortality up to 30 or 75 acres depending upon the treatment unit. Aspen is in a number of units proposed for treatment. The aspen can be considered seral to either subalpine fir or Douglas-fir, depending upon the unit and site. In many unit exams, the aspen is simply recorded as being present, as rare, or as a trace; while in several other units it comprises a substantial, although still minor, portion of the stocking, for example Unit 3. Comments concerning the aspen in unit exams range from “suppressed in the understory” to “vigorous in the overstory, but proportionally not much suckering.” In general, we can characterize aspen in proposed units and the project area as (1) small clones, (2) heavily competing with—to suppressed by— conifers, and (3) a minor stand component (with a few exceptions). Whitebark pine can be found in several units from Group 6, 7, and 8. In general, the whitebark pine in the project area is considered highly infected by white pine blister rust, and can be considered seral to subalpine fir. On sites where it is a seral species in the Northern Rocky Mountains, whitebark pine depends upon fire to maintain its dominance or presence (Arno 2001, Keane 2001, Kendall and Keane 2001, Morgan and Murray 2001). In the absence of fire, subalpine fir has increased in presence, and the combination of increased subalpine fir and whitebark pine mortality, and lack of regeneration due to white pine blister rust and mountain pine beetle have resulted in a decline in whitebark pin. This page left blank intentionally Title: Alternative 2-Proposed action treatmentsFigure 13. Alternative 2 – proposed action treatmentsThis page left blank intentionally Alternative 3 – Preferred This alternative was developed to address issues raised during scoping regarding reducing potential impacts to habitat for threatened, endangered and sensitive species and designated critical habitat; management indicator species (MIS); big game hiding cover, thermal cover, and security cover. Treatments were reviewed and adjusted to reduce impacts to habitat (figure 14). Alternative 3 proposes a total of 6,564 acres of commercial and noncommercial treatments. Harvest treatments (regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and precommercial thinning) are proposed on a total of 2,298 acres. Fuels treatments would follow timber removals and include slashing, pile burning, jackpot burning, and underburning. In addition to post-harvest burning, prescribed fire is proposed within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Areas to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 3,565 acres (about 0.4 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Areas. The Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas would not be treated. To help facilitate management, outside the IRAs approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Figure 16 displays alternative 3 treatment units with INFISH buffers. Project design features are listed in table 9. Treatment Descriptions Groups 1-8. Under Alternative 3, treatments for units in Groups 1-8 would be the same as discussed above under Alternative 2. The treated areas would change from that discussed in Alternative 2 because under Alternative 3 several units are not proposed for treatment and 12 units are proposed for treatment under new groups—Groups 9 and 10. Treatment acreages for alternatives 2 and 3 are displayed in table 8. Group 9. Under alternative 3, about 1,040 acres would be treated with a low-intensity and low-severity prescribed burn (underburn). The purposes of the underburn would be to reduce surface and ladder fuels (small trees) and so modify future fire behavior while minimizing impacts to stand overstory and mid-story stocking from the prescribed burn. Group 10. This group includes units 46a and 47a. Treatments would be designed in a mosaic pattern to maintain cover and forage for wildlife while promoting ponderosa pine and aspen, and reducing ladder fuels. Portions of the stands would be thinned to (1) reduce understory competition from around large ponderosa pine trees, (2) thin heavily-stocked groups of trees on sites historically dominated by ponderosa pine, and (3) remove conifer competition from within and around quaking aspen. Treatment guidelines are as follows: · Reduce understory competition around large ponderosa pine, move areas toward or maintain multi-storied ponderosa pine structure, within 50 feet of ponderosa pine trees larger than 17 inches d.b.h. remove all but two trees. Retained trees should be varied size and age classes. · In areas dominated by ponderosa pine, but lacking live trees greater than 17 inches d.b.h., trees would be thinned to 48 to 109 trees per acre depending upon tree size. · Ponderosa pine snags greater than 17 inches d.b.h. would be favored for retention to meet Forest Plan direction for snags. · Conifers less than 17 inches d.b.h. would be removed up to 100 feet of existing aspen patches. · Post-thinning, slash would be jackpot burned or hand-piled and burned to reduce fuels. · Treatments would affect up to 50 percent of these units. This page left blank intentionallyFigure 14. Alternative 3 treatments This page left blank intentionallyProject Design Features, Best Management Practices and Mitigation for the Action Alternatives The Forest Service developed the following mitigation measures and project design features that apply to all of the action alternatives. Table 9. Project design features, best management practices and mitigation DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE AIR- Air Quality Design Feature AIR-1 All prescribed burning would be implemented in full compliance with the Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) air program with coordination through the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group and reported to the Airshed Coordinator during active burning periods. All alternatives, all burn units AIR-2 Burning would be dependent upon site conditions and weather conditions. Notice of the pile and prescribed burning timeframes, or burn windows, would be shared with the public through paper notices and announcements on the Forest website. All alternatives, all burn units ARCH- Archaeology Quality Design Feature ARCH-1 Create a 30-meter buffer (approximately 100 feet) around known sites with flagging tape for avoidance. No mechanical thinning within buffered boundaries. Directionally fell trees away from sites. Do not pile burn on sites. Hand control line as necessary to prevent burning over sites. All alternatives, affected units ARCH-2 If any additional cultural resources are discovered during implementation of this project, work should cease in the area and a Forest Archaeologist would be contacted. Work in the area could only resume if mitigation measures can be determined and/or re-evaluated if necessary. All alternatives, all units BOT- Botany Design Feature BOT-1 If sensitive plant populations are located within the project area appropriate mitigation (e.g., site avoidance, avoid concentration of fuels on sites to be burned) would be followed upon consultation with a Forest Service botanist. All alternatives, all units FUEL- Fire Fuels Design Feature FUEL-1 Prior to burning slash piles, logging areas may be open to public firewood gathering after the sale is closed, if wood is available. Other resource values, such as wildlife snags, down logs, and soils, would be protected. Notify the public of firewood opportunities after timber removal activities are completed. Harvest units along existing open roads, all alternatives FUEL-2 Prescribed burning control lines would be constructed as needed for holding actions and/or to protect resource area concerns. This includes black line, fireline, pruning, saw line and hose lays. Existing roads, trails, creek drainages, wet meadows, rocky outcrops and other natural barriers would be used as control lines where possible. All burn units, all alternatives FUEL-3 Obliterate the appearance of fire lines and skid trails adjacent to or that intersect existing roads and trails to reduce the potential for unauthorized motorized use. All alternatives, all burn units DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE FUEL-4 All burning would take place under the guidelines set forth in a prescribed fire burn plan developed specifically for this project area. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality, and contingency resources. All alternatives, all burn units FUEL-5 Hand piling and pile burning of natural and activity fuels may occur in portions of units adjacent to private land to reduce fuel loading levels prior to jackpot and underburning. Alternative 2 units: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 47, 49, 51, 73; Alternative 3 units: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 47a, 47c, 51, 73 FUEL-6 Reduce fuel loading of CWD to approximately 10 tons/acre, where possible. Alternatives 2 and 3 Units: 76, 88. FUEL-7 Reduce fuel loading of CWD to 10-15 tons/acre Alternatives 2 and 3 unit: 78. FUEL-8 Slash understory fuels using chainsaws where needed to create burnable fuel bed. Alternative 2 units: 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88; Alternative 3 units: 78, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88 NOX- Noxious Weed Design Feature NOX-1 Incorporate all relevant guidance from FSM 2081.2 and the Environmental Protection Measures from the Helena National Forest Weed FEIS Record of Decision. All alternatives, all units NOX-2 All landings, skid trails or other activity areas ( e.g., hand lines, control lines, burn piles) that have over 30 percent ground cover removal/soil surface disturbance due to the activity would be recontoured and seeded with a prescribed native seed mixture as soon as appropriate following the cessation of activities. Where slopes are under 15 percent, surfaces would be left rough to provide microtopography for seed and water catchment. Woody debris would be spread on the surface at a rate of 1 to 5 tons per acre in these areas to provide site stability as well as additional microsites. Where slopes are over 15 to 20 percent, surfaces would be left rough to provide microtopography for seed and water catchment. Woody debris would be spread on the surface at a rate of 5 to 10 tons per acre in these areas to provide site stability as well as additional microsites. Timber harvest units in Alternative 2 units: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 18, 21, 29, 47, 49, 51, 73; Alternative 3 units: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 18, 21, 29, 47a, 47c, 51, 73 NOX-3 Recommended certified weed seed free native seed mixtures are located in Appendix F of the Helena National Forest Plan. Units with underburning for restoration would not be seeded NOX-4 Where feasible for restoration of disturbed ground (e.g., hand lines, control lines, burn piles), cover bare soils with a thin layer of duff from adjacent sites, if available. It is important to leave some duff on adjacent sites where cover material is collected. In units identified for pile burning throughout the unit: Alternative 2 units: 3, 4, 9, 14, 18, 21, 29; Alternative 3 units: 3, 9, 14, 18, 21, 29 In addition, this applies to portions of the following units where pile burning is proposed along the Forest boundary: Alternative 2 units: 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 47, 49, 51, 73; DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE Alternative 3 units: 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 47a, 47c, 51, 73 NOX-5 Only herbicides approved for use under the Helena National Forest Noxious Weed Record of Decision (2006) would be applied. All herbicides would be applied in accordance with label restrictions under that decision. All alternatives, all units NOX-6 The portions of the haul route that require road work (e.g., reconditioning, maintenance, construction) prior to haul should be treated with herbicides prior to the reconditioning early in the growing season to prevent seed set, and again in the fall following reconditioning to limit the effect of the ground disturbance. Roads proposed for work, all alternatives NOX-7 A 100-foot buffer around any sensitive plant species would be required when herbicides are applied. Within this buffer only hand pulling of weeds would be allowed, (Environmental Protection Measure #22 from the Helena National Forest Noxious Weed FEIS and Record of Decision 2006). All alternatives, all units RNG- Range Design Feature RNG-1 Protect existing livestock management fencing, or repair if damaged during operations. All alternatives, where needed. RNG-2 Fencing, temporary herding, or other techniques may be used to protect conifer regeneration where needed. All alternatives, where needed. RNG-3 Fence construction may be needed along allotment boundaries that would have natural barriers removed due to the project. This would primarily be of concern along the Stonewall allotment boundary on the west and east boundaries. Design all improvements for livestock management, such as fencing and water developments, in cooperation with a wildlife biologist. All alternatives, where needed REC- Recreation and Roadless Design Feature REC-1 No project activities would occur the week prior to, or during the first 2 weeks of the General Big Game Hunting rifle season or on weekends for the remainder of the General Big Game Hunting season. All alternatives, all units REC-2 No hauling on weekends and major holidays to minimize conflicts with the public users All alternatives, all units REC-3 Coordinate project implementation with recreation staff, Forest Public Affairs Officer and Law Enforcement to ensure the public is well informed of treatment schedules and potential impacts. Provide public notifications at of project activities (e.g., logging, hauling, prescribed burning) at major access roads, in local newspapers and on the Forest webpage. All alternatives, all units REC-4 Work with local snowmobile groups and Forest Service biologist to identify alternative groomed snowmobile routes where winter operations are considered. Snowmobile trails are groomed from December 1 through April 1. (Note: Alternative routes may be a groomed path along the side of a haul route that would be safe for snowmobiles, or allowing the user group to groom an approved "detour" type route along existing roads to provide trail connections or loop riding opportunities that All alternatives DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE may have otherwise been impacted by hauling activity.) REC-5 Prioritize treatments adjacent to the Pine Grove Dispersed Camping Area/Trailhead and Arrastra Creek trailhead to limit the amount of time these areas may be closed to the public. All alternatives, unit: 46 REC-6 Protect recreation facilities including: picnic tables, fire-rings, toilets, signs, bulletin boards, hand pumps, fences, etc. All alternatives, unit: 46 REC-7 Cut stumps as flush as possible to the ground within the Pine Grove Dispersed Camping Area/Trailhead and Arrastra Creek trailhead area. All alternatives, unit: 46 REC-8 Within the Pine Grove Dispersed Camping Area/Trailhead and Arrastra Creek trailhead areas, leave 10 to 12 tons per acre of coarse woody material (greater than 3 inches diameter) from harvest activities. All alternatives, units: 46 RDS- Roads Design Feature RDS-1 Roads would be maintained in accordance with direction provided in FSH 7709.15 (Transportation System Maintenance Handbook) and would be at a level commensurate with the need for the following operational objectives; resource protection, road investment protection, user safety, user comfort, and travel efficiency. Roads proposed for work RDS-2 Remove danger trees, approximately one and a half tree lengths from the roadway, as needed, along roads used for hauling and project implementation. Roads proposed for work RDS-3 Roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal and road reconstruction would be the minimum density, cost, and standard necessary for the intended need, user safety, and resource protection. Roads proposed for work RDS-4 Roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be closed (e.g., gates, barricades) during operations to limit use to administrative use only. Roads proposed for work RDS-5 Upon project completion roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be decommissioned and rehabilitated. Intersections with roads would be blocked by rocks, wood, or berms and would be slashed in and or ripped and covered with slash or seeded within site distance of open roads to reduce potential for use after the project harvest activities are completed. Roads proposed for work RDS-6 Provide warning and other signing in accordance with Forest Service signing standards and restrict or temporarily close roads in active project areas to provide for public safety. Roads proposed for work RDS-7 A wetting agent (water or other dust-reduction material) would be applied as needed to decrease or eliminate dust generated from timber hauling on aggregate and native surface roads to provide for air quality and public safety. Roads proposed for work. RDS-8 Road design would be addressed in clauses in the contract package. At a minimum, the following items would be included in the design considerations: location, width, drainage, stream crossings, closures, decommissioning and rehabilitation. All units, all alternatives DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE RDS-9 Existing open routes would be left in similar condition and drainage structures shall be left in functional condition. Roads proposed for use, all alternatives. RDS-10 For roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal that cross a drainage, associated temporary structures, and fills shall also be removed to the extent necessary to permit normal maximum flow of water and stream crossings restored to their original dimensions and contours. Alternative 2 and 3, road #5 between units 10 and 11 SILV Silviculture Design Feature SILV-1 Conifers suppressing aspen clones would be thinned from within and around suppressed aspen. Cut-tree diameter limits and cutting distance from aspen would be established and defined in stand and unit prescriptions. However in general, conifers would be cut up to 18 inches d.b.h. in units where commercial-sized trees are proposed for removal, and up to 9 inches d.b.h. in units where precommercial-sized trees are proposed for cutting, up to a distance of about 120 feet from the outside edge of the aspen clone Alternatives 2 and 3 units: 14,15,16,18,21,23,24,26, 28,3,30,31,32,33,4,44,45, 48,47,48,49,50,51,54,55,59, 6,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68, 69,7,70,71,72,73,75, 46b,47b,47c,61a SILV-2 Assess low- and mixed-severity prescribed burning units containing groups or stands of whitebark pine to determine if areas need pre-burn treatments to protect whitebark pine from damage during burning, and to create openings to serve as nutcracker caching sites. If needed, pre-burn treatments should take place a year prior to the proposed landscape burning. The pre-burn treatments could include cutting and directional felling of conifer trees to increase fuel loadings, improve continuity of the fuelbed, and reduce fuel loads around whitebark pine trees. Treatment areas around mature whitebark pine trees designed to serve as nutcracker caching sites should be cut near-circular areas of 1 to 5 acres. Alternative 2 units: 76,79,81,82,83,84,88 Alternative 3 units: 79,82,83,84,88 SILV-3 Where the opportunity exists in prescribed burning units where pre-burning tree cutting is proposed, thinned areas should be located around large ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, western larch and aspen to protect the trees and to promote the regeneration of those species. Alternatives 2 and 3 units: 76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84, 85,86,87,88, 80a SILV-4 All merchantable dead trees would be removed except as needed to meet other resource criteria. Alternatives 2 and 3 units: 4, 5, and all regeneration and commercial thinning units. S/WS/F- Soils, Watershed and Fisheries Design Feature S/WS/F-1 Maintain adequate soil cover following management treatments to reduce the risk of erosion. As a rough rule of thumb, at least 50 percent soil cover should be maintained on slopes less than 35 percent, and greater soil cover should be maintained on steeper slopes. Soil cover includes vegetation, plant litter and duff, rocks (greater than 2 inch diameter), and woody material. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-2 Conduct vegetation management activities using partial or full-suspension yarding methods (i.e. skyline cable yarding) All skyline Units: DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE S/WS/F-3 For vegetation management activities in forested ecosystems, retain 5 to 20 tons per acre of coarse woody material (greater than 3-inch diameter) for warm, dry types, and 10 to 20 tons per acre for other types following vegetation treatments (Graham et al. 1994; Brown et al. 2003). The purpose of this BMP is to sustain long-term soil nutrient cycling> 5-20 tons per acre coarse woody material: Alternative 2 units: 2, 6, 7, 15, 16, 26, 30-33, 44, 50, 54, 55, 73, 75, 76, 78, 80, 81, 84-86; Alternative 3 units: 2, 6, 7, 15, 16, 30a, 31a, 32a, 44a, 50, 73, 75b, 78, 84, 85 (Balance of units 10-20 tons per acre coarse woody material) S/WS/F-4 Re-use existing skid trails where practical. Before use, skid trail locations would be approved by Forest Service personnel. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-5 Where operations are restricted to the winter conditions, winter conditions guidelines are as follows: 0 inches of frozen soil.Need 10 inches of settled snow 2 inches of frozen soil.Need 6 inches of settled snow 4 inches of frozen soil.No snow cover If necessary, pre-pack snow on designated routes before work commences. This allows soil to freeze and the snow road to solidify. Alternative 2 Units: 1, 4, 5, 9-13, 17, 19, 20, 28, 29, 43, 45-47, 57, 58, 62, 63 Alternative 3 Units: 1, 4, 5, 9-13, 43, 46b, 47b, 47c, 57, 58, 62, 63 S/WS/F-6 For prescribed fire management activities in the timber removal treatment areas, design burn prescriptions to burn when the forest floor is moist. Note: Proposed prescribed burns are designed to maintain some duff on the forest floor. All alternatives S/WS/F-7 Harvesting and skidding operations would be limited to time periods when dry soil conditions exist (summer operating period). All units NOT treated in the winter S/WS/F-8 Skid trails would be designated with an average spacing of 100 feet. All tractor treated units S/WS/F-9 Following harvesting and skidding operations that result in the removal or displacement of litter, duff, soil, or coarse woody debris from the skid trail surface, the following activities would be conducted: Litter, duff, soil, and woody debris displaced from the trail would be placed on the skid trail. Slash and coarse woody debris that is placed on the skid trail would be compacted so that it is in contact with the soil surface. Slash placed on skid trails would be placed over 65-70% of the skid trail surface to a depth of 2-3 inches (approximately 22-25 tons/acre). Units requiring restoration: Alternative 2 Units: 1, 11-13, 29, 43, 46, 47; Alternative 3 Units: 1, 11-13, 43, 46b, 47b, 47c S/WS/F-10 Landings would be de-compacted and/or scarified as part of site preparation. Mulch and fine debris from on-site would be spread over the landing. Grass or trees would be seeded or planted on the disturbed site. Slash would be placed over 65-70% of the landing surface to a depth of 2-3 inches (approximately 22-25 tons/acre). Units requiring restoration: Alternative 2 Units: 1, 11-13, 29, 38, 40, 42, 43, 46, 47; Alternative 3 Units: 1, 11-13, 38, 40, 42, 43, 46b, 47b, 47c DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE Slash would be compacted so that it is in direct contract with the soil surface. S/WS/F-11 Where practicable, slash would be piled and burned in areas where detrimental soil disturbance already exists (i.e., abandoned log landings, skid trails, and roads associated with past activity). Handpiles would be constructed so they are no larger than approximately 6 feet in diameter and 4 feet high. Prior to hand piling, slash would be left through one winter after cutting to allow for initial decomposition and nutrient leaching. (Exception: units adjacent to private land or those identified in the silviculture prescription with insect concerns may be piled and burned as soon as possible to reduce fire hazard.) Units requiring restoration: Alternative 2: 14, 29 51; Alternative 3: 14, 51 S/WS/F-12 Where practical, burn piles would be covered with on-site mulch, fine debris, and slash. Burn piles would be seeded or planted with the appropriate grass or tree species. Units requiring restoration: Alternative 2: 14, 29 51; Alternative 3: 14, 51 S/WS/F-13 In skyline corridors, place on-site mulch, fine debris and slash. Also seed or plant with the appropriate grass or tree species. Units requiring restoration: Alternative 2: 15, 53; Alternative 3: 15, 53 S/WS/F-14 Precommercial thin (PCT) units would be hand thinned. Alternative 2: 2, 3, 14, 16, 18, 21, 48-51, 59-61, 64-73, 75-88 Alternative 3: 2, 3 14, 16, 17a, 19a, 20a, 29a, 30a, 31a, 32a, 44a, 45a, 46a, 47a, 48, 50, 51, 59, 61a, 66-73, 75b, 78, 79, 80a, 82-85, 87, 88 S/WS/F -15 Installation, removal or replacement of culverts would be restricted to periods when stream channels are dry or would be avoided from May 1 to August 1 to reduce the risk of affecting cutthroat trout eggs in stream gravels. As needed S/WS/F -16 INFISH (USDA 1995) Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) would be marked in the locations where dead tree removal is to occur between the road and the stream. A clear means of identifying trees that are to be cut and removed, cut and left in place, or left standing would need to be recognized. As provided for with INFISH (USDA 1995) standard RA-2, dead trees cut that are not needed for woody debris recruitment or floodplain needs, can be removed. Green commercial trees within the RHCA that have not been attacked by beetles and are not otherwise at risk of dying in the immediate future would remain. Avoid locating log landings in RHCAs. See Figure 15, RHCA map with INFISH buffers S/WS/F -17 Additional areas requiring INFISH buffers are likely to be found during vegetation unit layout that are not currently identified on project area maps. These areas would be identified during implementation and the appropriate buffers and mitigations applied to them to meet INFISH (USDA 1995) and Helena Forest Plan standards.  RHCA boundaries -Category 1--Fish bearing streams have a RHCA width of 300 feet either side of the stream or the 100-year floodplain whichever is greater. See Figure 15, RHCA map with INFISH buffers DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE -Category 2--For perennial streams not supporting fish, the RHCA is 150 feet either side of the stream. -Category 3-- For lakes and wetlands greater than one acre, the RHCA is a minimum of 150 feet but can be larger and extend to the outer limits of riparian vegetation, the extent of seasonally saturated soil, the extent of highly unstable areas, or the distance equal to the height of one site-potential tree. -Category 4--For Seasonally flowing or intermittent streams, wetlands less than 1 acre, landslides and landslide prone areas, the RHCA boundary is one-half site potential tree from the edges of the stream channel, wetland, landslide, or landslide prone area, or a 50-foot slope distance, whichever is greatest.  The following documents the specific treatment of trees within INFISH Categories 1-4 RHCAs associated with streams. Situations where dead or insect infested trees may be removed while still meeting INFISH standard RA-2. If the tree is between the creek and the road, within a tree length of the road, leaning toward the road or standing straight, and is not within a tree length of the creek and does not fall into what is considered a wider floodplain category (the situation where side channel development is possible) then the tree may be felled and removed If the tree is between the creek and the road, within a tree length of the road, not within a tree length of the creek, is on a bench elevated above the floodplain, and is standing either straight or leaning toward the road the tree can be removed. Salvage trees within the RHCA can be removed in the situation where the road is between the creek and the tree, as these trees are not potential contributors to large woody debris or stream channel form and function. The exception would be when the road is immediately adjacent to the stream. In this situation, the tree can be removed if the portion of the tree bole exceeding four inches would not span the stream should the tree fall toward the creek. For the separate situation where the road parallels a stream and then crosses a tributary to the stream, the salvage trees on the uphill side of the road, including those within a tree length of the tributary, can be cut and removed unless leaning directly toward the tributary. Precommercial thinning of green trees is allowed with hand treatment. Prescribed burning is allowed as long as it meets state SMZ rules. S/WS/F -18 The State of Montana Stream Management Zone (SMZ) Law (2007) prohibits broadcast burning in SMZs (see Rule 3 (26.6.603), specific to prescribed burning). During broadcast or underburning, no ignition would take place in an SMZ; however, some fire may back into the SMZ. SMZ portions of units S/WS/F-19 Follow all standard Forest Service timber contract road Best Management Practices. All cross drain culverts on All alternatives, all units DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE existing roads to be used for hauling in the project area would need to brought up to standard for functionality. Follow all applicable road and harvest BMPs listed in the FS Soil and Water Conservation Practices Handbook (USDA 2010) S/WS/F-20 Avoid hauling and other heavy-equipment traffic during conditions where the road surface is at or near saturation. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-21 Avoid snowplowing on any road adjacent to a stream as much as possible. At stream crossings, avoid sidecasting of snow into the stream. Leave drainage points in the snow berm to avoid concentration of snowmelt on the road surface. Identify specific sections of road S/WS/F-22 Avoid use of heavy equipment in any wetland identified during unit layout. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-23 Minimize cleaning of vegetated roadside ditches that are providing adequate road drainage. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-24 Areas cleared of vegetation such as landings or road side drainage ditches would be seeded with an approved native seed mix. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-25 Erosion control and drainage improvement BMPs would be used to reduce sediment at stream crossings. Sediment filtering devices (e.g., filter fence and weed-free straw bales) would be used as needed to limit erosion and delivery of disturbed material into all streams or ephemeral drainages. All alternatives, all units S/WS/F-26 Sediment sites 607-E-01on Stonewall Creek and 626-B1-01 on a tributary to Lincoln Creek would have sediment-filtering devices installed combined with gravel surfacing to reduce erosion. Alternatives 2 and 3 VIS- Visual Design Feature  Intermediate and Regeneration Harvest and Precommercial Thin  VIS-1 Along roadways boundaries and private property, vary unit sizes, widths, shapes and distance from the center line. Consider leaving single trees and/or groups of trees to visually connect with the unit's edges. Utilize natural breaks in topography and vegetation type to delineate treatment edges. Edges would be shaped and/or feathered to avoid a shadowing or edge effect in the cut unit. Where the unit is adjacent to denser forest including private land, the percent of thinning within the transition zone would be progressively reduced toward the outside edge of the unit. In addition, vary the width of the transition zone. Where the unit interfaces with an opening, the percent of thinning within the transition zone would be progressively increased toward the outside edge of the unit. In addition, vary the width of the transition zone. Soften edges by thinning adjacent to existing unit boundaries, removing larger trees and favoring smaller ones, where applicable. This would reduce a vertical wall or edge effect. Alternative 2 - 1, 10, 13, 17, 20, 39, 40, 41, 46 Alternative 3 - 1, 10, 13, 17a, 20a, 39, 40, 41, 46a, 46b DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE  Road, Skid Trail, and Landing Construction  VIS-2 Where feasible, locate and orient roads to minimize cut and fill. Cut and fill banks would be sloped to accommodate natural revegetation. Cut and fill slopes would be revegetated with native species where ever possible. All alternatives, all roads built then obliterated VIS-3 Side cast topsoil during the construction of roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, to use topsoil for obliteration and recontouring. All alternatives, all roads built then obliterated VIS-4 Where roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal and skid trails meet a primary travel route, they should intersect at a right angle and, where feasible, curve after the junction to minimize the length of route seen from the primary travel route. Alternative 2 - 13 and 46 Alternative 3 -13, 46a, 46b VIS-5 Where feasible, retain screening trees one tree-height below roads and landings (including cable landings) when viewed from below. Avoid creating a straight edge of trees by saving clumps of trees and single trees with varied spacing. All alternatives, all roads built then obliterated, all landings VIS-6 When viewed from above, retain, screening trees one tree-height above roads and landings and/or prescribe a higher leave basal area. Avoid creating a straight edge of trees by saving clumps of trees and single trees with varied spacing. All alternatives, all roads built then obliterated, all landings VIS-7 Log landings, roads, and bladed skid trails should be minimized within sensitive view sheds. Alternative 2 - 1, 13, and 46 Alternative 3 – 1, 13, 46a, 46b  Slash Treatment  VIS-8 In sensitive foreground areas, stumps should be cut to 8 inches or less in height, where possible. Slant stumps away from visually sensitive areas (travel routes, use areas, and water bodies, where possible Alternative 2 - 2, 13, 46, 73, 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88 Alternative 3 – 2, 13, 46a, 46b, 73, 79, 80, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88 VIS-9 All burn piles would be completely burned, or residual burnt material would be scattered within sensitive viewsheds. Alternative 2 - 1, 13, and 46 Alternative 3 – 1, 13, 46a, 46b  Unit Marking  VIS-10 Use cut tree (as opposed to leave tree) marking or species designation, where appropriate to minimize the amount of marking in visually sensitive areas. Alternative 2 - 1, 13, 16, 17, 46 Alternative 3 - 1, 13, 16, 17a, 46a, 46b VIS-11 Unit boundaries would be marked with water based paint. Alternative 2 - 1, 13, 16,17, 46 Alternative 3 – 1, 13, 16, 17a, 46a, 46b VIS-12 Prescribed Fire See FUEL-2 Alternative 2 – 46 Alternative 3 – 46a, 46b VIS-13 Tree Planting Tree planting should be completed in an irregular pattern with clumping to mimic future islands similarly found in the characteristic landscape. All alternatives, all units WL- Wildlife Design Feature DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE WL-1 Roads Existing roads which are currently closed or restricted and utilized for this project would be retained in their pre-project road status. All alternatives WL-2 Roads To retain habitat for snag dependent species and species dependent on large diameter trees, the location of roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, skid trails and cable corridors would ensure, whenever practical, that veteran and relic survivor trees and snags would not be removed during construction. Alt 2 – Roads 3-9, Alt 3 – Roads 5, 7 and 8 WL-3 Roads To maintain habitat for snag-dependent species, the timber sale contract or contract administrator would ensure, whenever practical, that the design of skid trails and cable corridors avoid veteran and relic trees and snags To be determined during implementation WL-4 Snags The Forest Plan (1986) specifies that snags should be managed at 70 percent of optimum (2 snags/acre) within each 3rd-order drainage. All alternatives, all units WL-5 Snags Larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, spruce, and subalpine fir, in that priority, are the preferred species for snags and replacement trees (live trees left to replace existing snags). All alternatives, all units WL-6 Snags The following numbers and sizes of snags should be retained in cutting units if available. In units with snags, keep a minimum of 20 snags and 10 replacement trees per 10 acres, if available. If 20 snags are not available, then any combination totaling 30 should be left by the following d.b.h. classes. 13 snags and 6 replacement trees 7-11” 5 snags and 3 replacement trees 12-19” 2 snags and 1 replacement tree 20+” In units – except those of pure lodgepole without snags, keep a minimum of 30 wind firm trees per 10 acres, if available, by the following d.b.h. classes: 21 trees from 7-11” 7 trees from 12-19” 2 trees from 20+” In pure lodgepole stands without snags, all non-merchantable material greater than 9 inches d.b.h. should be left on site, when it is consistent with fuel objectives. All alternatives, all units WL-7 Snags In order to maintain habitat for snag-dependent species, leave refugia of untreated snag habitat (of several acres) well distributed throughout the project area. All alternatives, all units WL-8 Woody Debris Forest Plan wildlife coarse, woody debris objectives would be met through retention guidelines under S/WS/F-3. The following measure would be implemented to ensure larger diameter material is left on site: Where they are present on site, maintain at least 4 down logs per acre at least 12 inches diameter (at large end) and 20 feet long. During burning, avoid the consumption of large coarse woody debris (e.g., logs greater than 10 inches in diameter at midpoint) to the extent possible. Where feasible and when consistent with fuel reduction  DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE objectives, use control lines and/or firing techniques to maintain pockets of understory vegetation and shrubs retained during timber harvest and small pockets of understory vegetation at scattered locations in un-harvested burn units WL-9 Avoid harvest and road construction in and immediately adjacent to elk wallows, streams, wet meadows, rock outcrops, known raptor nest sites, and other key wildlife habitats.  WL-10 Elk Areas of elk calving activity would be closed to motorized use during peak use (Late May through July). These areas would be determined annually through coordination with the MFWP. All alternatives, all units WL-11 Elk In order to minimize impacts to elk security, logging operations would be limited to one drainage at a time. All alternatives, all units WL-12 Elk No timber harvest would occur within 150 ft. of any elk wallow identified during project layout. Also during prescribed burning, ignition would be implemented in a manner that would maintain cover within 150 ft. of identified wallows. All alternatives, all units WL-13 Aspen Promote and protect existing aspen as needed during implementation. All alternatives, all units WL-14 Shrubs In order to maintain a shrub component and where feasible and when consistent with fuel reduction objectives, use control lines and/or firing techniques to maintain 30 to 50 percent of existing shrubs in a patchy mosaic. Alternatives 2 and 3, Unit 88 WL-15 Safety Snags greater than 20 inches diameter of any species would be retained unless they pose a specific safety or operability concern All alternatives, all units WL-16 Goshawk Within active goshawk territories, maintain a 40-acre (minimum) no-activity buffer around known nests. Restrict ground-disturbing activities inside Post-fledgling Areas (420 acres) between April 15th and August 15th. Alternatives 2 and 3 units: 46 (46a,b), 47 (47a,b), 72, 80 and in units if any new nests are discovered WL-17 Raptors If raptor nests are identified during project implementation, a wildlife biologist would be contacted and appropriate buffers and Limiting Operating Periods established. All alternatives, all units WL-18 MIS If nest sites for MIS and/or Migratory Birds are discovered during the layout or implementation of the proposed action, the wildlife biologist would be notified to determine appropriate protection measures. All alternatives, all units WL-19 TES If any threatened, endangered or sensitive species are located during project layout or implementation, a wildlife biologist would be notified. Management activities would be altered, if necessary, so that protection measures can be taken. All alternatives, all units WL-20 Bald Eagle Project prescribed burn plans would consider the Beaver Creek Eagle Nest as sensitive and ensure that smoke is adequately dispersed away from the nest during the nesting season (January 1 through July 15th). All Alternatives all burning units WL-21 Aircraft associated with proposed burning shall not be All Alternatives all burning units DESIGN FEATURE STONEWALL VEGETATION PROJECT DESIGN FEATURE APPLICABLE UNIT/ALTERNATIVE Bald Eagle permitted within 1,000 ft. of the Beaver Creek nest between January 1 and August 31. WL-22 Lynx Cutting of brush along low speed (closed) roads would be done to the minimum amount necessary to maintain public safety All Alternatives all burning units WL-23 Grizzly Due to the importance of white bark pine regeneration to grizzly bear, existing white bark pine regeneration would be retained to the extent possible during burning. Utilize modified unit boundaries, pre-treatment surveys, low intensity burns, or internal line construction to accomplish this. (See SILV-2 for additional whitebark pine measure), Alternative 2 units: 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88; Alternative 3 units: 79, 80, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88 WL-24 Grizzly In order to reduce impacts to Grizzly Bears, no mechanical treatment activities and hauling or prescribed burning would occur above 6,000 ft. elevation during the denning season (December 1 through March 31). Alternative 2 Units: 37, 55, 56, 76, 79, 81-85, 88 Alternative 3 Units: 37, 79, 82-85 WL-25 To promote and maintain important habitat characteristics where treatments are proposed, treatments would be designed and laid out in coordination with a Forest Service wildlife biologist. Alternative 2 units: 40, 41, 42, 43, 46, 47; Alternative 3 units: 40, 41, 42, 43, 46a, 47a WL-26 Stands classified as potential old growth - would be burned with a low-intensity prescribed burn to minimize mortality to trees greater than 19 inches DBH. Alternative 2 unit 81 WL-27 Ignition patterns would be modified to minimize burning in areas classified as multiple-story lynx habitat. Alternative 2 units 81, 82, 83, 84, 88  Figure 15. Proposed Action treatments with INFISH buffers Title: Alternative 2 - Proposed action treatments with INFISH buffers Title: Alternative 3 treatments with INFISH buffersFigure 16. Alternative 3 treatments with INFISH buffers Monitoring Noxious weed monitoring would consist of visually surveying all units that were previously infested. Areas that were not previously infested would be monitored for weeds by visually surveying the units in year one and year three following the disturbance and/or rehabilitation. If weed populations are found, those areas would be treated according to label guidelines and within the guidance provided in the HNF Weed Treatment Project FEIS (2006). If additional sensitive plant populations are found during implementation, those populations would be monitored to insure mitigation measures are effective. All landings, skid trails or other areas of disturbance due to the logging activities that have over 10 percent soil surface disturbance would be monitored for weed infestations each spring for three seasons following implementation. If any of the species on the Montana Noxious Weed list or County lists are located within the disturbed areas, the infestations would be treated using appropriate herbicides for three seasons following the harvest activity. If it is determined that illegal off-highway vehicle (OHV) use is taking place in areas where treatments have occurred, steps should be taken to prohibit the use (i.e. signing, barrier installation, increased law enforcement). Monitor National Forest System trail conditions following prescribed burning to determine if there is a need for increased trail maintenance for specific areas due to fallen trees or increased erosion. Monitor all cultural sites within the APE for effects associated with the selected actions, to ensure that the mitigation measures are implemented. If any additional cultural resources are discovered during implementation of this project, work should cease in the area and a Forest Archaeologist would be contacted. Work in the area could only resume if mitigation measures can be determined and/or re-evaluated if necessary. Roadless Area monitoring would consist of visually surveying units treated with prescribed fire to determine if illegal off-highway vehicle use is taking place in treated areas. If monitoring reveals this is happening, steps would be taken to eliminate the use (i.e. signing, barrier installation, increased law enforcement). The following road management monitoring recommendations are suggested for road facilities: · Complete the annual roads accomplishment report (RAR). · Roads within the project area should be surveyed as needed to comply with Forest Service-assigned road condition, survey requirements for deferred maintenance needs and real property inventory. Best management practices (BMPs) evaluations should be performed periodically by the sale administrator. Best management practices evaluations should focus on effectiveness and on whether BMPs were applied. The Southwestern Crown Collaborative (SWCC), one of the original 10 Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Projects (CFLR) selected for funding, has agreed to allocate 10 percent of the CFLR funds received to monitoring. The SWCC is in the process of developing a Long-term Monitoring Plan, which is still in draft. The role of the SWCC monitoring is to determine the effects of forest restoration efforts with the goal of validating or improving restoration methods to achieve restoration objectives. Goals for ecological, social, and economic monitoring for the SWCC were articulated both within the Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA) and the SWCC proposal. Five major goal areas for monitoring over the 10-year life of the project are: fire and fuel dynamics; biodiversity of plants and animals; soil and water; economic impacts; and social implications. Some of these monitoring efforts would likely occur in the Stonewall project; however, details of the SWCC’s specific monitoring plans in the Stonewall area have not been finalized. Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Detailed Study Federal agencies are required by NEPA to rigorously explore and objectively evaluate all reasonable alternatives and to briefly discuss the reasons for eliminating any alternatives that were not developed in detail (40 CFR 1502.14). Public comments received in response to the proposed action provided suggestions for alternative methods for achieving the purpose and need. (See appendix A, table A-2 for specific comments pertaining to alternatives, by letter (L) and comment number (c) (denoted by L#, c#).) Some of these alternatives may have been outside the scope of restoration, duplicative of the alternatives considered in detail, or determined to be components that would cause unnecessary environmental harm. Therefore, a number of alternatives were considered, but dismissed from detailed consideration for reasons summarized below. Maximize timber harvest and fuels reduction activities, particularly in the Wildland Urban Interface. (L1, c2) The wildland urban interface (WUI) was identified during development of the "Tri-County Regional Community Wildfire Protection Plan" (2005). The proposed action was designed to address fuels concerns on National Forest System lands adjacent to private lands. Treatments on private lands are outside the scope of our proposed action, but past, current and planned treatments are considered in the individual specialist's cumulative effects reports, where applicable. We reviewed the project area to identify potential vegetative treatments based on site conditions. This alternative would be similar to the proposed action, and is analyzed in detail. The roadless areas within the project area were created by the Rare 2 process identifying possible additions to the wilderness system. Management should reflect this quality. In addition, burning whitebark pine seedling and sapling areas, present in the roadless areas, could reduce white bark pine habitat, an important food source for grizzly bears. Consider an alternative that does not include prescribed burning in the roadless areas, but allows for the use of natural prescribed fire without mechanical treatments, including cutting trees and brush, in the roadless areas. (L5 c7; L48 c8) The large prescribed burn units in the roadless areas are proposed to improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape making it more diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. In particular, the burns in the roadless areas would be designed to encourage whitebark pine regeneration in proximity to existing mature whitebark pine trees. Portions of some units are lacking adequate ground fuels to carry fire across the desired burn unit locations. Without the prep work, burn prescriptions could not be implemented and fire lines could not be prepared. For any action alternative, design features are incorporated to exclude large concentrations of whitebark pine regeneration from burning, and protect mature whitebark trees that may provide seed sources. The no action alternative does not include slash treatments or prescribed burning in the roadless area but would address this issue. Implementing no management in these areas would allow the continuing trend regarding the reduction of whitebark pine and aspen. This alternative would not address the purpose and need to improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure, or modify fire behavior to create conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process across the roadless area portions of the landscape. This alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Burning activities proposed may char merchantable timber and decrease its value in areas managed for timber products. Consider an alternative that does not include prescribed burning in areas managed for timber products. Prescribed fire units in management areas T1-5 include all of units 2 and 78, and portions of units 77, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86 and 87. (L79, c2, c3) The Forest Plan identifies prescribed burning as an appropriate tool for vegetation and fuels management (pages II/33 - 34), and the Forest Fire Management Plan direction in place at the time of implementation would be followed. The no-action alternative does not include controlled burning in areas managed for timber products. This alternative would not address the purpose and need to modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Therefore, this alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Proposed actions may disturb landscapes allowing existing weed populations to expand or allowing additional species to become established. Consider an alternative that eliminates units that have noxious weeds present on roads within units from fire management proposals. (L5 c2) The Forest Weeds FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006) identified most of the roads in the project area for weed monitoring and treatment due to the presence of weeds. Appropriate preventive measures incorporated in the project design features include post treatment spraying of landings within the first year after mechanical treatment, and monitoring in the third and fifth years with retreatment if needed. The no action alternative addresses this suggestion and is analyzed. Eliminating units with noxious weeds would eliminate fire management treatments in all units in the WUI accessed by existing roads. Not treating areas within the WUI would not enhance community protection. This alternative would not meet the purpose and need for the project of modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Eliminating the units within the WUI would not meet the purpose and need for the project of modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection. In addition, the appropriate project design and mitigation of relevant best management practices are incorporated in the action alternatives. Therefore, developing an alternative that eliminates units that have noxious weeds present on the roads within them from fire management proposals is not necessary. This alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Public comments noted the continued loss of motorized recreational opportunities as a primary concern. A recommendation was made to consider a Pro-Recreation Alternative that would address recreation opportunities and include the following characteristics (L26 c1, 2, 4): · Dispersed camping within 300 feet of all existing routes · Use of seasonal closures, where required, to protect the environment and wildlife with the intention of keeping routes open for the summer recreation season · All of the existing routes are needed as OHV routes due to the cumulative effects of all other closures · Additional OHV routes are needed to address the growing popularity of OHV recreation and the greater needs of the public for access and motorized recreation Effects to recreation resources would be addressed in analysis and project design features would be included to minimize potential impacts to recreation opportunities within the project area. Travel management is being evaluated in the current Blackfoot Travel Plan (Non-Winter) and the appropriate project design and mitigation of the relevant best management practices would be applied to any developed action alternative. Developing a Pro-recreation alternative with additional OHV routes was considered, but this would not address the purpose and need identified for this project for fuels reduction in the WUI or restoration across the landscape. Therefore, this alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Consider a watershed or ecosystem restoration alternative or incorporate restoration elements in the alternatives considered. (L53 c6, 10, 11) The Stone Dry Watershed Assessment (2009) was considered when developing the proposed action. The purpose and need includes a restoration element. The proposed action was designed to incorporate treatments that move the project area towards a more resilient forest to address restoration of vegetative composition and structural diversity elements. Effects to vegetation and watershed resources would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the EIS. Watershed restoration and reducing sedimentation is often focused on changes to roads, and includes fixing drainage structures, road design or decommissioning roads. Changes to existing road alignments and decommissioning existing roads are being evaluated in the current analysis for the Blackfoot Travel Management Plan (Non-Winter) and therefore not being considered in this proposal. Roads built for the Stonewall Vegetation Project would be obliterated immediately after timber removal. Since many of the watershed elements of concern are being evaluated in the current Blackfoot Travel Plan (Non-Winter), and the appropriate project design and mitigation of relevant best management practices would be applied to any developed action alternative, a true or purer watershed restoration type alternative is not necessary; therefore, this type of alternative was not considered in detail. Comparison of Alternative Effects This section provides a summary of the effects of implementing each alternative. The following section displays a summary of effects to biophysical settings, species habitats and analysis issues in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area by alternative. Vegetation Vegetative conditions within the project area are described in chapter 1 and chapter 3. Proposed treatments address the purpose and need of the project. Following is a summary of the vegetative effects Purpose and Need: Enhance and Restore Aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine species and habitats Whether a treatment would result in an increase in a particular tree species depends upon the type of treatment, the characteristics of the tree species, and the current presence of the tree species in the area receiving the treatment. Treatments vary widely in the opportunity they provide to manipulate the presence of a particular species. Intermediate treatments provide a great deal of control through tree selection preferences applied during thinning if the tree species is present and regeneration treatments provide a great deal of control through control of seed sources and planting of preferred species. Prescribe burns provide opportunities to increase fire-tolerant or shade-intolerant early seral species such as ponderosa pine, western larch, and quaking aspen through killing competing fire-intolerant species and through creating open areas for regeneration although the degree of control is not great simply due to the variable nature of prescribed burning. The effects of the three alternatives upon within-stand tree species compositions by treatment group and as a proportion of the landscape are displayed in chapter 3 (table 29. Alternative comparison for ponderosa pine, western larch, whitebark pine, and aspen). Alternative 1 would continue the current condition in which the four species have declined in presence within stands and upon the landscape due to succession and the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic. In the long-term, those four species would continue to decline as succession continues. Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in an increase in the presence of all four species, with alternative 2 leading to the greatest increase due to the greater treatment area involved, and the greater area in regeneration and intermediate treatments which have the greatest potential for modifying species composition at the stand level. Purpose and Need: Improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects The expected effects of the three alternatives on within-stand species compositions are displayed in chapter 3 (table 30. Alternative comparison for stand structures). Under alternative 1, the current condition would persist, and the general track of tree species on the landscape would be toward increases in Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce and decreases in the early seral species—ponderosa pine, quaking aspen, western larch, whitebark pine, and lodgepole pine. Lodgepole pine would regenerate in many areas in which it was a major component before the mountain pine beetle epidemic, becoming a component in mixed-species stands with Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir. Treatments in both alternatives 2 and 3 would modify the current condition and increase ponderosa pine, western larch, quaking aspen, and whitebark pine as discussed above. Both alternatives would improve the mix of tree species in treated areas, resulting in tree species mixtures that would be more diverse and resilient. Alternative 2 would result in greater effects than Alternative 3 due to the greater acreage treated, and the greater acreage treated with intermediate and regeneration treatments. The effects of the three alternatives on stand structures in terms of tree diameter distributions for proposed treatment type groups are displayed in chapter 3 (table 30. Alternative comparison for stand structures). Alternative 1 would continue the current condition in the short term and long term; stand understories would become denser and the stands more closed. Stand diameter distributions would remain the same in the short-term and in the long-term would tend to become more steeply weighted toward smaller diameters due to ingrowth and natural mortality of the larger diameter classes. Treatments in both alternatives 2 and 3 would modify the track that the stands are on with the degree and nature of the effects depending upon the type of treatment. Intermediate harvests (Groups 1 and 10) would “flatten” the diameter distributions by thinning small and mid-sized trees while retaining the largest trees—creating open multi-story structures. Precommercial thinning (Group 2) would create open, single-story stands by pre-commercially thinning even-aged, closed, single-story plantations. Regeneration treatments (Groups 3 and 4) would create even-aged stands with a small number of older and larger trees present as seed sources, shelter, or retention trees. Removing dead and dying trees and slashing undesirable understory trees (Group 5) would create stands that are open and almost single-story. Low-intensity prescribed burns (Groups 6 and 9) would flatten the diameter distributions due to killing many of the smaller diameter trees and would create stands that are more open and still multi-story. Mixed-severity prescribed burns (Groups 7 and 8) would create areas that are mosaics of structures including open and closed single-story, open and closed multi-story, and early-seral grass/forb/shrub openings. The effects of all treatments would last into the long-term but eventually the stands would become more closed and multi-story as trees grow and as the stand understories fill in. The effects of the three alternatives on stand structures at the landscape level by comparing the proportion of change within Biophysical Setting/vegetation fuel class combinations are displayed in chapter 3 (table 31. Alternative comparison for landscape-level stand structures). Under alternative 1 in the short-term the current condition would persist, which in general is below desired in (1) early seral and mid-seral open for all Biophysical Settings, (2) mid-seral closed in the two subalpine fir Biophysical Settings, and (3) in late-seral open for the two Douglas-fir and the ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir Biophysical Settings. Vegetation-fuel classes are above desired in all other combinations. Long-term trends under Alternative 1 would be: decreasing early-seral, mid-seral closed, mid-seral open, and late-seral open in almost all Biophysical Settings due to tree growth and filling in of stand understories. Both Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 would: (1) increase area in early-seral for all BpS, (2) decrease area in mid-seral closed for all BpS, (3) increase area in mid-seral open for all but upper subalpine BpS, (4) increase area in late-seral open for all BpS, and (5) decrease area in late-seral closed in all Bps. Alternative 2 would bring about greater change than alternative 3 due largely to the greater acreage treated. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would move the vegetation-fuel classes toward the reference condition, but largely due to the small portion of the analysis area proposed for treatment there would still be relatively great differences between present and reference condition for many BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations. Purpose and Need: Forest health in terms of reduced susceptibility (increased resistance) of individual stands and the landscape to diseases and insects found within the project area of concern In chapter 3, (table 32. Alternative comparison for insects and diseases) we compare the three alternatives in terms of susceptibility to several insects and diseases that are impacting stands in the project area Under alternative 1, in the short term there would be little change from the current condition, which in general is (1) low and long-term decreasing risk for those insects and diseases dependent upon early seral trees such as the pines (e.g. mountain pine beetle), (2) higher and long-term increasing risk and impacts from those dependent upon Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce, and (3) relatively low but long-term increase in susceptibility to armillaria which affects all conifers but for which pines and western larch are more resistant than the other conifers. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would generally reduce susceptibility to insects and diseases in treated stands and on the landscape. Exceptions to this would be white pine blister rust, for which we cannot say that the treatments would directly reduce the disease and Douglas-fir beetle for which the prescribed burning may increase risk in the treated areas to a small degree and short period of time. Over the landscape, both alternatives would increase resistance to insects and diseases by increasing tree species diversity and age class diversity, reducing stocking and so increasing individual tree resistance, and modifying structures. Alternative 2 would reduce susceptibility to a greater degree than alternative 3, largely because a greater area is being treated. Transportation Under the no-action alternative, no changes would be made to the existing transportation network on and adjacent to the project area. There would be no changes to effects or impacts on the project transportation network. Alternatives 2 and 3 would use approximately 48.2 and 44.3 miles, respectively, of roads would access vegetation treatment units and connect with Montana State Highway 200. Existing roads would serve as project access and haul routes on nearly 45.6 miles under alternative 2 and 44.3 miles under alternative 3. Under alternative 2 another 2.6 miles of new roads would be constructed to access treatment units. Under alternative 3 approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. These roads would be closed (e.g., gates, barricades) during operations to limit use to operators only, and obliterated or rehabilitated immediately following vegetation treatments. Cumulative effects of past, present, and foreseeable actions are expected to have minor impacts on the project transportation network. Project haul routes would be maintained and improved in accordance with BMPs to accommodate haul vehicles. Sediment sites would be mitigated to reduce long-term sediment delivery. Annual road maintenance activities would also occur on National Forest System roads and also on adjacent State and private roads. Fire and Fuels The mechanical treatments proposed would reduce surface fuels, raise canopy base heights by reducing ladder fuels and stand density, resulting in modified fire behavior potential. The result would be safer, more efficient and direct initial attack of unwanted fires by fire suppression forces. The prescribed burn treatments would reduce fuels and break up contiguous vegetation to create a heterogeneous fuelscape so that areas with high fire behavior potential are interspersed with areas of mixed and low fire behavior potential, thereby limiting the potential for high-intensity crown fire to spread towards the WUI. Fire management has evolved over time and fire managers look for opportunities to manage fire for multiple objectives. Reintroducing fire to the landscape and allowing it to occur as a natural process is desired in order to move the landscape toward the desired condition as outlined in the LRMP. The Stonewall Vegetation Project would be important to the success of future fire suppression efforts and complements past treatments and those currently occurring or being proposed on adjacent federal, state and private lands. The following analysis issues or concerns were identified for this project during the scoping period. The alternatives will address the issues as follows. 1. Wildland Fire and Homes: Proposed treatments may be inefficient and ineffective in reducing home losses due to fire. Proposed treatments would reduce surface, ladder and crown fuels and change the fuel model profile, thereby decreasing the area with potential for flame lengths greater than four feet and reducing potential crown fire risk. In addition, alternative 2 or 3 would reduce the risk of wildfire impacts to adjacent private lands and other resource values. By treating these areas, they become more resilient to stand-replacing wildfire and allow greater protection within the WUI zone. 2. Fire Behavior: Proposed fuels reduction work will not reduce fire behavior. Fire modeling suggests the proposed treatments would effectively reduce fire behavior. Following implementation of a chosen alternative, the treated areas should exhibit surface fire under the modeled conditions, making fire suppression efforts safer and more effective. With these alternatives, desired fuel loadings and fire behavior characteristics would be achieved and natural or prescribed fire could occur with less risk. 3. Prescribed Burning: Concerns over risk of fire escaping burn boundaries during prescribed burning operations. All prescribed burning would occur when weather and fuel conditions are favorable. All burning would take place under the guidelines in the prescribed fire burn plan developed specifically for project-related burning activities. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality, contingency resources and potential escapes. Air Quality Wildfires are known to result in high levels of emissions and associated national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) violation and worst visibility. Vegetation management treatments provide the opportunity on a long-term basis to reduce the magnitude of wildfire air quality problems. According to (Wiedinmyer and Hurteau 2010) wide-scale prescribed fire application can reduce CO2 fire emissions for the western US by 18 to 25 percent. The total amount of pollutants released by prescribed burning under alternative 2 and 3 would be spread out over several years and would occur when emissions would be unlikely to have significant adverse effects on human health and visibility. After implementation, it is estimated that subsequent wildfires in the project area could produce less pollutants due to less fuel available to burn. All prescribed burning would be implemented in full compliance with Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) air program with coordination through the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group. All action alternatives would meet Forest Plan Standards for air quality by following coordination requirements. The project complies with the Federal Clean Air Act. Habitats of Special Concern Snags The forested landscape would experience additional bark beetle mortality from the ongoing mountain pine beetle (MPB) epidemic. The levels of additional mortality are a matter of speculation, but available research indicates that mountain pine beetle epidemics continue until the available bark beetle habitat is sufficiently reduced that epidemic levels can no longer be sustained (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980, Klein et al. 1978, Mitchell and Preisler 1991). Mountain pine beetles strongly favor infesting the trees of larger diameter each year and over the life of the infestation infesting smaller trees each year until the average host tree diameter declines to a point that the tree habitat cannot produce sufficient numbers of beetles to maintain the outbreak (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980). The outbreaks are relatively short, lasting about 6 years (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980). Given the magnitude of the mortality that has occurred in the project area as of the writing of this report, we suspect that the epidemic is declining. The lodgepole pine snags would start falling in three to five years after death (Bull 1983, Mitchell and Preisler 1998). Snag fall rates depend on tree species, tree size, cause of death, and environmental conditions that could affect the speed of bole decay (Bull 1983, Mitchell and Preisler 1998). For lodgepole pine, Bull (1983) found that eight years after death about 75 percent of the snags less than 25 cm had fallen and 42 percent of the snags greater than 25 cm had fallen. Mitchell and Preisler (1998) in their study of mountain pine beetle killed snags in Oregon found that tree size was not a factor in unthinned stands and that in unthinned stands, 50 percent were down in 9 years and 90 percent were down in 14 years. In the short term, snag numbers would be very high, but in the long-term snag numbers would decline greatly as the lodgepole pine snags fall down. As discussed and displayed above, given the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic, snags in the project area are abundant and far exceed forest plan requirements. Under alternative 2, the intermediate and regeneration treatments would reduce snag levels to the forest plan requirements within the treatment units and the mixed-severity prescribed burns would increase snag levels within the burn units. After the treatments are done, snag levels would slightly decrease in the 3rd-order drainage 0203, slightly increase in the 3rd-order drainage 0204A, and slightly increase in the project area. They would still exceed 19 times the forest plan requirements. Under alternative 3, the intermediate and regeneration treatments would reduce snag levels to the forest plan requirements and the prescribed burns would increase snag levels. After the treatments are done, snag levels would slightly decrease in the 3rd-order drainage 0203, slightly increase in the 3rd-order drainage 0204A, and slightly increase in the project area. They would still exceed 20 times the forest plan requirements. Old Growth Effects to designated old growth in the two 3rd-order drainage are the same under all alternatives because no activities are proposed in designated old growth in these drainages. Following the process described above, about five percent of each 3rd-order drainage is designated to manage as old growth. All old growth would continue to develop successionally under all alternatives. Changes would be slight in the short term, but could be substantial in the long term. Single-story and two-story stands would become more multi-story. Closed canopies would remain closed, and open stands would become closed over time. Down woody fuels would continue to accumulate. About 63 percent of the designated old growth is Douglas-fir type. With continuing succession, more small trees would become established with the species composition trending toward subalpine fir (Fischer and Clayton 1983). These stands are susceptible to Douglas-fir beetle (DFB), western spruce budworm (WSB), and root disease. ADS data appears to indicate that DFB has consistently declined in recent years, while WSB infestation was extensive in 2009, substantially less was recorded in 2010 (Amell 2012). Douglas-fir beetle tends to infest large and old Douglas-fir and heavily stocked stands. Their impacts can also be affected by weather conditions, for example droughts that reduce host tree vigor. With increasing stocking, tree size and age over time, we can expect DFB to continue to impact the stands to some degree, increasing with the next droughty period. Since forests in the area, including the old growth stands, are progressing toward dominance by Douglas-fir and subalpine fir, we can expect the impacts of WSB to continue if not increase. Diseases would continue to impact stands at current levels. In the long term, dense forest conditions with multiple-layer stands and increasing surface fuels would support increasingly intense fire behavior and severe fire effects (Buhl 2012). Stand replacement fire would become more likely on the landscape and old growth stands more susceptible to the impacts. No designated old growth in 3rd-order drainages would be treated under any alternative. Forest Plan direction regarding old growth would be met. Under alternative 2 outside of the 3rd-order drainages, three stands (42201139, 42201147, and 42201152) that may potentially be old growth would be prescribed burned; one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (41502089) would be prescribed burned, and one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (42303103) would be thinned and prescribed burned. Under alternative 3 outside of the 3rd-order drainages, one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (41502089) would be prescribe burned, and one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (42303103) would be partially thinned and the fuels burned. Stands proposed for treatment would be changed by the treatments, with species compositions “pushed” toward dominance by seral fire-tolerant conifers, and stand structures “pushed” to or toward open, but still multi-story, structures with relatively flat diameter distributions. Treated potential and verified old growth stands would still qualify as old growth following the treatments. Wildlife Overview of Issues The following issues were identified as a result of public scoping and used to develop alternatives to the proposed action. Also, these issues as well as other issue indicators identified to measure potential impacts to wildlife from alternatives considered in the project environmental impact statement are displayed in the following table. Effect indicators are collectively used to assess species viability or population changes. · Restoration of vegetation communities · Grizzly bear habitat impacts · Elk security cover and the LRMP standard. · Lynx habitat: Designated Critical Habitat and Stand Initiation Phase acreage · Wildfire hazard, risk, and fuels · Habitats including ponderosa pine, western larch and aspen: maintenance or restoration · Road impacts to elk and grizzly bear habitat as well as disturbance factors  Species Indicator Threatened and Endangered Species Grizzly Bear Effects to individuals and changes in security cover and potential conflicts with humans. Security Core habitat, Open Road Density (ORD) and Total Road Density (TRD) are specific measures used to evaluate changes within the recovery area, whereas changes in cover and forage within and outside the NCDE are assessed. Canada Lynx Effects to individuals and acres of stand initiation, multi-story and mid-seral habitat affected in Lynx Analysis Units (LAU’s bl-7 and bl-8). Compliance with the Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD) standards and guidelines. Wolverine Effects to individuals and acres of natal denning and foraging habitat. Availability of remote and dispersal habitat and changes in connectivity and human access. Sensitive and Federal Candidate Species Gray Wolf Effects to individuals and changes in big game. Den, rendezvous and foraging habitat affected. Fisher Effects to individuals and acres of den, rest and foraging habitat. Changes in human access. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat Effects to individuals and acres of and effect to foraging habitat. Bald Eagle Effects to individuals, suitable nest habitat affected, effects to reproduction and nest and foraging habitat availability. Black-backed Woodpecker Effects to individuals, acres of suitable habitat, changes in quality and distribution of suitable snag habitat. Flammulated Owl Effects to individuals and acres of suitable habitat. Short and long-term changes in the quality of suitable open-canopy habitat, availability of large diameter (>=19 inches) snags. Western Toad Effects to individuals, acres of breeding and upland habitat affected. Management Indicator Species Northern Goshawk Effects to individuals and reproduction. Acres of nest and foraging habitat, nest, foraging and post-fledgling habitat affected, landscape level changes in habitat. Ability of the project area to support nesting pairs. Pileated Woodpecker Effects to individuals and reproduction. Acres of old growth habitat, existing and affected suitable habitat, changes in quality of foraging and nesting habitat, large snag (>=20 inches d.b.h.) availability and changes in project area distribution and use. Species Indicator Hairy Woodpecker Effects to individuals and reproduction, acres of suitable habitat, acres of suitable habitat affected, changes in quality of suitable habitat, snag (all size classes) availability. Changes in project area distribution and use American Marten Effects to individuals and reproduction. Existing and affected suitable habitat. Changes in the quality of den and foraging habitat, project area distribution and use, and snag and downed woody debris (DWD) availability. Commonly Hunted Species Elk Acres of hiding and thermal cover, habitat effectiveness, acres of security habitat, changes in access and mortality, acres of foraging habitat, and compliance with the Montana logging study. Changes in hunting opportunity. Mule Deer Acres of hiding and thermal cover, acres of foraging habitat, changes in project area distribution and use and hunting opportunities. Migratory Species Migratory Birds Changes (acres) in available habitat (Biophysical settings), compliance with MBTA.    Effects Determinations The following table displays effects determinations for wildlife by alternative SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Threatened and Endangered Species    Grizzly Bear The risk of stand replacing wildfire remains high, but no direct effects are anticipated and in the absence of wildfire, grizzly habitat would be largely unchanged. Because whitebark pine would likely continue to decline, implementation of alternative 1 may affect but is not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Improve landscape level foraging habitat, maintain whitebark pine, result in short and long-term reductions in cover and increase the risk of bear/human interaction. However, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may affect, but not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Improve landscape level foraging habitat, maintain whitebark pine, result in short and long-term reductions in cover and increase the risk of bear/human interaction. However, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may affect, but not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Canada Lynx No effect. The risk of wildfire remains high, however, because there are no direct effects and considering winter foraging and den habitat remains largely unchanged, implementation of alternative 1 would have no effect on Canada lynx. All treatments fall within a WUI, meet exceptions for VEG 05 and VEG 06, and comply with VEG 10. Treatments comply with VEG 01 and VEG 02, and fuel treatment projects that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5 and VEG S6 occur on less than 6 percent of the available habitat on the Helena Forest. Proposed treatments comply with Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007b), and there are no effects anticipated that were not considered in the BO (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). As a result implementation of alternative 2 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect Canada lynx. All treatments fall within a WUI, meet exceptions for VEG 05 and VEG 06, and comply with VEG 10. Treatments comply with VEG 01 and VEG 02, and fuel treatment projects that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5 and VEG S6 occur on less than 6 percent of the available habitat on the Helena Forest. Proposed treatments comply with Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007b), and there are no effects anticipated that were not considered in the BO (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). As a result implementation of alternative 3 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect Canada lynx. Canada Lynx Critical Habitat No effect. All treatments are consistent with the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). While some treatments within winter foraging habitat would occur within the WUI, treatments were designed All treatments are consistent with the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). While some treatments within winter foraging habitat would occur within the WUI, treatments were designed SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 considering standards to promote lynx conservation and collectively application of the standards for vegetation management are expected to avoid adverse effects to lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b p. 43). May affect, not likely to adversely affect Critical Habitat considering standards to promote lynx conservation and collectively application of the standards for vegetation management are expected to avoid adverse effects to lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b p. 43). May affect, not likely to adversely affect Critical Habitat Wolverine Although recent fires have reduced wolverine foraging and den habitat, suitable habitat would continue to be available. While the risk of future wildlife is greatest under this alternative, there is no way to predict if or when wildfire would occur. As a result and based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 1 would not jeopardize the wolverine. The Stonewall project was analyzed for effects to wolverines based on vegetation changes, movements across the landscape, and the distribution from human activities associated with the project. Based on the analysis provided and the following rationale, it is determined that implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project would not jeopardize the wolverine. The Stonewall project was analyzed for effects to wolverines based on vegetation changes, movements across the landscape, and the distribution from human activities associated with the project. Based on the analysis provided and the following rationale, it is determined that implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project would not jeopardize the wolverine. Sensitive and Federal Candidate Species    Gray Wolf Suitable wolf habitat, including remote areas for denning and big game populations would remain largely unchanged. As a result, and considering that human use and access is not expected to increase, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on wolves. No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Disturbance to foraging wolves during implementation could occur, but would involve short-term disturbance during implementation. Big game populations and wolf foraging opportunities would be maintained in the short term and increased in the long term. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Alternative 2 has the potential for short-term impacts to foraging or dispersing wolves. However, based on the analysis and the above rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Disturbance to foraging wolves during implementation could occur, but would involve short-term disturbance during implementation. Big game populations and wolf foraging opportunities would be maintained in the short term and increased in the long term. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced across the landscape, but at a reduced level from that of alternative 2. Alternative 3 has the potential for short-term impacts to foraging or dispersing wolves. However, based on the analysis and the above rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may impact individuals, SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 to cause a trend toward federal listing for the gray wolf. but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for the gray wolf. Fisher Suitable habitat would be largely maintained. Risk of stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Because there are no direct effects anticipated and considering suitable fisher habitat would remain relatively unchanged, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on fisher. Approximately 88 percent of the existing suitable habitat would be maintained. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors as well as prey availability would be maintained and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. The action alternatives would reduce fisher habitat by 11 to 12 percent and alter the structural conditions on approximately 38 percent of the existing fisher habitat. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for fisher. Approximately 91 percent of the existing suitable habitat would be maintained. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors as well as prey availability would be maintained and the risk of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced under this alternative when compared to no action. The action alternatives would reduce fisher habitat by 9 to 10 percent and alter the structural conditions on approximately 24 to 25 percent of the existing fisher habitat. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for fisher. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat No impact. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected and foraging habitat would be largely unchanged. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. The action alternatives would affect suitable habitat on 35 percent of the project area. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend towards federal listing for the Townsend’s big-eared bat. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected A total of 8,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat would be affected by treatment. No mortality is anticipated although short-term disturbance from smoke to foraging bats could occur. Available foraging habitat would be widespread and the risk of stand replacing wildfire The action alternatives would affect suitable habitat on 27 percent of the project area. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend towards federal listing for the Townsend’s big-eared bat. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected. A total of 6,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat would be affected by treatment. No mortality is anticipated although short-term disturbance from smoke to foraging bats could occur. Available foraging habitat would be widespread and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 is lowest under this alternative. Bald Eagle No impact. No anticipated impacts to the existing eagle nest, although the risk of wildfire is highest under this alternative. Existing habitat in the project area habitat would be largely unaffected. As a result alternative 2 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend toward federal listing for the bald eagle. No direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Approximately 100 acres of potentially suitable nest habitat would be reduced. Foraging habitat would not be treated, although short-term disturbance to foraging birds could occur. Untreated nest and foraging habitat would continue to be widely available. Risks of wildfire are lowest under this alternative. Existing habitat in the project area habitat would be largely unaffected. As a result alternative 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend toward federal listing for the bald eagle. No direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Approximately 100 acres of potentially suitable nest habitat would be reduced. Foraging habitat would not be treated, although short-term disturbance to foraging birds could occur. Untreated nest and foraging habitat would continue to be widely available. Risks of wildfire would be reduced when compared to no action. Black-backed Woodpecker No impact. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. Flammulated Owl May impact individuals, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing or cause a loss of viability. Suitable flammulated owl habitat would continue to decline under this alternative. While large diameter nest trees would increase in the short term, availability would decline over the long term. The likelihood of high intensity wildfire is greatest under this alternative. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the flammulated owl. Owl habitat would be restored or created on almost 4,200 acres or 31 percent of the dry forest community. Treatments would promote ponderosa pine and potential nest trees across the landscape and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the flammulated owl. Owl habitat would be restored or created on almost 2,800 acres or 21 percent of the dry forest community. Treatments would promote ponderosa pine and potential nest trees across the landscape and reduce the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire when compared to no action. Western Toad No impact. Western boreal toads and their habitat would not be affected. The risk of stand May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing. SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 replacing wildfire and a long-term reduction in breeding and upland habitat is highest under this alternative. Suitable habitat would continue to occur on sites treated and long-term foraging habitat would be improved. The likelihood of impacts to breeding and upland habitat from high severity wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Suitable habitat would continue to occur on sites treated and long-term foraging habitat would be improved. The likelihood of impacts to breeding and upland habitat from high severity wildfire would be reduced when compared to no action. Management Indicator Species    Northern Goshawk Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Suitable nest habitat would increase, although landscape diversity associated with foraging and post-fledging habitat would be largely unchanged. Risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable nest habitat is highest under this alternative. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Suitable nest, forage and PFA habitat would occur in all affected drainages and landscape conditions resulting from treatment are consistent with goshawk use. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat is lowest under this alternative. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Suitable nest, forage and PFA habitat would occur in all affected drainages and landscape conditions resulting from treatment are consistent with goshawk use. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat would be reduced. Pileated Woodpecker and Hairy Woodpecker Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated or hairy woodpeckers. Suitable snags and nesting and foraging habitat would be maintained and continue to be widely available. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated or hairy woodpeckers. A long-term reduction in habitat would occur on 540 acres, whereas the quality of suitable habitat would be reduced for 10 to 20 years on 2,666 acres. Over the long term restoration of open grown ponderosa pine and western larch may improve habitat on 5,700 acres and the risk of stand replacing wildfire Is lowest under this alternative. Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated or hairy woodpeckers. A long-term reduction in habitat would occur on 200 acres, whereas the quality of suitable habitat would be reduced for 10 to 20 years on 1,920 acres. Over the long term restoration of open grown ponderosa pine and western larch may improve habitat on 4,500 acres and the risk of stand replacing wildfire Is reduced under this alternative. American Marten Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Existing habitat would be maintained. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Treatments would improve species and landscape diversity, and maintain 93 Not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Treatments would improve species and landscape diversity, and maintain 96 SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 highest under this alternative. percent of the suitable habitat over the long-term. Also the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. percent of the suitable habitat over the long term. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. Commonly Hunted Species    Elk In the Beaver Creek unit hiding cover would continue to be available to meet the 50 percent level of Forest Plan standard 3. Due to the effects of the 2003 Snow Talon fire, the Keep Cool unit is below and would continue to be below the 50 percent level of Forest Plan standard 3. With continued MPB mortality, hiding and thermal cover within both units would continue to decline. While forage availability may increase in some areas, due to continued fire suppression and overstocked stand conditions, overall forage availability would continue to be low. Due to the reduced cover conditions, neither herd unit meets Forest Plan standard 4a for big game security. Cover would continue to decline, however, it is expected that available habitat would continue to support desired levels of elk. Finally, due to increased fuel loading, the risk of a long-term loss of cover from stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative.  Herd numbers would be largely unchanged. Effects of predation would be largely unchanged. The risk of a long-term reduction in cover from wildfire is highest under this alternative. Treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. This alternative would require a site-specific, nonsignificant forest plan amendment for standards 3 and 4(a) for the reductions in elk hiding cover and thermal cover. Hunting opportunities would be maintained and based on the analysis presented above and the following rationale, adequate elk habitat would continue to be available within both units to support desired levels of elk.  · Implementation would result in both short- and long-term increases in available forage on approximately eleven percent of the combined herd units, including increases on summer, transition and winter range. The increase in forage is expected to maintain or improve herd health. · There would be no increase in public access or changes to elk security habitat. · Within the combined herd units approximately 89 percent of the existing hiding cover and 86 Treatments proposed under alternative 3 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. This alternative would require a site-specific, nonsignificant forest plan amendment for standards 3 and 4(a) for the reductions in e Hunting opportunities would be maintained and based on the analysis presented above and the following rationale, adequate elk habitat would continue to be available within both units to support desired levels of elk. · Implementation would result in both short and long-term increases in available forage on approximately eleven percent of the combined herd units, including increases on summer, transition and winter range. The increase in forage is expected to maintain or improve herd health. · There would be no increase in public access or changes to elk security habitat. · Within the combined herd units, approximately 93 percent of the existing hiding cover and 86 percent of the existing winter range thermal cover would be maintained. Cover would continue to be available within SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 percent of the existing thermal cover would be maintained. Cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment units and across the landscape. · Past wildfires have greatly reduced project area elk habitat and much of the remaining habitat is at risk. Implementation of alternative 2 would reduce future wildfire risk.  It is believed that active management is necessary to address fuel loading, species diversity and insect and disease concerns. Due to the predominance of mature forest, limited disturbance and reduced forage, some management is necessary to maintain herd health and increase elk populations within the elk management unit (MFWP 2004). Collectively, the treatments proposed under this alternative are designed to address these concerns and the long-term benefits associated with the increased forage availability and reduced wildfire risk, are believed to outweigh the risks associated with the anticipated reduction in cover. and adjacent to treatment units and across the landscape. · Past wildfires have greatly reduced project area elk habitat and much of the remaining habitat is at risk. Implementation of alternative 3 would reduce future wildfire risk.  It is believed that active management is necessary to address fuel loading, species diversity and insect and disease concerns. Due to the predominance of mature forest, limited disturbance and reduced forage, some management is necessary to maintain herd health and increase elk populations within the elk management unit (MFWP 2004). Collectively, the treatments proposed under this alternative are designed to address these concerns and the long-term benefits associated with the increased forage availability and reduced wildfire risk, are believed to outweigh the risks associated with the anticipated reduction in cover. Mule Deer Deer cover on winter, transition and summer ranges would be altered due to continued MPB mortality. Forage availability would increase somewhat but would continue to remain low, and over the long-term, herd health would not be expected to improve. Adequate forage and cover would continue to be available to support existing populations Treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce deer hiding and thermal cover and increase deer forage. Based on the analysis presented previously and the following rationale, adequate cover would continue to be available to support existing populations, whereas foraging availability would increase over the short and long term. Hunting Treatments proposed under alternative 3 would reduce deer hiding and thermal cover and increase deer forage. Based on the analysis presented previously and the following rationale, adequate cover would continue to be available to support existing populations, whereas foraging availability would increase over the short and long term. Hunting opportunities SPECIES ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 and maintain hunting opportunities. opportunities would be maintained. would be maintained. Migratory Species    Migratory Birds Migratory bird habitat would remain largely unchanged. This alternative complies with the MBTA. Project design features are in place to maintain migratory bird habitat and reduce potential mortality. This alternative complies with the MBTA. Project design features are in place to maintain migratory bird habitat and reduce potential mortality. This alternative complies with the MBTA.   Plants Alternative 1 would have no new soil disturbing activities that would disturb sensitive plant populations. However, alternative 1 does not propose activities that modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Consequently, there remains a higher risk of a large, stand-replacing fire that could result in effects to herbaceous sensitive species habitat. Under alternative 1 whitebark pine would not increase in the short term and is expected to decline from present levels in the long term. Alternatives 2 and 3 include soil disturbing activities with the potential to affect unknown herbaceous sensitive plant populations. Alternatives 2 and 3 address the purpose and need by proposing activities that modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Alternative 2 would affect more acres than alternative 3. The proposed actions are designed to reduce potential for stand-replacing wildfire events in the treated stands. Reducing potential for stand replacing events may reduce wildfire impacts to specific resources. Proposed activities under alternatives 2 and 3 are consistent with recommendations for restoration of whitebark pine ecosystems, and in treated areas whitebark pine would increase in the short term with the increase extending into the long term. There are no known occurrences of herbaceous sensitive plants in the project area and there is a project design feature in place to protect whitebark pine; therefore, direct and indirect effects are limited. Cumulative effects are not expected to contribute to change in status or viability of sensitive plants, under any of the alternatives. No downward trend in population numbers or density, or downward trend in habitat capability that would reduce the existing distribution of any of the sensitive plant species discussed in this analysis, is expected under any of the alternatives. Summary of determination of effects to sensitive plant species is displayed in the following table. Species Common name Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Roundleaf orchid MII* MII MII Scalloped moonwort MII MII MII Peculiar moonwort MII MII MII Lesser yellow lady’s slipper MII MII MII Sparrow egg lady’s slipper MII MII MII Howell’s gumweed MII MII MII Hall’s rush MII MII MII Missoula phlox MII MII MII Whitebark pine MII MII MII *May impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss of viability to the population or species. Noxious Weeds While the spread of noxious weeds would continue under all alternatives, the rate of spread could potentially be faster in areas proposed for treatments, particularly areas to be thinned and burned. Potential impacts would be greatest under alternative 2 followed by alternative 3. Weed management would continue as in the past, however, activities proposed for the Stonewall Project add a layer of ground disturbance and therefore requires additional management for weeds. Areas of ground disturbance would be monitored for weed infestations and treated as appropriate, in accordance with the Helena National Forest Weed Treatment Project FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006) and Best Management Practices (BMPs) as specified in FSM 2080 (USDA Forest Service 2001), and the Forest Plan. Chemical weed treatment would be the primary treatment method in areas that are accessible by spray equipment. Biological control would apply in areas where the biological agents have optimal conditions for survival and expansion. In riparian areas, biological control would be emphasized where conditions for insect establishment are met. The effect of all treatment methods would be to control and contain existing and new infestations related to vegetation treatments. Soil The project area has a long management history that includes mining, grazing, and timber harvesting, which contributed to past ground disturbing activities that lead to the current conditions. The amount of detrimental soil disturbance in the units is mixed, but primarily is the result of past log landings and skid trails with the exception of four units that have residual effects from mining. The soils in the project area are generally coarse textured and resilient to compaction and erosion if operations take place during dry or frozen conditions. Ground cover is generally high in the project area and trending toward recovery where a thin organic layer exists. Coarse woody debris (CWD) levels also vary across units but are mostly within forest standards. There are multiple areas and units where large amounts of CWD signal a build-up of “locked-up” nutrients that are not plant or soil available. Alternative 2 has the most proposed treatment acres, followed by alternative 3. The action alternatives would result in potentially detrimental soil disturbance. However, based on research and professional experience, the positive effects of reintroducing fire far outweigh negative potential effects from disturbing a larger acreage of land. Watershed resources Primary water resource concerns stemming from this project include potential sediment conveyance to streams from project treatment units, and potential increased water yield due to removal of vegetation. Field sediment surveys identified road segments that were capable of delivering sediment to ephemeral, intermittent, or perennial stream channels. Under all project alternatives, overall reductions in sediment delivery to stream channels due to application of road BMPs and road obliteration are expected. Results suggest that under existing conditions, roughly 11 tons of sediment is delivered from roads to Lincoln, Beaver, and Keep Cool Creeks in an average year. With design features proposed in this project, sediment delivery from roads would remain one ton per year for Lincoln Creek, and reduce by about one ton each for Beaver and Keep Cool Creeks. Overall sediment delivery reduction for alternatives 2 and 3 during the project is estimated to be about 2 tons. While road improvement and road obliteration activities proposed in alternatives 2 and 3 may temporarily increase sediment delivery to stream channels, the design features proposed in this project would reduce sediment delivery to project area tributaries of the Blackfoot River over the long term, leading to improved conditions in project watersheds. The project has the potential to increase water yield in Lincoln Creek, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek. A water yield increase above 10 to 15 percent may be of concern in that the flow increase could accelerate bank erosion. Water yield increase modeling results suggest a potential increase of 2 to 8 percent in the affected watersheds. The project, when combined with other recent past and reasonably foreseeable actions was predicted to result in a theoretical combined increase in water yield from project watersheds of about 5 percent at the confluence with the Blackfoot River. These levels are within State DEQ recommendations for TMDL and non-TMDL streams elsewhere on the Helena National Forest. If predicted water yield increases did occur, the modest additional flow would likely improve stream temperature and in-stream physical habitat, rather than cause any degradation. The project is unlikely to significantly affect the condition of riparian areas in the project area, given the 50- to 100-foot riparian no-ignition buffers in place for all action alternatives. The project is unlikely to affect the condition of any wetlands found in the project area, in that these areas would either be avoided entirely, or would be treated only by hand crews or by equipment during winter operating conditions. In summary, the proposed project would have relatively minor impacts to water resources in the project watersheds under the action alternatives. Through implementation of design features and application of BMPs, the project alternatives would most likely reduce short- and long-term sediment delivery to stream channels, improving or maintaining water quality in the Blackfoot River headwaters watershed. Alternatives 2 and 3 would also reduce long-term sediment delivery through improving road BMPs at stream crossings. Water yield change due to proposed project activities is predicted to be at the margins of detectability and is not anticipated to have any deleterious effects on channel stability or water quality. Fish habitat Alternative 1 (no action) would not promote a change in existing conditions within the analysis area. While this alternative meets the Forest Plan direction of “no measurable effect”, it does nothing to help ensure movement toward desired conditions. Because many streams are currently nonfunctioning or functioning at risk, alternative 1, when considered with other current, past and reasonably foreseeable actions could work cumulatively with the management activities/natural events discussed above to limit the potential to achieve healthy population densities in certain populations. Alternatives 2 and 3 would promote improvement in stream conditions through long-term reductions in sediment delivery and physical impacts to stream channels, which would promote positive shifts in stream function across the analysis area. Therefore, the effects of the Stonewall Vegetation Project proposed actions when considered cumulatively with other past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions should promote the attainment of better habitat conditions, and more abundant and resilient aquatic populations. The analysis used a practical approach outlined in Ruggiero et al. (1994) and Region 1 guidance (Draft 01/30/2004) in conjunction with criteria established by Rieman et al. (1993). Selected habitat attributes considered both ecologically significant to fish and sensitive to land management disturbances are borrowed from Overton et al. (1995) and Region 1 guidance (Draft 1/30/2004). The population consists of both fluvial and resident components Pierce et al. (1997). Radio tracking of WCT indicates wide-ranging movements and use of various tributaries for spawning (Pierce et al. 2004). This analysis predicts a short-term change in substrate composition risks, some minor downward trend in incubation and fry emergence success (birth rate) to the population before recovering to an improved trend over baseline after 3 years. Western cutthroat trout recruitment is likely more than adequate to offset minor short-term sediment increases near the populations in Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek. In the long term, treating hydrologically connected roads helps recover gravel quality slightly over baseline conditions. Therefore, there is some minimal risk to viability for this Western cutthroat trout population in the short-term with a long-term trend of maintaining reproductive habitat within the acceptable range of variation. The Biological Effects Determination for westslope cutthroat trout and western pearlshell mussel, if implementing alternative 2 or 3 is: May impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss of viability to the population or species. The Biological Analysis Determinations for bull trout and bull trout critical habitat is: May effect, not likely to adversely affect. Recreation Alternative 1, no action would have no direct or cumulative effects to recreation resources. The purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project “…improving the mix of vegetation and structure across the landscape so that it is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects; modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape; enhancing and restoring aspen, western larch and ponderosa pine species and habitats; utilizing the economic value of trees through removal; and integrating restoration with socioeconomic considerations” would not be addressed. Potential long-term indirect effects to recreation resources would be due to the ongoing risk of severe wildfire that could lead to changes in the recreation settings, visual qualities and naturalness within the roadless expanse. Alternatives 2 and 3 propose actions would have short-term direct effects to recreation resources during project implementation such as limited access to specific areas and increased presence of people and noise within the project area. Project design features are in place to limit potential affects. The proposed treatments would address the purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, resulting in a more diverse, resilient and sustainable Forest ecosystem with reduction in risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire. Alternative 2 treats more acres and would have more effects than alternative 3. The long-term indirect effects to recreation would be generally beneficial and help to maintain the existing recreation settings and scenic qualities within the project area. Cumulative effects to recreation resources would generally be short term, occurring during project implementation, and would relate to an increased presence of people, vehicles and the associated noise that may affect the recreation experience. Longer-term cumulative effects would impact the Pine Grove dispersed camping area, such as hazard tree removal and fence construction for a riparian exclosure, in addition to the actions proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project. These effects would remain until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the vegetation treatment activities, approximately 3-5 years, but would remain consistent with Roaded Natural ROS class (p.5). There would be no effects to the Lincoln Gulch IRA and fewer acres treated within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA. Inventoried Roadless Areas Alternative 1, no action would have no direct or cumulative effects to roadless resources. Potential long-term indirect effects to roadless resources would be due to the ongoing risk of severe wildfire that could lead to changes in the recreation settings, visual qualities and naturalness within the roadless expanse. Alternatives 2 and 3 would have short-term direct impacts to roadless resources during project implementation such as increased presence of people and noise within the project area. Project design features are in place to limit potential effects. The proposed treatments would result in a more diverse, resilient and sustainable forest ecosystem with a reduction in risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire. The long-term indirect effects from the action alternatives to roadless resources would be generally beneficial and help to maintain the existing recreation settings and scenic qualities within the project area. Alternative 2 proposes prescribed fire on 4,182 acres (about 0.5 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan Inventoried Roadless Area and on 664 acres (about 3.8 percent) within the Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Area. Alternative 3 proposed on 3,565 acres (about 0.4 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan IRA. The Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Area would not be treated. Cumulatively there may be short-term impacts to solitude and undeveloped character with long-term benefits to naturalness throughout the IRA. Additional management activities within the IRA including travel planning, weed treatments and livestock grazing would also occur. These activities are compatible with the management of roadless resources and may cumulatively represent short-term impacts to solitude throughout the IRA due to the presence of people. Visual The characteristic landscape is expected to continue to perpetuate. Management activity viewed disturbances would increase when considering all viewed units proposed for treatment. However, with the project design features the VQOs would be met. Units where dead trees would be removed would ultimately look similar to the end result of the natural decay cycle. This alternative would decrease the length of time the dead trees are viewed in the landscape. Cumulative effects for this alternative are expected to be similar to alternative 2, with fewer acres impacted by alternative 3. Both action alternatives would allow the VQOs to be met and would be in compliance with the Forest Plan and other regulations with the implementation of the visual design features. Cultural The no-action alternative would have an undesired effect on cultural resources. Most significant of these is the increased risk of damage to cultural resources from catastrophic wildfires resulting in artifact damage, wooden structure and feature loss, and loss of site integrity through erosion. Alternatives 2 and 3 could have both negative and positive impacts on cultural resources within the project area. There would be no adverse or negative effects with implantation of project design features and mitigation measures. The negative effects are the possibility of cultural resources damage from ground disturbance from the use of heavy machinery, log and tree removal, road construction, and the heat damage to resources from prescribed fires. The loss of vegetation can indirectly lead to vandalism to cultural resources because of the increased visibility. Project design features would mitigate adverse effects to cultural resources within the project area. Positive effects include the reduction of fuels that could result in fire damaged cultural resources and increased erosion of archaeological sites. Alternatives 2 or 3 would meet the Helena National Forest management goals for cultural resources by reducing the risk of fire. Damages to cultural resources from wildfires, suppression efforts and erosion, are irreversible losses of cultural resources. With project design features the project is anticipated to have no adverse effect. If additional cultural resources are discovered during implementation of this project, work should cease in the area and a Forest Archaeologist would be contacted. Work in the area could only resume if mitigation measures can be determined and/or re-evaluated if necessary. Economic Financial Efficiency Project feasibility and financial efficiency indicates that both action alternatives are financially inefficient (negative Present Net Value (PNV)) when including all activities associated with the analysis. Both action alternatives are feasible when considering only timber harvest and the required design criteria. Alternative 2 has the highest PNV for the timber harvest and required design criteria at positive $178 thousand and negative $1.2 million when considering all proposed activities. For alternative 3, the PNV for the timber sale and required design criteria is positive $68 thousand for the timber harvest and negative $1.1 million for all proposed activities. The no-action alternative has no costs or revenues associated with it. A reduction of financial PNV in any alternative as compared to the most efficient solution is a component of the economic trade-off, or opportunity cost, of achieving that alternative. The no-action alternative would not harvest timber or take other restorative actions and, therefore, incur no costs. As indicated earlier, many of the values associated with natural resource management (e.g., reduced fuel loadings for future reduced fire severity, improving vegetative species mix across the landscape) are nonmarket benefits. Economic Impact The no-action alternative would not change jobs or income because there are no proposed project activities associated with this alternative. Alternative 2 proposes harvest of 22,022 hundred cubic feet (Ccf) of timber products and could result in a total of 171 jobs and labor income at $7.7 million over the life of the project. The annual effects are greatest with this alternative since it has the most timber harvest. If the harvest takes longer than anticipated, the total impacts would remain the same, but the annual contributions would be reduced. Approximately 134 direct, indirect and induced jobs and $6.6 million of labor income are associated with the proposed timber harvest activities, with the rest associated with restoration activities. Alternative 3 proposes harvest of 14,299 Ccf of timber products could result in a total of 118 total jobs and labor income of $5.2 million over the life of the project. On an annual basis, this would amount to approximately 25 jobs per year over a period of 10 years, and $1.2 million annually in total labor income. Approximately 87 direct, indirect and induced jobs and $4.3 million of labor income would be associated with the timber harvest activities, with the rest associated with restoration activities. Environmental Justice More employment and labor income opportunities would be created by alternatives 2 and 3 when compared to no action. Implementation of any of the action alternatives would not likely adversely affect minority or low-income populations. Implementation of the no-action alternative maintains the status quo and provides no additional employment or income in the economic impact area. The Executive Order also directs agencies to consider patterns of subsistence hunting and fishing when an action proposed by an agency has the potential to affect fish or wildlife. There are no Native American Reservations or designated Native American hunting grounds located in or near the analysis area. None of the alternatives restrict or alter opportunities for subsistence hunting and fishing by Native American tribes. Tribes holding treaty rights for hunting and fishing on the Helena National Forest are included on the project mailing list and have the opportunity to provide comments on this project.    This page left blank intentionally Chapter 3. Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences Introduction This section presents the biological, physical and socioeconomic environments of the affected project area and the potential changes to those environments due to implementation of the alternatives. It also presents the scientific and analytical basis for comparing the alternatives as described in Chapter 2. This chapter is arranged by resource area, starting with an overall introduction to vegetation to provide the reader a better understanding of the overall vegetative condition. Following each resource description is a discussion of the potential effects (environmental consequences) to the resources associated with the implementation of each alternative. Potential effects, including direct, indirect, and cumulative effects are disclosed. Effects are quantified, where possible, and qualitative discussions are also included. This analysis uses best available science, but recognizes that opposing science exists. A literature review of opposing science sent to the project by the public in scoping responses, and the Forest Service accompanying response, is available in the project record at the Lincoln Ranger District. This DEIS incorporates by reference the resource specialist reports in the project record (40 CFR 1502.21). Specialist reports contain detailed data, executive summaries, regulatory framework, assumptions and methodologies, analyses, conclusions, maps, references, and technical documentation that the resource specialists relied upon to reach conclusions in the DEIS. This DEIS incorporates the Forest Plan by reference and tiers to the FEIS completed for the Forest Plan, and amendments. The discussions of resources and potential effects take advantage of existing information included in the Forest Plan and other sources as indicated. Where applicable, such information is briefly summarized and referenced to minimize duplication. The planning record includes all project-specific information such as resource reports, ecosystem analyses, and other results of field investigations. The record also contains information resulting from public involvement efforts. The planning record is available for review by contacting the Helena National Forest office. Analyzing Environmental Consequences Environmental consequences are the effects of implementing an alternative on the biological, physical, economic, and social environment. The Council of Environmental Quality regulations implementing the National Environmental Policy Act include a number of specific categories to use for the analysis of environmental consequences. Several form the basis of much of the analysis that follows. They are explained briefly here. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects Direct environmental effects are those occurring at the same time and place as the initial cause or action. Indirect effects are those that occur later in time or are spatially removed from the activity, but would occur in the foreseeable future. The project is expected to be active over approximately the next 7 to 10 years, or from the time the decision is made to full implementation. Cumulative effects result when the incremental effects of actions are added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions, regardless of what agency or person undertakes such actions. Cumulative effects can result from individually minor, but collectively significant, actions taking place over a period of time. Past activities contributed to the existing condition and are considered in the affected environment. Present and reasonably foreseeable future actions are assessed along with the effects of the proposed action to determine whether significant cumulative effects may occur. This analysis is consistent with the Council on Environmental Quality memo from James L. Connaughton titled “Guidance on the Consideration of Past Actions in Cumulative Effects Analysis” dated June 24, 2005, incorporated by reference. In order to understand the contribution of past actions to the cumulative effects of the proposed action and alternatives, this analysis considers the current environmental conditions as a reflection of the aggregate impact of all prior human actions and natural events that affected the environment and might contribute to cumulative effects. The cumulative effects analysis does not attempt to quantify the effects of past human actions by adding up all prior actions on an action-by-action basis. There are several reasons for not taking this approach. First, a catalog and analysis of all past actions would be impractical to compile and unduly costly to obtain. Current conditions have been impacted by innumerable actions over the last century, and trying to isolate the individual actions that continue to have residual impacts would be nearly impossible. Second, providing the details of past actions on an individual basis would not be useful to predict the cumulative effects of the proposed action or alternatives. In fact, focusing on individual actions would be less accurate than looking at existing conditions, because there is limited information on the environmental impacts of individual past actions, and one cannot reasonably identify each and every action over the last century that has contributed to current conditions. Additionally, we cannot focus on the impacts of past human actions and ignore the important residual effects of past natural events, which may contribute to cumulative effects just as much as human actions. By looking at current conditions, we are sure to capture all the residual effects of past human actions and natural events, regardless of which particular action or event contributed those effects. Third, public scoping for this project did not identify any public interest or need for detailed information on individual past actions. Finally, the Council on Environmental Quality issued an interpretive memorandum on June 24, 2005 regarding analysis of past actions, which states, “agencies can conduct an adequate cumulative effects analysis by focusing on the current aggregate effects of past actions without delving into the historical details of individual past actions.” The cumulative effects analysis in this EIS is also consistent with Forest Service National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Regulations (36 CFR 220.4(f)) (July 24, 2008). The Helena National Forest Schedule of Proposed Actions (SOPA) was reviewed and forest and district personnel consulted to identify current and reasonably foreseeable projects on the Lincoln Ranger District. Contacts were made with adjacent Forests for proposed activities to be considered for affected resources cumulative effects analysis. Assessment areas vary by resource, and so do the other actions included in each cumulative effects analysis. Cumulative effects may include estimated effects from present logging (timber harvest, fuels treatments, road and landing construction and maintenance) and wildfire activities (e.g. suppression activities and the affected burn areas). Other actions may include but are not limited to grazing and fuels reduction and/or forest health projects in the vicinity. Ongoing activities include annual road maintenance, recreation trail use for hiking and snowmobiling, dispersed camping, hunting, and appropriate responses for fire suppression. The past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions considered for this project analysis are displayed in appendix C on figure C-1 (map) with impacts noted in tables C-4, C-5, and C-6. Vegetation Introduction In this section we describe the current vegetative condition and the factors shaping the current condition of the project area, as well as the desired condition and how the current vegetative condition relates to the desired condition. This section discusses how three alternative management scenarios would or would not move the vegetation from the current condition to or toward the desired condition. We discuss changes in stand density, stand structure, species composition and how those changes address the purpose and need for the project. Methodology In this section we identify information sources and assumptions used and briefly outline the analysis process. Information Sources A variety of information sources were used for qualitative and quantitative analysis. These information sources are listed below, and are explained in greater detail in volume 2, appendix B. Information sources used in this analysis includes: · Individual treatment unit diagnosis from field reviews completed by Helena National Forest personnel and last updated in fall 2009. These can be found in project records. · 30-meter Digital Elevation Model (DEM) Geographic Information Systems (GIS) raster layers from which we attained elevation, percent slope and aspect · National Agricultural Imagery Program (USDA Farm Service Agency 2011) aerial photo digital imagery · Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) grid-intensification sample plot data · Formal stand exam data collected in 1989, 1991, and 2010 and housed in the Field Sampled Vegetation database · Past management activity contained in the Forest Service Activity Tracking System (FACTS) database · Site visits during the summer of 2010 · GIS spatial data acquired from the Helena National Forest including: · VMAP spatial data including classification for tree dominance type, tree canopy cover class, and tree diameter · Helena National Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) Management Area boundaries · 2001-2010 aerial insect and disease detection (ADS) survey data · Property ownership boundaries · Project area boundary · Historic wildfires · Past management activities · Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) analysis data including classification for biophysical settings and vegetation-fuel classes · Other literature representing the best available science referenced in this report. Assumptions A number of assumptions are made in any analysis. These assumptions range from very small to large in scope. In this analysis we do not include as assumptions that natural processes which are certain to happen will continue to happen. For example, succession is a natural process constantly occurring due to differences in plants abilities to colonize, survive, grow, and propagate as conditions change. The process of succession will always happen, however we do include as assumptions factors such as changes in climate conditions and the occurrence or non-occurrence of disturbances which can modify the direction of succession. Read more about assumptions in volume 2, appendix B. Assumptions made in this analysis are listed below: · Current Forest Plan and other pertinent management direction would continue indefinitely into the future · In the long-term time frame of the analysis, no additional major disturbances, such as wildfire or bark beetle epidemics would occur, the analysis is of future risk and probable effects if the disturbance occurs and is not a future projection of the occurrence · Climate change has occurred to some degree and will continue to occur in the future (Amell 2012), ramifications of a changing climate are likely to be (Amell 2012, Karl et al. 2009): · More of the winter precipitation will fall as rain · Snow levels will raise in elevation · Snow melt will occur earlier in the spring · The late-spring to summer dry season (fire season) will increase in length · Summer dry seasons will be drier and warmer · Prolonged drought periods will increase, but their occurrence will probably be variable · Storms will become more intense with a larger portion of annual precipitation falling in the heaviest storms · Night-time minimum temperatures will increase · Growing season and number of frost-free days will increase · Wildfires are likely to become more frequent and the area burned averaged annually likely greater · Weather conditions conducive to bark beetle mortality are likely to become more frequent · Climate changes will most likely bring about some change in site characteristics leading to climax plant community changes and so Biophysical Setting changes, but the direction and magnitude of the changes are unknown and would be very small within the time frame of this analysis · FIA grid intensification plot data can provide reliable estimates of average vegetation attributes at a landscape-level · ADS data can provide a reasonable estimate of the magnitude and spatial location of tree damage and mortality on the landscape · Intensive (formal) stand exam data provide the most accurate estimates of individual stand attributes · Individual informal stand exams and diagnosis can provide reliable descriptions of stand conditions · Formal and informal field exams from 2009 and 2010 represent the current condition and formal exam data taken before that time should be adjusted for bark beetle mortality · The FACTS database contains the most current and accurate past management activity data · The accomplishment year for analysis purposes is 2012 · No unforeseen occurrences such as fire, blowdown, or insect mortality would occur from 2010 until the time of implementation · Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) modeling can provide a reasonable estimate of the magnitude and direction of proposed treatment effects on individual stands or on forest types · Remote-sensed data such as VMap can provide reliable landscape-level estimates of forest conditions and can be informative at the stand-level if used with caution · The Stonewall Vegetation Project area, at about 24,000 acres is sufficiently large to analyze and discuss landscape-level effects · Landscape-level desired conditions contained in the Stone Dry Vegetation Report (Milburn et al. 2006, Milburn et al. 2006) can also be directly applied to the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. Analysis Process In the following analysis we summarize the current condition and reference condition from the Stone Dry analysis as the current and desired condition in terms of Biophysical Setting (BpS) and vegetation-fuel class (VFC) for the landscape. We also display current conditions for several stands as examples of stand structures, species compositions, and stocking levels with discussion of how they do not represent the desired condition. We analyzed alternative effects by comparing landscape-level changes in vegetation-fuel classes for each BpS due to treatment unit changes in vegetation-fuel class. We compare the effects of treatments qualitatively and we also model the effects of treatments on stand structure, species compositions, and stocking levels for representative stands using available formal stand exam data and the Forest Vegetation Simulator program. We also used the Forest Vegetation Simulator Fire and Fuels Extension with stand exam data and FIA grid-intensification plot data to model changes in crown bulk density, canopy base height, and percent canopy cover for use in modeling fire and fuel effects (Buhl 2012). See the Fire and Fuels section for a discussion of fire and fuels effects. Overview of Issues Addressed The purpose and need for the project includes: · Improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects · Modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape · Enhance and restore aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine species and habitats · Utilize economic value of trees with economic removal · Integrate restoration with socioeconomic considerations On August 26, 2011 Region 1 Regional Forester Leslie A. C. Weldon designated whitebark pine as a sensitive species in the Region. Direction following the designation includes considering the species in new analysis. Indicators Indicators used in this analysis to discuss how the alternatives would address the purpose and need for the project as well as issues relating to wildlife identified from public comments are: · Within-stand changes in tree species compositions as a result of proposed treatments and the proportion of the analysis area on which quaking aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine would increase in presence · Landscape-level changes in species compositions as measured by the acres treated in each alternative with an emphasis on benefits to aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, and whitebark pine · Within-stand changes in stand structures and species compositions in terms of tree diameter distributions for proposed treatment type groups · Landscape-level changes in stand structures in terms of Biophysical Setting (BpS) and vegetation-fuel classes as measured by the acres and proportion of change within each BpS/vegetation fuel class combination · Forest health in terms of reduced susceptibility (increased resistance) of individual stands and the landscape to diseases and insects found within the project area of concern Affected Environment Stonewall Desired Condition In 2006, the Lincoln Ranger District completed a vegetation report (Stone Dry Vegetation Report, Milburn et al. 2006) as part of an ecosystem analysis at the watershed scale (EWAS) for the Stone-Dry area that includes the Stonewall project area. In the analysis, they used the Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) system to describe reference vegetative, fuel and fire conditions and to compare them to current conditions based on site visits (Milburn et al. 2009, FRCC 2005). The FRCC analysis for the area was updated in 2010 (Olson 2010) including updates to the biophysical settings and vegetation-fuel classifications. See the discussion in chapter 1for more information about biophysical settings, vegetation fuel classes, habitat types, insects and diseases and tree canopies. Existing Condition The existing condition of the 24,000 acre project area has been shaped by management activities including: (1) many years of fire suppression, (2) 3,473 acres of harvest/regeneration treatments that created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area, and (3) 1,660 acres of other tree-cutting from 1950 to present. In natural fire events, 87 acres were burned in the Snow/Talon Fire (2003), and 261 acres were burned in the Keep Cool Fire (2006). In addition, natural processes such as succession, and natural events such as droughts are always occurring. Table 10 that follows displays the existing condition information for proposed treatment units.  Table 10. Existing condition data for proposed treatment units DESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT SLOPE ASPECT ELEVATION FOREST TYPE SPECIES COMP ACRES EST. TPA O/S EST. TPA U/S EST. BA AVERAGE D.B.H. AGE MORTALITY RATING 1 6 35-60 E 47-52 DF 50DF/45LP/5PP 14 200-450 300-400 80-180 12" 100-175 High 1 7 35-60 E 47-52 DF 50DF/45LP/5PP 17 200-450 300-400 80-180 12" 100-175 High 1 8 35-60 E 47-52 LP 60LP/40DF/tracePP 62 200-450 300-400 80-180 12" 100-175 Severe 1 15 40-55 SW 48 DF 75DF/20PP/5LP/traceAS/ES 15 250 400 80-180 16" 100-120 Low-High 1 23 40-55 E 48-52 LP 60LP/40DF 29 275 0-100 80-180 12" 140 Severe 1 24 30-40 NE 52-54 LP 50LP/40DF/trace WL/PP 5 300-400 Trace 120-180 12" 140 Severe 1 26 40-60 E, SE 50-56 DF 65DF/35LP/5PP/ES/AF 65 300 Trace 120-200 14" 130 Severe 1 28 35 NW 53-55 LP 60LP/40DF 22 300 200-600 60-180 12" 120-150 Severe 1 30 15-45 E 52-57 DF 50DF/50LP 14 300 200-600 80-180 14" 85-150 High 1 31 15-45 E 52-57 DF 75DF/25LP/tracePP/AS 16 300 200-600 80-180 14" 85-150 High 1 32 15-45 E 52-57 DF 75DF/25LP/tracePP/AS 45 300 200-600 80-180 14" 85-150 High 1 33 45-55 NE 54-60 DF 60DF/40LP 17 400 200-600 140-200 14" 120 High 1 44 50 SW 48-56 DF 50DF/30PP/20LP 97 250-300 200 120-200 16" 120 High 1 45 50 SW 48-56 Mix 45LP/35DF/20PP 38 250-300 200 140-220 16" 120 Severe 1 46 0-30 SW 50 Mix 40DF/40LP/15PP/5AF/AS/ES 251 300 300-1000 80-200 16" 180-200 Severe 1 47 0-20 S 50 Mix 40DF/40LP/15PP/5AF/AS/ES 220 300 300-1000 80-200 16" 180-200 Severe DESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT SLOPE ASPECT ELEVATION FOREST TYPE SPECIES COMP ACRES EST. TPA O/S EST. TPA U/S EST. BA AVERAGE D.B.H. AGE MORTALITY RATING 1 54 45-55 NE 54-60 DF 60DF/40LP 20 400 200-600 140-200 14" 120 High 1 55 35-55 NE, SE 60-64 DF 50DF/40LP/10AF 29 350 200 120 14" 130 High 2 3 0-20 E, SE 46 LP 60LP/15DF/25AS/traceES 37 Trace 500 80-120 6" 45 Low 2 14 0-25 SW 48 Mix 30PP/30DF/15LP/10AS/5ES 11 400 200 40-100 9" 30 Low 2 16 30-50 SW 48 DF 90DF/10LP 3 Trace 1000 0 2" 20-30 Low 2 18 0-25 SW 46-48 LP 95LP/5DF/tracePP/WL/AS 21 Trace 800-1000 0 2" 29 Low 2 21 0-25 SW 46-48 LP 95LP/5DF/tracePP/WL/AS 6 Trace 800-1000 0 2" 29 Low 2 48 20-35 SW 51-58 Mix 40PP/35LP/15DF 141 400-500 100 120-140 8" 41 Low 2 49 20-35 SW 50-52 Mix 40DF/30PP/15LP/5AS 49 400-500 100 120-140 8" 41 Low 2 50 35-45 SW 51-54 DF 50DF/40DF/5LP/5PP/AS 49 400-500 100 120-140 8" 41 Low 2 51 20-35 SW 48-50 Mix 40DF/30PP/15LP/5AS 193 400-500 100 120-140 8" 41 Low 2 59 <35% E 60-62 LP WL/AF/LP 16 Trace 600 N/A 4-6" 41 Low 2 60 <35% N 46-50 LP LP/DF/WL 25 Trace 400-500 N/A 1-2" 19 Low 2 61 <35% NE 50-54 LP LP/WL/DF 34 Trace 600-800 N/A 2-3" 29 Low 2 62 <35% NW 52-57 DF DF/LP/AS 37 Trace 600-800 N/A 2-4" 12-20 Low 2 63 <35% E 57-62 LP LP/AF/DF 17 Trace 600-800 N/A 8" 41 Low 2 64 <35% N, NE 53-60 LP LP/AF/WL 30 Trace 600 N/A 1-2" 19 Low 2 65 <35% NE 56-60 LP LP/AF/DF 25 Trace 600-800 N/A 2-4" 44 Low DESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT SLOPE ASPECT ELEVATION FOREST TYPE SPECIES COMP ACRES EST. TPA O/S EST. TPA U/S EST. BA AVERAGE D.B.H. AGE MORTALITY RATING 2 66 <35% NE 52-56 AF AF/WL/LP 26 Trace 800 N/A 1-2" 19 Low 2 67 <35% NE 49-52 LP LP/DF/WL 20 Trace 400-500 N/A 1-2" 19 Low 2 68 <35% NE 57-59 LP LP/DF/WL 15 Trace 400-500 N/A 1-2" 19 Low 2 69 <35% E 50-55 LP LP/DF/WL 31 Trace 400-500 N/A 1-2" 19 Low 2 70 <35% E 48-51 LP LP/DF/WL 39 Trace 400-500 N/A 1-2" 22 Low 2 71 <35% SE 50-52 LP LP/DF/WL 40 Trace 400-500 N/A 1-2" 22 Low 2 72 <35% SE 48 LP LP/ES/AF 85 Trace 800 N/A 2-9" 49 Low 2 73 <35% SE 46-50 PP PP/DF/LP 33 Trace 600 N/A 4-8" 44 Moderate 2 75 <35% Flat 49 DF DF/LP/PP 148 Trace 600 N/A 2-4" 27 Low 3 1 0-35 E, NE 44-48 LP 80LP/20DF/trace PP/AS 96 300-400 200-1000 100-240 12-14" 75-95 Severe 3 9 0-30 NE,E 50-52 LP 85LP/15DF/traceAF 18 300-400 200-300 140 12" 100 Severe 3 11 0-10 NE 45 Mix 30LP/20AS/20PP/20DF/10ES 23 250 200-700 120-200 16" 85/30 Severe 3 12 0-10 NE 46 LP 50LP/20AS/10DF/15ES/5PP 80 300 200-600 120-140 14" 85/30 Severe 3 13 20-40 E 47 LP 85LP/15DF/traceAS/ES/AF 41 350 300-700 100-220 14" 100 Severe 3 20 5-35 SW 46-48 LP 80LP/20PP/traceDF/AS 32 250-400 200-600 120-200 16" 100 Severe 3 22 40-55 N 48-50 LP 65LP/30DF/5PP/traceWL/AS 30 350 200 180 14" 140 Severe 3 25 40-55 E 52-55 LP 75LP/25DF/traceAF 29 200-400 300 180 14" 120 Severe 3 29 10-35 E 50-55 LP 70LP/30DF 25 200 400-1000 80-180 11" 100 High 3 34 35-50 SE 54-60 LP 55LP/40DF/5AF 12 300 100-80-14" 130 Severe DESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT SLOPE ASPECT ELEVATION FOREST TYPE SPECIES COMP ACRES EST. TPA O/S EST. TPA U/S EST. BA AVERAGE D.B.H. AGE MORTALITY RATING 400 180 3 39 5-25 E to SW 48-53 LP 80LP/15DF/5AF/ES/PP 42 400 100-1000 100-260 12" 110 Severe 3 40 5-25 E to SW 48-53 LP 80LP/15DF/5AF/ES/PP 11 400 100-1000 100-260 12" 110 Severe 3 41 5-25 E to SW 48-53 LP 80LP/15DF/5AF/ES/PP 12 400 100-1000 100-260 12" 110 Severe 3 42 5-25 E to SW 48-53 LP 80LP/15DF/5AF/ES/PP 65 400 100-1000 100-260 12" 110 Severe 3 43 5-25 E to SW 48-53 LP 80LP/15DF/5AF/ES/PP 104 400 100-1000 100-260 12" 110 Severe 3 53 35-50 SE 54-60 LP 55LP/40DF/5AF 17 300 100-400 80-180 14" 130 Severe 3 57 5-20 SW 50-53 Mix 30PP/30DF/30LP/10AS 93 300 200 80-160 8" 47 Severe 3 58 15-35 SW 53-55 Mix 30PP/30DF/30LP/10AS 15 300 200 80-160 8" 47 Severe 4 10 5-15 NE 46-48 LP 90LP/5DF/5PP 18 300 250-700 120-140 14" 100 Severe 4 17 5-25 SW 48 LP 70LP/15DF/15PP/traceES/WL 38 200-300 300 120-220 16" 100 Severe 4 19 5-35 SW 46-48 LP 80LP/20PP/traceDF/AS 15 250-400 200-600 120-200 16" 100 Severe 4 27 35-50 NE, SE 52-55 LP 60LP/40DF/tracePP/WL 31 400 50-75 100-160 14" 120-140 Severe 4 35 45-55 NE 55-57 LP 85LP/10DF/5AF/ES 24 450 300-900 100-200 12" 120-140 Severe 4 36 35-65 NE, SE 56-59 LP 90LP/10DF/traceES/AF 20 300-400 200 100-200 14" 130 Severe 4 37 20-55 E 58-64 LP 80LP/20DF/traceAF 8 300-400 300-500 140-180 13" 130 Severe 4 38 20-55 E 58-64 LP 80LP/20DF/traceAF 7 300-400 300-500 140-180 13" 130 Severe DESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT SLOPE ASPECT ELEVATION FOREST TYPE SPECIES COMP ACRES EST. TPA O/S EST. TPA U/S EST. BA AVERAGE D.B.H. AGE MORTALITY RATING 4 52 20-55 E 58-64 LP 80LP/20DF/traceAF 22 300-400 300-500 140-180 13" 130 Severe 4 56 35-55 NE, SE 60-64 LP 80LP/15DF/5AF 17 350 200 120 14" 130 Severe 4 74 <35% SE 50-53 LP 75LP/25DF/traceAF 23 200-400 300 100-120 9-11" 120 Severe 5 4 0-30 E, SE 45-48 Mix 40LP/25ES/25DF/10AS/tracePP 7 250 400 200 10" 90 High 5 5 0-30 E, SE 45-48 Mix 40LP/25ES/25DF/10AS/tracePP 18 250 400 200 10" 90 High 6 2 25-55 E, SE 46-53 DF 60DF/30PP/10LP 146 100-400 100 40-180 14" 100-250 High 6 76 Variable Variable  DF 70DF/20LP/5AF/5WB 123 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable High 6 78 Variable Variable  DF 70DF/10PP/10LP 38 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable High 6 85 Variable Variable  DF 80DF/5PP/5LP/traceAF 143 Variable Variable Variable Variable 125 Low 7 80 Variable Variable  DF 80DF/10PP/5LP/traceAS 326 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low 7 86 Variable Variable  DF 90DF/10PP/traceAS 47 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Moderate 7 87 Variable Variable  LP 60LP/35DF/5AS 36 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Moderate 8 77 Variable Variable  LP 50LP/5AF/30DF/10PP 736 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-High 8 79 Variable Variable  LP 50LP/40DF/10PP/AS/WB/AF 337 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-High 8 81 Variable Variable  DF 70DF/15PP/15LP 629 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-High 8 82 Variable Variable  LP 70LP/15AF/15WB 776 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-High 8 83 Variable Variable  LP 70LP/15AF/15WB 457 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-High DESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT SLOPE ASPECT ELEVATION FOREST TYPE SPECIES COMP ACRES EST. TPA O/S EST. TPA U/S EST. BA AVERAGE D.B.H. AGE MORTALITY RATING 8 84 Variable Variable  DF 50DF/50LP/5PP/trace AF 831 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-Severe 8 88 Variable Variable  LP 50LP/20DF/20AF/10WB 892 Variable Variable Variable Variable Variable Low-Severe Asp – Aspect code: NE-northeast, E-east, SE-southeast, S-south, SW-southwest, W-west, NW-northwest Elev – Elevation in 100’s of feet Forest Type Code: DF-Douglas-fir, LP-lodgepole pine, Mix-mixed species, PP-ponderosa pine, AF-subalpine fir Species Comp – Tree species and percent composition: · AF-subalpine fir · AS-aspen · DF-Douglas-fir · ES-Engelmann spruce · LP-lodgepole pine · Mix-mixed species · PP-ponderosa pine · WB-whitebark pine · WL-western larch Est TPA O/S – Estimated trees per acre (TPA) overstory Est TPA U/S – Estimated trees per acre understory Est BA – Estimated basal area in ft2/acre Ave d.b.h. – Estimated average diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) in inches Age – Estimated stand age Mortality rating: Severe – estimated more than one-half of basal area dead, High – estimated from one-quarter to one-half of basal area dead, Low – estimated up to one-quarter of basal area dead Habitat Types The project area is heavily dominated by subalpine habitat types which cover about 69 percent of the area, Figure 17 and Table 11. Second in presence are Douglas-fir habitat types which cover about 18 percent of the area. Whitebark pine-subalpine fir and spruce habitat types each cover only about 0.3 percent of the area. The rest of the area is covered by rock, grass, meadows, water or private land. For the habitat type coverage in the project area, species such as ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, quaking aspen, western larch, and whitebark pine are always or almost always a seral species, and as such would decline in presence and eventually die out of the stands without disturbance (Pfister et al.1977, Fischer and Bradley 1987). Douglas-fir would be seral to subalpine fir on about 69 percent of the area. More discussion of habitat types is in chapter 1.  Title: Figure 22. Stonewall project area habitat typesFigure 17. Stonewall project area habitat types and units Table 11. Habitat types for each prescription group and treatment unit PRESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT NUMBER HABITAT TYPE ACRES 1 6 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 3 1 6 Douglas-fir/twinflower 11 1 7 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 7 1 7 Douglas-fir/twinflower 10 1 8 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 46 1 8 Douglas-fir/twinflower 15 1 15 Douglas-fir/snowberry 10 1 15 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 3 1 23 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 8 1 23 subalpine fir/beargrass 21 1 24 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 5 1 26 Douglas-fir/snowberry 39 1 26 subalpine fir/beargrass 14 1 26 subalpine fir/menziesia 12 1 28 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 21 1 30 Douglas-fir/twinflower 13 1 31 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 15 1 32 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 22 1 32 Douglas-fir/snowberry 10 1 32 Douglas-fir/twinflower 10 1 32 subalpine fir/Sitka alder 3 1 33 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 13 1 33 subalpine fir/huckleberry 2 1 44 unknown 17 1 44 Douglas-fir/snowberry 80 1 45 unknown 12 1 45 Douglas-fir/snowberry 22 1 45 subalpine fir/beargrass 3 1 46 Douglas-fir/pinegrass 3 1 46 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 54 1 46 subalpine fir/beargrass 25 1 46 subalpine fir/twinflower 169 1 47 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 2 1 47 Douglas-fir/snowberry 2 1 47 subalpine fir/beargrass 215 1 54 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 18 1 54 subalpine fir/menziesia 2 1 55 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 9 1 55 subalpine fir/menziesia 18 2 3 Douglas-fir/snowberry 33 2 3 Douglas-fir/twinflower 3 PRESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT NUMBER HABITAT TYPE ACRES 2 14 trees-rock 9 2 16 Douglas-fir/snowberry 2 2 18 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 20 2 21 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 6 2 48 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 103 2 48 Douglas-fir/snowberry 22 2 48 subalpine fir/beargrass 17 2 49 Douglas-fir/snowberry 6 2 49 subalpine fir/Sitka alder 43 2 50 Douglas-fir/snowberry 46 2 51 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 181 2 51 Douglas-fir/snowberry 9 2 51 subalpine fir/beargrass 3 2 59 subalpine fir/menziesia 16 2 60 subalpine fir/twinflower 25 2 61 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 33 2 62 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 20 2 62 subalpine fir/Sitka alder 17 2 63 subalpine fir/menziesia 17 2 64 subalpine fir/menziesia 30 2 65 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 3 2 65 subalpine fir/menziesia 22 2 66 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 2 2 66 subalpine fir/twinflower 25 2 67 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 20 2 68 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 13 2 68 subalpine fir/menziesia 2 2 69 subalpine fir/bedstraw 31 2 70 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 39 2 71 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 9 2 71 spruce-moist 30 2 72 subalpine fir/twinflower 85 2 73 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 33 2 75 subalpine fir/beargrass 145 2 75 subalpine fir/twinflower 2 3 1 Douglas-fir/snowberry 5 3 1 Douglas-fir/twinflower 88 3 1 pvt 2 3 9 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 18 3 11 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 12 3 11 subalpine fir/bluejoint 9 3 12 unknown 79 PRESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT NUMBER HABITAT TYPE ACRES 3 13 unknown 2 3 13 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 3 3 13 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 32 3 13 trees-rock 2 3 20 Douglas-fir/snowberry 20 3 20 subalpine fir/twinflower 12 3 22 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 27 3 22 subalpine fir/menziesia 2 3 25 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 23 3 25 subalpine fir/beargrass 4 3 25 subalpine fir/menziesia 2 3 29 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 20 3 29 Douglas-fir/twinflower 5 3 34 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 3 3 34 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 2 3 34 subalpine fir/twinflower 7 3 39 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 12 3 39 subalpine fir/beargrass 4 3 39 subalpine fir/pinegrass 4 3 39 subalpine fir/twinflower 21 3 40 subalpine fir/beargrass 9 3 41 subalpine fir/beargrass 10 3 41 subalpine fir/twinflower 2 3 42 Douglas-fir/pinegrass 3 3 42 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 19 3 42 subalpine fir/beargrass 10 3 42 subalpine fir/twinflower 32 3 43 Douglas-fir/pinegrass 6 3 43 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 7 3 43 subalpine fir/twinflower 92 3 53 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 13 3 53 subalpine fir/menziesia 4 3 57 Douglas-fir/snowberry 93 3 58 Douglas-fir/snowberry 15 4 10 subalpine fir/twinflower 18 4 17 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 28 4 17 trees-rock 8 4 19 subalpine fir/twinflower 15 4 27 Douglas-fir/snowberry 12 4 27 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 18 4 35 Douglas-fir/snowberry 5 4 35 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 18 PRESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT NUMBER HABITAT TYPE ACRES 4 36 subalpine fir/beargrass 15 4 36 subalpine fir/menziesia 5 4 37 subalpine fir/beargrass 6 4 37 subalpine fir/menziesia 2 4 38 subalpine fir/beargrass 7 4 52 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 3 4 52 subalpine fir/beargrass 12 4 52 subalpine fir/menziesia 7 4 56 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 14 4 56 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 2 4 74 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 15 4 74 subalpine fir/Sitka alder 6 5 4 Douglas-fir/twinflower 7 5 5 Douglas-fir/twinflower 9 5 5 subalpine fir/twinflower 9 6 2 Douglas-fir/snowberry 134 6 2 Douglas-fir/twinflower 3 6 2 subalpine fir/twinflower 2 6 2 spruce-moist 5 6 76 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 48 6 76 subalpine fir/beargrass 68 6 76 subalpine fir/menziesia 7 6 78 Douglas-fir/snowberry 30 6 78 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 8 6 85 Douglas-fir/snowberry 106 6 85 subalpine fir/beargrass 37 7 80 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 66 7 80 Douglas-fir/pinegrass 14 7 80 Douglas-fir/snowberry 243 7 80 subalpine fir/beargrass 3 7 86 Douglas-fir/snowberry 35 7 86 subalpine fir/beargrass 13 7 87 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 7 7 87 Douglas-fir/snowberry 8 7 87 subalpine fir/beargrass 11 7 87 subalpine fir/menziesia 5 7 87 subalpine fir/twinflower 6 8 77 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 17 8 77 Douglas-fir/snowberry 256 8 77 Douglas-fir/twinflower 32 8 77 pvt 5 8 77 subalpine fir/Sitka alder 25 PRESCRIPTION GROUP UNIT NUMBER HABITAT TYPE ACRES 8 77 subalpine fir/queencup beadlily 24 8 77 subalpine fir/beargrass 349 8 79 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 72 8 79 Douglas-fir/snowberry 76 8 79 grass-trees 8 8 79 subalpine fir/beargrass 180 8 81 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 43 8 81 Douglas-fir/snowberry 238 8 81 subalpine fir/beargrass 349 8 82 subalpine fir/beargrass 724 8 82 subalpine fir/menziesia 48 8 82 subalpine fir/twinflower 3 8 83 rock 57 8 83 subalpine fir/beargrass 295 8 83 subalpine fir/woodrush 31 8 83 trees-rock 74 8 84 Douglas-fir/huckleberry 2 8 84 Douglas-fir/pinegrass 168 8 84 Douglas-fir/snowberry 159 8 84 grass-trees 14 8 84 subalpine fir/beargrass 466 8 84 subalpine fir/menziesia 21 8 88 Douglas-fir/pinegrass 6 8 88 rock 51 8 88 subalpine fir/beargrass 471 8 88 subalpine fir/twinflower 11 8 88 subalpine fir/woodrush 101 8 88 trees-rock 225 Biophysical Settings Biophysical Settings are land delineations based on the physical setting, (e.g. elevation and aspect) and the potential vegetation community that can occupy the setting. A national team has established in the FRCC system a set of descriptions for BpS found within regions of the United States (FRCC 2005). HNF ecologists, fuel specialists, and silviculturists reviewed the BpS descriptions applicable to the Stone Dry area and determined that the descriptions could be used for the Stone Dry area without modification (Milburn et al. 2009). For the Stone Dry analysis, HNF personnel spatially assigned BpS based upon habitat type (Milburn et al. 2009). Table 12 identifies acres of biophysical settings by unit. Table 12. Unit biophysical setting acreages Unit Biophysical Setting Acres 1 Barren 3 1 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 134 10 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 44 Unit Biophysical Setting Acres 11 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 50 12 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 130 13 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 95 14 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 47 15 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 51 16 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 12 17 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 95 18 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 62 19 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 50 2 Barren 5 2 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 2 2 Mountain Shrubland 0 2 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 178 20 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 72 21 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 23 22 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 84 23 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 3 23 Mountain Shrubland 5 23 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 50 24 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 7 24 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 14 25 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 21 25 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 3 25 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 53 26 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 33 26 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 2 26 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 96 27 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 3 27 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 77 28 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 13 28 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 50 29 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 3 29 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 60 3 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 68 30 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 2 30 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 40 31 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 5 31 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 46 32 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 39 32 Mountain Shrubland 0 Unit Biophysical Setting Acres 32 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 58 33 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 23 33 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 2 33 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 25 34 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 31 34 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 4 35 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 53 35 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 6 36 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 42 36 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 5 37 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 28 38 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 9 38 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 21 39 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 67 4 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 30 40 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 29 41 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 34 42 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 126 43 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 204 44 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 3 44 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 185 45 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 25 45 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 74 46 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 365 47 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 284 48 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 14 48 Mountain Shrubland 1 48 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 223 49 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 79 5 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 37 50 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 15 50 Mountain Shrubland 1 50 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 89 51 Barren 4 51 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 242 52 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 68 52 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 2 53 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 40 53 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 2 54 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 53 Unit Biophysical Setting Acres 54 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 2 55 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 21 55 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 46 56 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 10 56 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 38 57 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 173 58 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 21 58 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 29 59 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 19 59 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 37 6 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 57 60 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 58 61 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 65 62 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 50 62 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 27 63 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 43 63 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 24 64 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 49 64 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 2 64 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 30 65 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 50 65 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 4 65 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 3 66 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 33 66 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 41 67 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 14 67 Mountain Shrubland 2 67 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 41 68 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 29 68 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 15 68 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 5 69 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 16 69 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 20 69 Mountain Shrubland 5 69 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 39 7 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 39 70 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 70 71 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 90 72 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 158 73 Barren 3 Unit Biophysical Setting Acres 73 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 63 74 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 7 74 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 72 75 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 195 76 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 88 76 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 74 76 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 29 77 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 335 77 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 369 77 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 224 78 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 90 79 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 208 79 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 111 79 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 1 79 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 96 8 Barren 3 8 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 136 80 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 106 80 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 317 81 Barren 4 81 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 264 81 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 333 81 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 202 81 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 3 82 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 150 82 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 503 82 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 23 82 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 5 82 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 237 83 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 109 83 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 37 83 Mountain Shrubland 4 83 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 359 83 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 64 84 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 410 84 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 296 84 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 8 84 Mountain Shrubland 3 84 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 245 84 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 21 Unit Biophysical Setting Acres 85 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 86 85 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 62 85 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 84 86 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 3 86 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 78 87 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 29 87 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 104 88 Barren 1 88 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 154 88 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 334 88 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 41 88 Mountain Shrubland 16 88 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 2 88 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 384 88 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 86 9 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 42  Table 13. Treatment group biophysical settings Prescription Group Biophysical Setting Acres Percent of Group 1 Barren 3 0.1 1 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 216 11.6 1 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 48 2.6 1 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 14 0.8 1 Mountain Shrubland 5 0.3 1 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 1571 84.6 2 Barren 7 0.3 2 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 318 14.6 2 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 82 3.7 2 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 34 1.5 2 Mountain Shrubland 10 0.4 2 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 1729 79.4 3 Barren 9 0.5 3 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 116 6.8 3 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 2 0.1 3 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 5 0.3 3 Mountain Shrubland 0 0.0 3 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 1564 92.2 4 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 186 29.5 Prescription Group Biophysical Setting Acres Percent of Group 4 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 88 14.0 4 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 7 1.1 4 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 350 55.4 5 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 68 100.0 6 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 173 33.8 6 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 136 26.5 6 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 204 39.7 7 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 138 21.6 7 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 499 78.4 8 Barren 5 0.1 8 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 1520 26.9 8 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 2056 36.4 8 Mountain Grassland with Shrubs 110 1.9 8 Mountain Shrubland 23 0.4 8 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 773 13.7 8 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 1005 17.8 8 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 150 2.7 Insects and Diseases Mountain Pine Beetle The role of mountain pine beetle in ecosystems where lodgepole pine is seral is to remove the larger, dominant lodgepole pine and increase growing space for understory late-seral species such as subalpine fir and Douglas-fir, hastening succession (Amman 1977). Mountain pine beetle in these ecosystems also plays a role in converting stands from even-aged and single-story to uneven-aged and multi-story (Cole and Amman 1980). Mountain pine beetle (MPB) infestations are closely related to host tree age, size, and density. Larger diameter trees are attacked by mountain pine beetle at higher rates than smaller diameter trees, and trees less than 5 inches d.b.h. have very low levels of attack (Cole and Amman 1969, Roe and Amman 1970, Cole and Amman 1980, Klein et al. 1978). VMap data shows that before the recent MPB outbreak, about 5,300 acres (22 percent of the project area) was dominated by lodgepole or ponderosa pine in or greater than a 5 to 9.9 inches d.b.h. size class. This could be considered a substantial portion of the landscape susceptible to mountain pine beetle, and does not include the area containing lodgepole or ponderosa pine where they are not dominant. Available stand data from recently examined stands in the project area containing lodgepole pine that has been severely impacted by MPB had average diameters greater than 8 inches d.b.h. (table 10). Mountain pine beetle risk increases in lodgepole pine stands with an average age greater than 80 years old (Amman et al. 1990). Available stand data indicates that examined stands in the project area containing lodgepole severely impacted by mountain pine beetles had stand ages greater than 80 (table 10). Mountain pine beetle risk also increases with stand stocking levels (Larsson et al. 1983, Anhold and Jenkins 1987, Negron et al. 2008, Obezinski et al. 1999, Oliver 1995, Olsen et al. 1996, Schmitz et al. 1981) and the proportion of stocking in susceptible species. In terms of basal area stocking Olsen et al. (1996) found greater MPB mortality in ponderosa pine where tree density exceeded 200 TPA and where BAs were between 150 and 250 ft2, Larson et al. (1983) found an attack threshold in ponderosa pine of about 91 ft2, Amman and Logan (1998) described a basal area of 80 ft2/acre in lodgepole pine as a threshold for susceptibility. Available stand data indicates that examined stands in the project area containing lodgepole severely impacted by mountain pine beetles had stand basal areas greater than 80 (table 10). Available research indicates that mountain pine beetle epidemics continue until the available bark beetle habitat is sufficiently reduced that epidemic levels can no longer be sustained (Cole and Amman 1969, Roe and Amman 1970, Cole and Amman 1980, Klein et al. 1978, Mitchell and Preisler 1991). Available stand data from 2009 and 2010 show that most of the larger, mature lodgepole pines are dead. Given this, we suspect that the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic in the project area has probably peaked is now declining because the supply of host trees has been depleted. Ponderosa and whitebark pine are also present in the project area and extensive mortality has also been recorded on those species. Douglas-fir Beetle Characteristics such as poor growth and stand density have been shown to be related to Douglas-fir beetle mortality (Negron 1998). Maintaining tree vigor and reducing moisture stress is important to reducing bark beetle hazard in interior Douglas-fir (Furniss and Carolin 1977, Schmitz and Gibson 1996). Douglas-fir beetle tends to attack trees that are mature or overmature, large-diameter, and in densely-stocked stands (Schmitz and Gibson 1996, Furniss et al. 1979, Reid and Glubish 2001, Garrison-Johnson et al. 2003). Higher stand density and high density in Douglas-fir results in higher mortality with basal area of Douglas-fir being the best predictor variable for basal area (BA) killed (McMillin and Allen 2000, Negron et al. 2001). Weatherby and Thier (1993) developed a rating model for Douglas-fir beetle which included stand basal areas of greater than 27.5 m2/ha (119 ft2) and proportion of stand basal area in Douglas-fir greater than 50 percent integrated which stand age and average tree size as thresholds for susceptibility. Randall and Tensmeyer (1999) developed a hazard rating system for the Inland Northwest integrating average Douglas-fir d.b.h., average stand age, stand BA and Douglas-fir percent of stand BA. In their system, if percent stand BA in Douglas-fir was 30-50, and stand BA 120 to 250 then hazard was high. For values greater than those resulted in hazard being very high. Douglas-fir beetle prefers old trees because of their abundance of food and lower defense mechanisms and so the oldest, largest trees are the most susceptible. Furniss (1962), when studying the infestation patterns of Douglas-fir beetle that trees from 150 to 250 years old were exclusively attacked. Weatherby and Thier (1993) used an age of 120 years as a threshold for susceptibility in their DBF risk rating system. Randall and Tensmeyer (1999) used an average stand age of 80-120 years as a parameter for a hazard rating of moderate, with age greater than 120 a parameter for a hazard rating of high or greater. Douglas-fir beetle shows a preference for attacking large-diameter trees. Negron noted that they rarely attack trees less than 15.2 cm (6 inches) d.b.h. (Negron 1998). Weatherby and Thier (1993) included a stand average d.b.h. of all Douglas-firs greater than 22.9 cm (9 inches d.b.h.) as a threshold for susceptibility in their DFB risk rating system. Randall and Tensmeyer (1999) used an average Douglas-fir diameter of 10-14 inches d.b.h. a parameter for a hazard rating of moderate, with greater than 14 a parameter for a hazard rating of high or greater. Also, damage by fires has been shown to initiate Douglas-fir beetle attack. Douglas-fir injured by fires, especially by crown scorch, attract and can be susceptible to DFB (Furniss 1965, Cunningham et al. 2005, Hood and Bentz 2007). Cunningham et al. (2005) found that 1 year after a fire event the Douglas-fir beetle selected and attacked large-diameter Douglas-fir with 60%–80% bole char, 60–80 percent crown volume scorch, and 50–70 percent probability of mortality due to fire. Hood and Bentz (2007) found that beetles were attracted to trees with high levels of crown scorch but not cambium injury. Hood and Bentz (2007) study also suggested that that tree size, stand conditions, and host availability were slightly more important in determining the likelihood of beetle attacks than fire injuries sustained by trees. ADS data suggests that DFB is present at endemic levels. Stand-level data is available for only a portion of the stands within the project area and so we did not be model DFB hazard on the landscape. We discuss DFB hazard on the landscape from available exam data and the effects of alternatives on DFB hazard in individual treatment units. Available data does show that many heavily forested stands in the project area contain mature Douglas-fir which is susceptible to bark beetles. Of the FVS grid-intensification plots in the project area, 60 percent could be classified as high hazard under Randall and Tensmeyer’s (1999) rating scheme. Western Spruce Budworm Western spruce budworm’s (Choristoneura fumiferana) primary hosts are Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and true firs. Western spruce budworm (WSB) feeds on foliage, staminate flowers and developing cones (Fellin and Dewey 2012). WSB infestations can be prolonged, widespread and destructive. Regeneration and young stands are particularly vulnerable when growing beneath a canopy of overstory trees because larvae disperse from the overstory and feed on the small trees below. WSB’s greatest impact in mature stands is reduced growth, although repeated defoliation sometimes results in top-killing and tree mortality. Multi-story, dense stands are especially prone to developing high levels of WSB and susceptible to WSB damage (Carlson and Wulff 1989). Trees severely defoliated by the WSB may be predisposed to one or more species of tree-killing bark beetles, mainly the Douglas-fir beetle, and the fir engraver beetle (Scolytus ventralis). Budworm populations are usually regulated by combinations of several natural factors such as insect parasites, vertebrate and invertebrate predators, and adverse weather conditions. If stands become heavily defoliated during prolonged outbreaks, starvation can become important in regulating WSB populations (Fellin and Dewey 2012). Swetnam and Lynch (1993) studied WSB outbreaks in New Mexico from 1690 to 1989 using tree ring records and found that WSB outbreaks tended to be cyclical with periods varying from 20-33 years, duration within stands of about 11 years. They observed that budworm activity in the 1900’s was unusually severe and tended to be more synchronous among stands than during earlier centuries, which they suggested was due to changes in stand structures due to man’s influence. Ryerson et al. (2003) in a reconstruction of SPB in the San Juan Mountains, Colorado, did not find significant 20th-century changes in the frequency of outbreak occurrence or magnitude of growth reduction. Acreage affected by WSB declined in 2010 continues to be present in the project area. Many of the stands in the project area are multi-story and dense, with a high proportion of the stocking being in susceptible species. Of the FIS grid-intensification plots, 60 percent have greater than one-half of the BA stocking in WSB host species and another 20 percent although BA stocking of WSB host species is less than 50 percent, the TPA stocking in host species in high due to the large number of small trees. All of the plots can be considered multi-story. White Pine Blister Rust White pine blister rust (Cronartium ribicola) has led to a rapid and precipitous decline in whitebark pine throughout Montana (appendix B). Five units proposed for prescribed burning (Units 76, 79, 82, 83, 88) are shown in available data to contain whitebark pine. Although little data is available concerning the condition of whitebark pine in those units, Forest and Inventory Analysis data for the Helena NF recorded white pine blister rust on about 19% of the live whitebark pine trees in the plots. However, blister rust surveys of whitebark pine in two stands south of the Stonewall project area on the Helena National Forest done in 2007 and 2009 found 74 and 97 percent WPBR infection levels (see WBP Survey_granite.xls and WBP Survey_redmtn6253.xls in project records). Given that the purpose of the blister rust surveys was to closely examine trees for the presence of blister rust, we suspect infection levels within the project area to be closer to the survey values than that shown in FIA data. Also, given the widespread presence and impacts of the disease throughout the Intermountain West (appendix B), there is no reason to believe that the condition is not similar to other places in the state. Dwarf Mistletoe Dwarf mistletoes (DMT, Arceuthobium spp.) are a family of native parasitic plants that extract water and nutrients from living conifers. DMT reduces tree vigor, causing irregular branching, branch kill, and top kill. Premature death eventually follows, usually aided by secondary bark beetles (Hawksworth and Johnson 1989). The parasitic activity of DMT causes reduced tree diameter and height growth, decreased cone and seed production, direct tree mortality, or predisposition of other pathogens and insects (Geils et al. 2002). In the long term, DMT in heavily invested seral-species stands can accelerate the shift toward climax non-host tree species (Geils et al. 2002). Stand data shows that in the project area, lodgepole pine is being affected in many stands by A. americanum at levels ranging from light to heavy. In most of the stands the infected overstory has been recently killed by MPB but remaining smaller understory lodgepole is probably infected also. Armillaria Stand data indicates that several stands contain root rot pockets, probably by armillaria root disease (Armillaria ostoyae) although the stand data did not definitively establish armillaria as the cause. The root rot pockets appear to be generally small. Armillaria root disease can result in tree mortality, growth reduction and wood decay. Armillaria can infect all conifers found in the area, but susceptibility varies between the species. The general descending order of susceptibility to armillaria root disease is: ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, Douglas-fir, western larch, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir (McDonald et al. 1987). Tree growth and vigor also affects susceptibility to armillaria, although study results are mixed. Filip and Goheen (1995) found that precommercially thinning 10- to 20-year-old mixed species stands significantly increased tree growth but after 10 years, difference in crop-tree mortality between thinned and unthinned stands was not statistically significant. In ponderosa pine, Filip and Goheen (1995) found that 20 years following precommercial thinning, crop-tree mortality in unthinned plots was twice that of thinned plots. In the same plots, Filip et al. (2009) found that seven years after commercial thinning was in leave trees less than thinned plots than in unthinned plots. Armillaria root rot is difficult to control because disease is nearly impossible to eliminate from a site (Rippy et al. 2005). The impacts of armillaria root disease can be reduced by: · Favoring more resistant/tolerant tree species. · Maintaining tree species diversity. · Reforesting stands with locally adapted species suitable to the site. · Promoting tree vigor by minimizing stress and avoiding wounds. · Reducing inoculum sources through the uprooting of stumps and removal of woody debris See more about tree mortality and damage for proposed units from insects and disease in chapter 1. Stand Structures and Species Compositions It can be useful to display stand species compositions and structures through the use of “diameter distributions” which display the number of trees present within diameter ranges. In this analysis, we display example stand diameter distributions in terms of trees-per-acre (TPA) within 2-inch diameter-at-breast-height (d.b.h.) classes. Note that within the diameter distribution scheme used in this analysis, what is displayed as the “1-inch” d.b.h. class displays the TPA for trees less than a 1-inch d.b.h.; the 2-inch d.b.h. class displays TPA for trees greater than or equal to 1 inch and less than three inches, and so on. The 1-inch d.b.h. class is often not displayed because the large number of trees in that class makes it difficult to see the species compositions of larger d.b.h. classes. Figure 18 displays the diameter distribution for Stand 42303130. The stand has an estimated 1,442 total TPA live with 610 in the 1-inch class (not displayed) and 201 TPA dead due largely to the recent bark beetle outbreak (not displayed). The stand has about 167 ft2 of basal area. The distribution is a very steep “reverse-J” shape with large numbers of trees in the smallest d.b.h. classes indicating that it is multi-story with a dense understory.  Title: Stand 42303130 current condition diameter distribution - Description: This is a chartFigure 18. Stand 42303130 current condition diameter distributions Figure 19 displays the diameter distribution for a plantation in the Stonewall Project Area. The species composition and diameter distribution suggests that the stand was planted to ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, the trees forming the 4-inch to 10-inch d.b.h. class. The trees in the 1-inch and 2-inch d.b.h. classes are likely naturally-established.  Title: Figure 2. Plantation current condition diameter distribution - Description: This is a chartFigure 19. Plantation current condition diameter distributions Figure 20 displays the current condition of Stand 41502088 in the Stonewall Project area. Dead and live trees are displayed to show the degree of mortality due to the recent mountain pine beetle outbreak. Most of the larger lodgepole pines have been killed. The stand is proposed for a harvest/regeneration treatment in this analysis.  Stand 41502088 current condition diameter distributionsFigure 20. Stand 41502088 current condition diameter distributions Figure 21 and figure 22 display the current condition of Stand 42502089 in the Stonewall Project area. Only live trees are displayed. The stand currently has 317 TPA and 110 ft2 BA. Figure 22 displays the diameter distribution with the smallest size class removed so that the minor lodgepole pine and ponderosa pine components show up better. The figures display a stand average species composition but it should be noted that the distribution of ponderosa pine and lodgepole pine in the stand area was very clumpy. Mortality in the stand shows an average of 4 TPA dead for lodgepole and ponderosa pine and 15 TPA dead for Douglas-fir greater than 10 inches d.b.h. The low average mortality for ponderosa and lodgepole pine reflects the proportion of stocking in the stand. Other stand data indicates that most of the larger lodgepole within the stand have died. The mortality for Douglas-fir indicates that Douglas-fir beetle may have impacted the stand in the last few years.  Title: Figure 4. Stand 41502089 current condition diameter distribution all d.b.h. classes - Description: This is a chartFigure 21. Stand 41502089 current condition diameter distributions all d.b.h. classes  Title: Stand 41502089 current condition diameter distribution without 1-inch d.b.h. class - Description: This is a chartFigure 22. Stand 41502089 current condition diameter distribution without 1-inch d.b.h. class Figure 23 displays the diameter distribution for Stand 415020066. Live and dead trees are displayed. The stand has about live 717 TPA and 187 feet2 BA. It is proposed to have a pre-commercial thin and to have dead trees removed in the Stonewall Project.  Title: Figure 6. Stand 415020066 current condition diameter distribution - Description: This is a chartFigure 23. Stand 415020066 current condition diameter distributions Figure 24displays the diameter distribution for Stand 41502043. Live and dead trees are displayed. The stand has about live 385 live TPA, 126 dead TPA and 90 ft2 BA. It is proposed to be thinned under alternative 2 and underburned under alternative 3 in the Stonewall Project.  Title: Stand 415020043 current condition diameter distribution - Description: This is a chartFigure 24. Stand 41502043 current condition diameter distribution Figure 25 displays the diameter distribution for Stand 415020056. Live and dead trees are displayed. The stand has about live 575 live TPA, 239 dead TPA and 73 ft2 BA. It is proposed to be regenerated under alternative 2 and underburned under alternative 3 in the Stonewall Project.  Title: Stand 41501056 current condition diameter distributionFigure 25. Stand 41501056 current condition diameter distributions Tree Species of Interest Ponderosa Pine VMap data classifies 147 acres (about 0.6 percent) of the project area as having ponderosa pine as the dominant tree species with greater than 40 percent of the total tree canopy cover. About 32 percent of the area is within the Ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir BpS indicating that following the FRCC system based upon the physical setting and potential vegetation community we could expect to find ponderosa pine in a substantial portion of the area. Exams are available for only a portion of the project area, but available exams in proposed treatment units show ponderosa pine as a minor component (less than10 percent of stocking) in about 23 percent of the proposed treatment area and as a substantial component (equal to or greater than10 and less than 40 percent) on about 37 percent of the proposed treatment area. The available data indicates that ponderosa pine is present on a substantial portion of the landscape, roughly ranging from about 32 to 60 percent, but is the major species on a very small portion of the landscape. The ponderosa pine can be considered as a seral species. Quaking Aspen VMap data does not show any quaking aspen-dominated stands within the project area which indicates that quaking aspen within the project did not dominate in sufficiently large area to be classified as the VMap data was created. Available exam data shows that aspen can be found in a number of units proposed for treatment, but always as a minor component. Although not observed and recorded in stand exams, very small aspen clones may be found in other units. The aspen can be considered seral to either subalpine fir or Douglas-fir, depending upon the unit and site. In many unit exams, the aspen is simply recorded as being present, as rare, or as a trace; while in several other units it comprises a substantial, although still minor, portion of the stocking( e.g. Unit 3). Comments concerning the aspen in unit exams range from “suppressed in the understory” to “vigorous in the overstory, but proportionally not much suckering.” In general, we can characterize aspen in proposed units and the project area as: (1) small clones, (2) heavily competing with to suppressed by conifers, and (3) a minor stand component (with a few exceptions). Western Larch VMap data does not classify any area as being dominated by western larch indicating that the species is not present in sufficient quantities to be classified. Western larch is present in the project area, but available exam data for proposed treatment units shows the species as a minor component on about 3 percent of the proposed treatment area, except for one stand, which is a plantation. Available data, then, suggests that western larch is a very minor component on the landscape and in almost all stands, but many sites in the area could probably support it. Whitebark pine VMap data shows whitebark pine as the dominant tree species on about four percent of the project area, most in the highest elevations in the north side of the area. Available data mentions the species as present in treatment within Groups 6, 7, and 8, (Units 76, 79, 82, 83, 88) and although not recorded in available treatment unit diagnosis sheets (see analysis file), available FIA grid intensification plots in the project area recorded whitebark pine as present within about 11% of the plots. There are only 16 FIA grid intensification plots within the project area, but they are uniformly distributed whereas the treatment units, except for the treatment units listed above, are generally lower elevation. As stated above, a substantial portion (19%) to most (74% to 97%) of the whitebark pine on the Helena NF area can be considered infected by white pine blister rust (appendix B). In all FIA plots on the Helena NF, about 27 percent of the whitebark pine trees recorded were dead. Whitebark pine in the Stonewall Project units is considered seral to subalpine fir. On sites where it is a seral species in the Northern Rocky Mountains, whitebark pine depends upon fire to maintain its dominance or presence (Arno 2001, Keane 2001, Kendall and Keane 2001, Morgan and Murray 2001). In the absence of fire, subalpine fir has increased in presence, and the combination of increases in subalpine fir and whitebark pine mortality and lack of regeneration due to white pine blister rust and mountain pine beetle have resulted in a decline in whitebark pine. Environmental Consequences Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis We used three spatial scales for the effects analysis that follows. The spatial scale used depends upon the measurement indicator discussed. First, we discuss treatment effects on individual trees or classes of trees, for example, the increase in growth, vigor or size of small aspen clones due to the removal of competing conifers. Second, we discuss treatment effects on stand-level or unit-level attributes, for example, changes in species compositions. Third, we discuss treatment effects on a landscape scale, for example, the mixture of stand structures over the landscape. We chose the project area as the largest spatial scale for this analysis because it includes all Forest System land that: (1) includes the proposed treatment areas, (2) is bounded on the north, northwest, and west sides by drainage divides, and (3) at about 24,000 acres, is sufficiently large to analyze and discuss effects to forest vegetation on a landscape-level without ‘diluting’ the magnitude of the effects with a large area. The year 2010 is the existing condition baseline used for this analysis. Proposed treatment stands were last examined in fall 2009 and 2010, briefly visited in summer 2010, and the last ADS survey used in this analysis was done in 2010. Short-term effects refer to effects over the 10-year period from the time the activity was accomplished which, for the purpose of modeling in this analysis, is assumed to be the year 2012 (although we do not know exactly when the activity would be accomplished). Long-term effects refer to effects from 10 to 50 years from the time the activity was accomplished. All pertinent past activities and events are incorporated into the previous existing condition discussion. In the cumulative effects analysis that follows, cumulative effects are discussed as changes in the existing condition due to present and future activities, including the effects of the alternative being discussed. Connected Actions, Past, Present, and Foreseeable Activities Relevant to Cumulative Effects Analysis Past Activities Past activities that have shaped the existing condition discussed and displayed in this document include: (1) 3,872 acres of harvest/regeneration treatments, (2) 373 acres of other harvests cutting, (3) 822 acres of pre-commercial thinning, and (4) 7,922 acres of fuels treatments from 1950 to present (table 10), although some of these treatments were on the same area and so the acreages are not accumulative. In addition to the management actions, vegetation has been shaped by (1) 87 acres in the Snow/Talon Fire (2003), (2) 261 acres in the Keep Cool Fire (2006), and (3) insect and disease activity as discussed previously. Other past actions, such as livestock grazing and recreational activities have played a small role in shaping forest vegetation in the project area, or played a localized role. As mentioned above, these activities have been considered in describing the current condition. Present Activities Appendix C displays all of the past, ongoing and foreseeable projects identified by the HNF for possible consideration in this analysis. Activities that when combined with the proposed activities could contribute to cumulative effects were considered in this analysis. Some of the activities listed are not considered in this analysis because they are (1) outside of the analysis area used in this analysis, or (2) have no effect on the forest vegetation issue indicators addressed in this analysis, or (3) have such a small effect on the forest vegetation issue indicators used in this analysis that they are inconsequential to the analysis. Effects Common to All Alternatives The continuing effects on forest species composition and structures due to fire exclusion, succession, insect infestations, and diseases would be the same under all alternatives for areas not proposed for treatment in Alternatives 2 and 3. In the short-term these changes would be slight but in the long-term could be substantial. These effects would be the continuing decline in area within all Biophysical Settings in the earlier vegetation-fuel classes and an increase in the later vegetation-fuel class. In general terms, (1) overall stand structures would become more closed-canopy and multi-story, and (2) species compositions would become more dominated by climax, shade-tolerant tree species, which would largely be subalpine fir. Insects and Diseases Mountain Pine Beetle In stands receiving no treatment, mountain pine beetle activity would continue to some degree, but as discussed above, we suspect that the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic in the project area has probably peaked would decline to endemic levels in the short-term because the supply of host trees has been depleted. MPB risk would be lower than before the recent epidemic into the long-term because stands are moving successionally from dominance by lodgepole pine toward Douglas-fir and subalpine fir. Douglas-fir Beetle Douglas-fir beetle in the short-term would continue at recent levels. In the long-term due to the increase in Douglas-fir stocking, tree size, and total stand stocking, Douglas-fir beetle populations can be expected to increase and an outbreak would most likely occur. Western Spruce Budworm In the short-term WSB populations are likely to continue at current levels. In the long-term WSB populations can be expected to increase due to an increase in host species-Douglas-fir and subalpine fir-dominance on the landscape and the increase in multiple-storied stand structures. Dwarf Mistletoe Dwarf mistletoes would continue in the short-term at levels described above, and in the long-term would increase in presence and degree of impact. Lodgepole pine dwarf mistletoe would continue to increase the impacts of lodgepole pine and would accelerate the decline of lodgepole pine as a stand component. Armillaria In the short-term armillaria root disease pockets would generally remain as described above, growing slowly larger. In the long-term the disease would have greater impacts in stands and on the landscape due (1) to the increase in dominance by tree species such as subalpine fir, Engelmann spruce, and Douglas-fir which are less resistant than seral species such as ponderosa pine and lodgepole pine, and (2) due to increases in stand stocking leading to deceases in tree vigor and disease resistance. Species of Interest Ponderosa Pine As mentioned above, ponderosa pine is a shade-intolerant seral species on habitat types found in the project area and over time would decline in presence and eventually disappear without disturbance. It is a relatively long-lived species and to the decline and disappearance would be a long-term process punctuated by rapid declines brought about by events such as the recent mountain pine beet outbreak. Quaking Aspen Quaking aspen as a relatively short stature and very shade-intolerant seral species would continue to decline from its already small presence and without disturbance would almost disappear. Aspen stems are relatively short-lived but the decline and disappearance would continue into the long-term. Western Larch As with ponderosa pine, western larch is a shade-intolerant but relatively long-lived seral species on habitat types found in the project area and in the long-term would decline in presence and eventually disappear without disturbance. Whitebark Pine Whitebark pine is a shade-intolerant seral species on almost all habitat types found in the project area and over time would decline in presence and almost disappear without disturbance. Effects Common to All Action Alternatives Effects common to all action alternatives include the effects of different proposed treatment regimes, the differences between the action alternatives being largely the amount of treatment area and in several proposed treatment units, the proposed treatment regime. Treatments proposed in this project are described in eight treatment groups (USDA Forest Service 2010b): Prescription Groups Group 1 (Intermediate Harvest) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, and mixed-species forest types mostly on Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS with small inclusions of shrubland and barren BpS. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (36%) and subalpine fir (59%) habitat types with minor amounts of unknown habitat types. Treatment objectives for this group are to develop mature, open forests comprised mostly of fire-resistant species. The proposed treatments would thin live trees, remove dead trees, and prescribe burn surface fuels. All tree thinning would be "from below" to favor retaining larger trees over smaller trees except that thinning regimes would favor retaining smaller trees of a more desirable species over larger trees of a less desirable species, and would favor keeping smaller, healthier-and-disease-free trees over larger, diseased trees. In general, the species preference for retention would be aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir in descending order. This general order of preference may be modified for individual stands to address management objectives such as retaining species diversity, site factors, and other stand-specific factors such as relative species presence as noted in individual stand/unit prescriptions. Although not showing as present in these units, whitebark and limber pine would be retained if found. Trees would be thinned to an average spacing of 20 to 40 feet (109 to 27 TPA), but spacing could vary widely. Thinning would be by hand and/or machine. All cut live and dead trees of merchantable size would be removed for utilization except those needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements). Following thinning and removal, units would be underburned or jackpot burned to reduce fuels. Figure 26 displays the post-treatment species composition and structure for Stand 42303130 which partially forms Unit 46. The stand area is within the ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS and is currently mostly ELSC with a minor component of BMSC and a very minor component of AESP which is a former lightly-forested meadow that is filling in. The effects of the proposed treatment would be to reduce the subalpine fir, Engelmann spruce, lodgepole pine, and Douglas-fir component and retain the ponderosa pine component. Stocking would be reduced to 258 TPA and 77 BA. The stand would have an almost “flat” diameter distribution and would be open and almost single-story but would still be uneven-aged.  Title: Stand 42303130 post thin and burn treatment - Description: This is a chartFigure 26. Stand 42303130 post thin and burn treatment We displayed figure 26 above in the same vertical scale as figure 1 above for a direct comparison between the current and post-treatment condition. In figure 27 below we change the vertical scale to better display the species composition.  Title: Stand 42303130 post thin and burn treatmentFigure 27. Stand 42303130 post thin and burn treatment Other treatment units in this prescription group (appendices I and L) vary from that shown above somewhat in species composition and current structure, BpS, and vegetation-fuel classes. The general effects of the treatment would be as shown above; (1) diameter distributions would become much “flatter” and (2) shade-tolerant and fire-intolerant tree species would decline in representation and shade-intolerant and fire-tolerant tree species would increase in relative representation. In terms of vegetation-fuel classes, treatment effects would be to (1) move ELSC to DLSO, (2) retain DLSO, (3) retain CMSO, (4) move BMSC to CMSO, and (5) retain AESP. Growth and vigor in the remaining trees would increase. Opening up the stand and prescribed burning can be expected to initiate a wave of tree establishment but the magnitude of the establishment would be moderated by overstory stocking. In the long-term, without additional treatments, the stand would again develop a dense understory and move back toward the current condition. Future treatments would be required to continue increasing ponderosa pine as a stand component and retain the open nature of the stands. Group 2 (Precommercial Thinning) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10.This group contains Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, and mixed-species forest types mostly on dry Douglas-fir, moist Douglas-fir, and ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS with small inclusions of shrubland, shrubland-grassland, and barren BpS. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (50%) and subalpine fir (47%) habitat types with minor amounts of other habitat types. This group consists of previous harvest/regeneration units that are proposed for precommercial thinning. Treatments would thin small diameter trees of little to no merchantable value. All tree thinning would be from below but would favor retaining smaller trees of a more desirable species over larger trees of a less desirable species, and would favor keeping smaller, healthier-and-disease-free trees over larger, diseased trees. In general, the species preference for retention would be aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir in descending order. Post-thinning average tree spacing would range from 12 to 20 feet (109 to 303 TPA). Thinning would be by hand and/or machine, depending upon tree size. In several units, thinning slash would be piled by hand and burned. Figure 28 displays an example plantation from the Stonewall area after thinning.  Title: Figure 11. Plantation post-thinning diameter distributionFigure 28. Plantation post-thinning diameter distribution Following treatment, the stands would be more uniformly-sized because the smaller, slower-growing trees have mostly been removed. All of the stands would be more open and classified as CMSO. Growth and vigor would increase. In the long-term, trees would grow larger and canopy cover would increase, transitioning the stands into DLSO or ELSC depending upon the amount of canopy cover at the time the trees area greater than greater than nine inches d.b.h. Group 3 (Seedtree and Shelterwood Harvest/Regeneration) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains lodgepole pine and mixed-species forest types mostly on dry Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS with small inclusions of shrubland, shrubland-grassland, and barren BpS. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (41%) and subalpine fir (47%) habitat types with minor amounts of other habitat types. This group includes stands that have been severely impacted by the recent bark beetle outbreak but which do contain overstory trees that can be retained as seed sources and as shelter for seedlings. Treatments proposed are seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration systems. Most trees, except as needed for shelter and seed production would be removed. In some of the shelterwoods, trees would be retained in groups; in others, the remaining trees would be relatively evenly distributed. All cut live and dead trees of merchantable size would be removed for utilization except those needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements). Many of the units would be burned to reduce fuel loads and prepare sites for natural regeneration or planting. Many of the units may be planted with some combination of ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and western larch where needed to regenerate the stands to the desired seral and fire-resistant species. Figure 20 shows an example stand in the Stonewall Project area that is proposed for a shelterwood treatment. The diameter distribution displays the current condition including dead trees. Most of the lodgepole pine in the stand was killed except for the very small trees and a few between six and 10 inches d.b.h. Figure 29 shows the stand immediately following a shelterwood treatment. Other stands in this group would vary in the species, remaining numbers of trees retained, and the distribution of the remaining trees but the general characteristics of the treatment, that is, a very open stand with a residual single-layer overstory would be the same.  Title: Figure 12. Stand 41502088 post-shelterwood - Description: This is a chartFigure 29. Stand 41502088 post-shelterwood Following treatment, all of the stands would be classified as AESP. In the long-term, the stands would regenerate and transition out of AESP into CMSO. Many of the stands would develop in a two-story structure depending upon the number of seed and shelter trees retained. Group 4 (Clearcut Harvest/Regeneration) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains the lodgepole pine forest type mostly on dry Douglas-fir, moist Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS with small inclusions of mountain grassland with shrubs. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (21%) and subalpine fir (75%) habitat types with minor area of other habitat types. This group includes stands that have been severely impacted by the recent bark beetle outbreak. Treatments proposed are clearcut harvest/regeneration systems in which all trees would be removed except for scattered clumps or individuals. Retained trees would mostly be Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, or western larch. All live and dead merchantable trees would be removed for utilization except those needed to meet other resource concerns. Following cutting and removal, units would be prescribed burned, the type of burn varying by individual unit fuels reduction and site preparation needs. Natural regeneration by Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine is expected to occur to some degree, and Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, and western larch may be planted to achieve the desired species composition, the mixture differing by individual unit based upon site attributes. Since this treatment is a “clearcut with reserves” there would be a very open distributed to clumpy overstory remaining following the treatment. Each unit’s tree distributions would vary to some degree in species, number of retained trees, and distribution, but general characteristics of the treatment, that is, a very open stand with a patches and individual trees scattered throughout would be the same. Following treatment, all of the stands would be classified as AESP. In the long term, the stands would regenerate and transition out of AESP into CMSO. Many of the stands would develop in a two-story structure depending upon the number of seed and shelter trees retained. Group 5 (Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains the mixed-species forest type on ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (60%) and subalpine fir (30%) habitat types. This group includes two treatment units (4 and 5) comprising about 25 acres. The treatments would remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees, and reduce fuels by handpiling and burning. Post-thinning the units would have from 194 to 435 TPA (10-15 foot average spacing). All cut merchantable trees would be removed for utilization using ground-based equipment except as needed to meet other resource concerns. Figure 30 displays the post-thinning diameter distribution for Stand 415020066 in Unit 4. Unit 5 differs somewhat from Unit 4 in species composition, but the general effects of reducing the small tree stocking would be the same.  Title: Figure 13. Stand 41020066 post-treatment - Description: This is a chartFigure 30. Stand 41020066 post-treatment In terms of vegetation-fuel classes, the units would be moved to CMSO from DLSO or from ELSC to DLSO depending upon the pre-treatment class. Group 6 (Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains the Douglas-fir forest type on dry Douglas-fir, moist Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (61%) and subalpine fir (38%) habitat types with minor area of a spruce habitat type. This group includes three treatment units comprising about 449 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. The prescribed burning would create openings less than 5 acres or in some cases up to10 acres, the opening size depending upon the unit. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. Figure 14 shows the current condition for Stand 41502089 which forms a part of proposed treatment Unit 2. Note that we did not display present dead trees to keep the chart simple. Figure 31 shows the stand immediately following a modeled low-intensity fire. The modeled fire would kill most of the small trees but few of the large trees. The modeled fire would kill only two TPA greater than 17 inches d.b.h. Immediately following the treatment the stand would have about 92 TPA, 88 ft2 BA, and 17 TPA greater than 17 inches d.b.h. The quaking aspen is shown as being killed but tree regeneration by sprouting or seed was not being modeled in the exercise. Following the treatment the aspen can be expected to resprout and conifers to become established in the understory. In the short term we can expect the stands in this group to be complexes of all five vegetation-fuel classes including about 15 percent of early-seral. The diameter distribution shown in Figure 31 is a “stand average” and does not display the high degree of variability within the post-treatment units within this group. In the long-term, natural regeneration through sprouting and conifer seeds, would form a new cohort in the understory. The new understory would also be very variable in the numbers of trees, with many young trees in the small openings, and few under the dense overstory groups. A mixture of species would become established, but conditions would favor seral species.  Title: Stand 41502089 post-underburn treatmentFigure 31. Stand 41502089 post-underburn treatment Group 7 (Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains the Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine forest types on dry Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir BpS. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11. This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (91%) and subalpine fir (9%) habitat types. This group includes three treatment units comprising about 410 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. Where the opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around available whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir trees to enhance the regeneration of those species. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. The treatments would create patches of mortality up to 5, 10, or 20 acres depending upon the treatment unit (appendices K and L). The general effects of these treatments would be similar to those in Group 6 but would be more variable with some larger patches of mortality. The cutting and burning would kill most of the small trees but few of the large trees. A mosaic of tree diameter distributions reflected in figures 2, 4-11, and 13-17 would be found within the treatment units due to the variable nature of the treatment. Following the treatment the aspen can be expected to resprout and conifers to become established in the understory especially in the small patches of mortality and small, deliberately created openings. A number of species would become established, but conditions would favor the establishment of seral species. In the short term we can expect the stands in this group to be highly-variable complexes of all five vegetation fuel classes including about 15 percent of early-seral. In the long term, natural regeneration through sprouting and conifer seeds would form a new cohort in the understory. The new understory would also be very variable in the numbers of trees, with many young trees in the small openings, and few under the dense overstory groups. Group 8 (Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches) Detailed information concerning biophysical settings found in each treatment unit can be found in table 12. Detailed information concerning the biophysical settings found within this treatment group, and the proportion of the treatment group within the BpS can be found in table 13. Detailed information concerning the forest type and species composition of individual units within this group can be found in table 10. This group contains the Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine forest types on dry Douglas-fir, moist Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir and interior west lower subalpine BpS. Detailed information about the habitat types found within units in this prescription group can be found in table 11 This prescription group is dominated by Douglas-fir (23%) and subalpine fir (67%) habitat types with inclusions of rock and grass. This group includes seven treatment units comprising about 4,604 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. Where the opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around available whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir trees to enhance the regeneration of those species. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. The treatments would create patches of mortality up to 30 or 75 acres depending upon the treatment unit (appendix B). The general effects of these treatments would be similar to those in Group 7 but would have larger patches of mortality. The cutting and burning would kill most of the small trees but few of the large trees in areas, but due to the variable nature of the burning, patches of dense small trees can be expected to survive the fire. As with group 7, a mosaic of tree diameter distributions would be found within the treatment units due to the variable nature of the treatment. Following the treatment the aspen can be expected to resprout and conifers to become established in the understory especially in the patches of mortality and deliberately created openings. A number of species would become established, but conditions would favor the establishment of seral species. In the short-term we can expect the stands in this group to be highly-variable complexes of all five vegetation-fuel classes including about 15 percent of early-seral. In the long term, natural regeneration through sprouting and conifer seeds would form a patchy new cohort in the stands. Alternative 1 – No-Action Direct and Indirect Effects There would be no direct effects to vegetation under this alternative. Stand structures, stocking levels, species compositions, and susceptibility to diseases and insects would not change from that described above in the existing condition. Biophysical Settings and Vegetation-fuel Classes As succession continues, trees grow, understories fill in, and coverage increases, the proportion of vegetation-fuel class area in each BpS would continue to shift. The current condition displayed in table 14 is the result of those processes upon the reference condition and it can be expected that the direction of change reflected in table 14 would continue. Table 14 displays the relative current amount (Cur) and expected direction of future change (Dir) for each BpS/Vegetation-fuel class combination. With no action, we can expect the current condition to progress farther from the reference and desired condition. Table 14. Alternative 1 BpS and vegetation-fuel class current and future direction of change BpS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC Cur/ Dir Cur/ Dir Cur/ Dir Cur/ Dir Cur/ Dir Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) VL/D H/D L/D L/D VH/I Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) VL/D H/D L/D L/D VH/I Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir VL/D VH/D N/N VL/D VH/I Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest VL/D L/D L/D VH/I VH/I Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest N/N L/D L/D H/I VH/I D – Declining H – High (Yellow, Greater than desired but less than 180 percent of desired) I – Increasing L – Low (Orange, Greater than or equal to 20 percent but less than desired) N – None VH – Very High (Green, Greater than or equal to 180 percent of desired) VL – Very Low (Red, none to less than 20 percent of desired) Stand Structures and Species Compositions General indirect effects on species compositions would be, in the short term and long term, stands continue to progress successionally with continuing decreases in seral species and increases in climax species (Fischer and Clayton 1983, Fischer and Bradley 1987). Species compositions on the subalpine fir habitat types would continue to change as the seral species–ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, whitebark pine, aspen, Douglas-fir, and Engelmann spruce–die out of the stands due to insect or competition-related mortality, to be replaced by subalpine fir. Species compositions on the Douglas-fir habitat types would similarly change with species composition shifting toward Douglas-fir. Succession can be a relatively slow process, punctuated by abrupt shifts such as that caused by the recent bark beetle mortality, which reduced the seral overstory and mid-story components in many stands. The changes that have taken place within the last few years due to the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic are substantial. In the short term, any further change would be relatively small and easily reversible, but in the long term, the change would be profound and difficult to reverse due to the absence of seral tree species present to provide seed for natural regeneration. Along with the species composition shifts, shade-tolerant trees would increase and fill in lesser-stocked areas, including those created by the recent bark beetle mortality and natural openings (Copenheaver et al. 2009, Skinner 1995), making individual stands and the landscape more homogeneous and less structurally diverse. Insects and Diseases In this alternative, no actions would be taken. The effects described above for untreated stands under all alternatives would apply to stands in this alternative. Species of Interest Ponderosa Pine As discussed above, with no action, ponderosa pine would decline in presence due to succession under this alternative and in the long-term would almost disappear from the landscape. Quaking Aspen As discussed above, with no action, quaking aspen, already a very minor component on the landscape would decline in presence due to succession under this alternative and in the long-term would almost disappear. Western Larch As discussed above, with no action, western larch, already a very minor component on the landscape would decline in presence due to succession under this alternative and in the long-term would almost disappear. Whitebark Pine As discussed above, with no action, whitebark pine, which has declined as a landscape component due to insects and diseases (volume 2, appendix B), would decline in presence due to succession under this alternative and in the long term, would almost disappear. On a very small portion of the landscape, on the highest elevation ridges, it may continue to survive as a component with subalpine fir. Cumulative Effects As mentioned above, all past activities are taken into account in this analysis in the current condition description and do not again need to be discussed in cumulative effects. Hence, cumulative effects in this analysis are the effects of the alternative being discussed, present, and foreseeable actions. Three ongoing activities: the Forestwide hazardous tree removal and fuels reduction HFRA project, continuing livestock grazing permits, and noxious weed treatments have the potential to affect forest vegetation. Biophysical Settings and Vegetation-fuel Classes Because of the very minor effects on forest vegetation from removing hazardous trees along roadsides, grazing livestock, and noxious weed treatments, cumulative effects for this alternative would be the same as direct and indirect effects discussed above. Insects and Diseases The current and ongoing activities would have no discernible effect on insect and disease levels in the project area. The insect and disease levels and risk would continue as described above for the direct and indirect effects. Species of Interest Ponderosa Pine, Western Larch, Whitebark Pine Because of the very minor effects on stand species compositions from removing hazardous trees along roadsides, grazing livestock, and noxious weed treatments, cumulative effects for this alternative would be the same as direct and indirect effects discussed above. Quaking Aspen Removing hazardous trees along roadsides and noxious weed treatments would have very minor effects on this species. Continuing livestock grazing may have a localized impact on individual aspen clones within the grazing allotments ability to successfully regenerate through suckering. However, the effect of the grazing would be very minor because as discussed above, the condition of the aspen is what can be characterized as: a minor component in poor and declining condition due to competition with conifers. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans More information about compliance with standards and direction from the Forest Plan is in appendix B. Compliance of alternative 1 (no action) with Forest Plan forestwide standards pertinent to this vegetation discussion are displayed in volume 2, appendix B, table B-4. Compliance with management area standards is displayed in table B-5, and compliance with Forest Plan direction for regeneration harvest is displayed in table B-6. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action About 8,564 acres of treatment is proposed under this alternative. This is about 36 percent of the project area. The proposed treatments for each prescription group are shown in table 15 and figure 32. Total treatment acres for each prescription group are displayed in table 16. Treatment effects for each group are the same for alternatives 2 and 3 and are described in the Effects Common to All Action Alternatives section. Table 15. Alternative 2 proposed treatments by prescription group and unit GROUP UNIT TREATMENT TYPE PRESCRIPTION REGENERATION ACRES 1 6 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 14 1 7 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 17 1 8 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 62 1 15 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 15 1 23 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 29 1 24 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 5 1 26 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 65 1 28 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 22 1 30 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 14 1 31 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 16 1 32 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 45 1 33 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn N/A 17 1 44 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 97 1 45 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 38 1 46 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn N/A 251 1 47 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn N/A 220 1 54 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn N/A 20 1 55 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 29 2 3 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 37 2 14 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 11 2 16 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 3 2 18 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 21 2 21 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 6 2 48 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 141 2 49 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 49 2 50 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 49 2 51 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 193 2 59 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 16 2 60 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 25 GROUP UNIT TREATMENT TYPE PRESCRIPTION REGENERATION ACRES 2 61 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 34 2 62 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 37 2 63 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 17 2 64 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 30 2 65 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 25 2 66 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 26 2 67 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 20 2 68 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 15 2 69 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 31 2 70 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 39 2 71 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 40 2 72 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 85 2 73 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 33 2 75 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 148 3 1 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP/WL 96 3 9 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles NRG DF/LP 18 3 11 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP/ES/AS, Plant PP 23 3 12 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP/ES/AS, Plant PP 80 3 13 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP/AS 41 3 20 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn To Be Determined* 32 3 22 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG DF/LP 30 3 25 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP/WL 29 3 29 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Slashing, Handpile/Burn NRG LP/DF 25 3 34 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant DF/WL 12 3 39 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 42 3 40 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 11 3 41 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 12 3 42 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 65 3 43 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 104 3 53 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant DF/WL 17 GROUP UNIT TREATMENT TYPE PRESCRIPTION REGENERATION ACRES 3 57 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP 93 3 58 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP 15 4 10 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP 18 4 17 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant PP 38 4 19 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn To Be Determined* 15 4 27 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP/WL 31 4 35 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 24 4 36 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF 20 4 37 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 8 4 38 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 7 4 52 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 22 4 56 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 17 4 74 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG, plant 23 5 4 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 7 5 5 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 18 6 2 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 Acres NRG PP/DF 146 6 76 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres NRG DF/LP/WB 123 6 78 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres NRG DF/LP/PP 38 6 85 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres Natural Recovery 143 7 80 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres Natural Recovery 326 7 86 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres Natural Recovery 47 7 87 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres NRG LP/DF/AS 36 8 77 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres NRG LP/DF 736 8 79 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres NRG LP/DF/PP/WB 337 8 81 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres Natural Recovery 629 8 82 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres Natural Recovery 776 8 83 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres Natural Recovery 457 8 84 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres Natural Recovery 831 8 88 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres Natural Recovery 892  Table 16. Alternative 2 total treatment acres by prescription group GROUP ALTERNATIVE 2 ACRES 1 974 2 1,132 3 745 4 223 5 25 6 449 7 410 8 4,604 Totals 8,564  Title: Figure 24. Alternative 2 (proposed action) harvest and fuels treatmentsFigure 32. Alternative 2 (proposed action) harvest and fuels treatments Design Features and Mitigation Measures The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described above for the treatment groups, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to silviculture and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The design features in table 9 pertaining to silviculture are: SILV-1, SILV-2, SILV-3, and SILV-4. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Specific design features listed above that are applicable to vegetation include not only those designed specifically to protect vegetation, but also those designed to protect other resources such as water and soil. Biophysical Settings and Vegetation-fuel Classes Proposed treatments would change vegetation-fuel classes in the project area as described above. Table 17 displays our projected vegetative-fuel class matrix for each BpS under Alternative 2 (A2), the Current vegetation-fuel class matrix (Cur), and the desired (Ref) vegetation-fuel class matrix for the project area as discussed above. Table cells that are colored red or orange BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations that are under-represented on the landscape, those that are colored green and yellow are over-represented, and no color in close to that desired. All but the CLSO, BMSC, and DLSO vegetation-fuel class for the upper subalpine fir BpS, the BMSC and DLSO vegetation-fuel classes for the lower subalpine BpS, and the DLSO vegetation-fuel class for the moist Douglas-fir BpS would move toward the desired levels. Four of the vegetation-fuel class/BpS combinations are within 20 percent of the desired condition and we consider them “close” to the desired. Note that because (1) the current condition may not fully reflect changes in vegetation-fuel classes due to the recent mountain pine beetle activity, and (2) changes in vegetation-fuel classes due to proposed treatments are modeled estimates, one must not take the current and Alternative 2 as precise values. The most important factors considered in this analysis are the direction and magnitude of vegetation-fuel class change due to the treatments and the relationship between the reference condition and the Alternative 2 direction and magnitude of change. Table 17. Alternative 2 post-treatment, current and desired vegetation-fuel classes by BpS BpS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC A2/ Cur/ Ref A2/ Cur/ Ref A2/ Cur/ Ref A2/ Cur/ Ref A2/ Cur/ Ref Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 7/ 2/ 15 21/ 31/ 25 12/ 4/ 20 19/ 8/ 25 41/ 55/ 15 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 6/ 1/ 15 22/ 35/ 25 14/ 5/ 20 18/ 10/ 25 39/ 50/ 15 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 14/ 1/ 15 16/ 31/ 10 11/ 0/ 25 24/ 1/ 40 35/ 67/ 10 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 5/ 1/ 20 15/ 21/ 40 12/ 7/ 10 32/ 25/ 5 37/ 46/ 25 Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 3/ 0/ 20 21/ 22/ 25 11/ 11/ 25 27/ 22/ 15 38/ 46/ 15 Yellow – High (Greater than desired but less than 180 percent of desired) Orange – Low (Greater than or equal to 20 percent but less than desired) No Color – Within 20% of desired Green – Very High (Greater than or equal to 180 percent of desired) Red – Very Low (less than 20 percent of desired) Species of Interest Ponderosa Pine The effects of this alternative would be to increase the presence of ponderosa pine as a stand component in treated stands, with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand. Depending upon the treatment and unit, ponderosa pine would increase due to (1) retaining PP over less preferred species during thinning increasing PP as a portion of future stand stocking relative to less preferred species, (2) increased natural establishment of PP, and (3) planting PP. The degree of PP increase is displayed in table 18. Ponderosa pine would increase to some degree on about 23 percent of the project area. Table 18. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on ponderosa pine TREATMENT DEGREE OF PP INCREASE ACRES Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection to long-term small increase in number of trees due to increased establishment in more open stands 845 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin Increase in presence relative to less preferred species, no increase in number of trees. Note that in some units PP is not currently present. 651 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration Substantial short and long-term increase due to planting and natural regeneration 633 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration Substantial short and long-term increase due to planting and natural regeneration 102 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, small due to current “trace” presence 25 Group 6 – Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches Increase in presence relative to other species due to higher ponderosa pine fire-tolerance and in tree numbers due to PP establishment in open areas 326 Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches Increase in presence relative to other species due to higher ponderosa pine fire-tolerance and in tree numbers due to PP establishment in open areas 374 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches Increase in presence relative to other species due to higher ponderosa pine fire-tolerance and in tree numbers due to PP establishment in open areas 2,506 Quaking Aspen The effects of this alternative would be to increase the presence of quaking aspen (AS) as a stand component where it is found in treated stands, with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand. Quaking aspen would increase due to (1) retaining aspen over less preferred species during thinning increasing its relative presence as a portion of future stand stocking, and (2) increased suckering of aspen due to increased growing space. Quaking aspen would increase to some degree on about 10 percent of the landscape. Table 19. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on quaking aspen TREATMENT DEGREE OF AS INCREASE ACRES Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection and increase in suckering, may be some top-killing of aspen during burning 547 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection and increase in suckering 402 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration Increase in suckering, may be some top-killing of aspen during burning 410 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration Increase in suckering, may be some top-killing of aspen during burning 15 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, may be a small increase in suckering 25 Group 6 – Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches May be some top-killing of existing stems, increased suckering due to increases in growing space 146 Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches May be some top-killing of existing stems, increased suckering due to increases in growing space 410 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches May be some top-killing of existing stems, increased suckering due to increases in growing space 337  Western Larch The effects of this alternative would be to increase the presence of western larch (WL) as a stand component with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand. Western larch would increase due to (1) retaining larch over less preferred species during thinning increasing its relative presence as a portion of future stand stocking, (2) planting larch in regeneration units, and (3) natural regeneration in regeneration units. Western larch would increase to some degree on about 3 percent of the project area. Table 20. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on western larch Treatment Degree of WL Increase Acres Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, mostly small due to trace current stocking of WL 5 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, mostly small due to small current stocking of WL 303 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration Substantial increase in numbers due to planting 184 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration Substantial increase in numbers due to planting 146 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 6 – Low-intensity No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Treatment Degree of WL Increase Acres prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Whitebark Pine The effects of this alternative would be to increase the presence of whitebark pine (WB) as a stand component where it is found in treated stands, with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand (table 21). Whitebark pine would increase due to (1) retaining WB over less preferred species during thinning increasing its relative presence as a portion of future stand stocking, (2) natural regeneration in burning units. Whitebark pine would increase to some degree on about 17 percent of the project area. Table 21. Alternative 2 effects of treatment groups on whitebark pine TREATMENT DEGREE OF WB INCREASE ACRES Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 6 – Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches Increase in presence due to establishment in open areas 123 Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches Increase in presence due to establishment in open areas 3,894 Insects and Diseases Mountain Pine Beetle Reducing tree stocking through thinning has been shown to reduce mountain pine beetle risk (appendix B). As discussed above, the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic has generally reduced the risk for a mountain pine beetle outbreak in most stands and over the landscape. The risk for a landscape-level MPB outbreak would be low into the long-term. There are, however stands containing live lodgepole, whitebark, or ponderosa pine trees in which stocking would be reduced under this project. In these treatment units (table 15), growth and vigor in the post-treatment pines would increase and MPB risk to the individual trees or small groups of trees would be reduced into the long-term. The total proposed unit area in which any of these tree species can be found is 8,564 acres although it must be noted that they are a minor component in many units and have been reduced in presence by the recent outbreak. Douglas-fir Beetle Douglas-fir beetle (DFB) activity is also positively related to tree stocking. Thinning and prescribed burning activities would reduce the risk of losing additional large Douglas-fir in treated stands into the long-term. The total proposed unit area in which Douglas-fir can be found is 7,172 acres although it must be noted that Douglas-fir is a minor component in some units. Outside of the treatment units DFB activity would continue as discussed above for untreated stands. Fires can increase the susceptibility of Douglas-fir to bark beetle attack by scorching tree crowns, basal cambium, and root systems, (appendix B). Wildfires, because of the conditions under which they burn and the damage to Douglas-fir they can cause, can substantially increase DFB mortality in the years following the fires. However, because prescribed burns are implemented under less severe fire weather and fuel moisture conditions than wildfires usually burn, they damage residual Douglas-fir less and so result in lower potential for DFB to increase (appendix B). In this alternative, about 7,172 acres containing large Douglas-fir would be prescribe burned, resulting in a relatively small increase in Douglas-fir beetle risk to individual large Douglas-fir and a very small increase in risk to Douglas-fir over the landscape. The increase in risk would be short term. Western Spruce Budworm As discussed above, western spruce budworm’s primary hosts are Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and true firs with multi-story, dense stands especially prone to developing high levels of WSB and susceptible to WSB damage. All treatments proposed in this alternative would reduce Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir and so the predisposition of stands to be impacted by WSB on about 7,257 acres. These effects would continue into the long-term. On the remaining untreated area, WSB populations would continue as described above. White Pine Blister Rust The presence of white pine blister rust would not be reduced by the treatments because the treatments would attempt to minimize mortality to whitebark pine and would not attempt to directly reduce white pine blister rust infected trees. In a number of the prescribed burn units (chapter 2, table 9, Silv-2) small openings would be created to increase the regeneration of whitebark pine. Due to the past and current levels and impact of white pine blister rust on mature whitebark pine, cone-producing trees in the project area that would provide seed for whitebark pine regeneration may be relatively resistant to white pine blister rust (Hoff et al. 2001), therefore the treatments may be increasing the establishment of trees that are more resistant to the white pine blister rust than the past forest. However, the level of white pine blister rust resistance, or the type of resistance is not known for any of the potential whitebark pine seed trees in the project area. About 3,894 acres of unit area would be treated within which (1) whitebark pine would be thinned around which would increase tree vigor and the progression of the disease, and (2) the treatment would increase the establishment of whitebark pine in small openings. Thinning around the trees and creating small openings would comprise a small portion of the treated acreage, however. Dwarf Mistletoe The presence of dwarf mistletoes would in general be reduced due to (1) preference in retaining other species over lodgepole pine, (2) preference in retaining less infected trees over more infected trees in mechanical treatment units, (3) tendency for infected trees to be damaged and die from prescribed burning (Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, Conkin 2000, Conklin and Armstrong 2002), and (4) tendency for infected tree branches to be damaged and die from prescribed burning (Harrington and Hawksworth 1990, Conkin 2000, Conklin and Armstrong 2002). Although the presence and magnitude of dwarf mistletoe is not mapped and it is not present on all unit acres, this alternative could potentially reduce dwarf mistletoe over about 8,516 acres containing lodgepole pine. Armillaria The presence of armillaria would not be directly reduced by the treatments, but treatments in stands would reduce both short-term and long-term impacts from the disease due to increases in more resistant tree species, promoting tree vigor, and reforesting to tree species suitable to the sites (Rippy et al. 2005). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans More information about compliance with standards and direction from the Forest Plan is in appendix B. Compliance of alternative 2 with Forest Plan forestwide standards pertinent to this discussion are displayed in volume 2, appendix B, table B-7. Compliance with management area standards is displayed in table B-8, and compliance with Forest Plan direction for regeneration harvest is displayed in table B-9. Alternative 3 About 6,564 acres of treatment is proposed under this alternative. This is about 27 percent of the project area. The proposed treatments for each unit are displayed in table 22 and figure 33. Total acres for each prescription group are displayed in table 23. Treatment effects for groups 1 through 8 are the same as described for alternative 2 above. Table 22. Alternative 3 proposed treatments by group and unit GROUP UNIT TREATMENT TYPE PRESCRIPTION REGENERATION ACRES 1 15 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 15 1 23 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 29 1 24 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 5 1 28 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 22 1 46b Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 27 1 47b Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 9 1 47c Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 31 1 6 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 14 1 7 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 17 1 8 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn N/A 62 2 14 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 11 2 16 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 3 2 3 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 37 2 48 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Underburn N/A 141 2 50 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 49 2 51 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Underburn or Slash Treatment along PVT N/A 193 2 59 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 16 2 61a Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpile Underburn N/A 9 2 62 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 37 2 63 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 17 2 66 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 26 2 67 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 20 2 68 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 15 2 69 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 31 2 70 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 39 2 71 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 40 2 72 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 85 GROUP UNIT TREATMENT TYPE PRESCRIPTION REGENERATION ACRES 2 73 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin N/A 33 2 75b Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 20 3 1 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP/WL 96 3 11 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn NRG DF/LP/ES/AS, Plant PP 23 3 12 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn NRG DF/LP/ES/AS, Plant PP 80 3 13 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP/AS 41 3 22a Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG DF/LP 22 3 25 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP/WL 29 3 34 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant DF/WL 12 3 39 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 26 3 40 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 11 3 41 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 12 3 42 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 65 3 43 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP 104 3 53 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant DF/WL 17 3 57 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP 93 3 58 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP 15 3 9 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles NRG DF/LP 18 4 10 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Underburn NRG DF/LP, Plant PP 18 4 27 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG LP/DF, Plant DF/PP/WL 31 4 35 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 24 GROUP UNIT TREATMENT TYPE PRESCRIPTION REGENERATION ACRES 4 36 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF 20 4 37 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 8 4 38 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 7 4 52 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn NRG LP, Plant DF/WL 22 4 74 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn NRG, plant 23 5 4 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 7 5 5 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 18 6 2 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres NRG PP/DF 146 6 78 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres NRG DF/LP/PP 38 6 85 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres Natural Recovery 143 7 87 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres NRG LP/DF/AS 36 8 79 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres NRG LP/DF/PP/WB 337 8 82 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres Natural Recovery 776 8 83 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres Natural Recovery 457 8 84 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres Natural Recovery 831 8 88 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres Natural Recovery 865 9 17a Prescribed Fire Underburn NRG LP/DF, Plant PP 38 9 19a Prescribed Fire Underburn To Be Determined 15 9 20a Prescribed Fire Underburn To Be Determined 24 9 29a Prescribed Fire Underburn N/A 25 9 30a Prescribed Fire Underburn N/A 14 9 31a Prescribed Fire Underburn N/A 16 9 32a Prescribed Fire Underburn N/A 45 9 44a Prescribed Fire Underburn N/A 97 9 45a Prescribed Fire Underburn N/A 38 9 80a Prescribed Fire Jackpot Burn N/A 326 10 46a Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 223 10 47a Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles N/A 180  Table 23. Alternative 3 total treatment acres by prescription group Group Alternative 3 Acres 1 232 2 822 3 664 4 152 5 25 6 326 7 36 8 3,265 9 637 10 403 Total 6,564 For alternative 3, the interdisciplinary team developed two additional prescription groups. Group 9: This group contains 10 units that are also described above and displayed in table 15 as being in groups 1, 3, and 4. These are a mixed group of units whose common characteristic is that the proposed treatment was changed to a low-intensity and low-severity underburn in Alternative 3. The units are mixed species and dominated (greater than one-half of the basal area) by either lodgepole pine (Units 17a, 19a, 20a, and 29a) or Douglas-fir (Units 30a, 31a, 32a, and 44a) with ponderosa pine, western larch, Engelmann spruce or aspen components. The average age in the units ranges from 85 to 150 years, average overstory diameter ranges from 11 to 16 inches d.b.h. and stocking can be considered high, or at least could be before the mountain pine beetle epidemic. Mountain pine beetle mortality ranges from high in the Douglas-fir units to severe in those dominated by lodgepole pine. Units 30a, 31a, 32a, and 44a are generally single-story but do have patches of understory, which is mostly Douglas-fir. Units 17a, 19a, 20a, and 29a are generally two-story (or were before the mountain pine beetle epidemic) with sapling and pole understories of mostly Douglas-fir with minor lodgepole pine and subalpine fir components. Group 10: This group includes units 46a and 47a, which in Alternative 2 are proposed for treatment under Group 1. Treatments would be designed in a mosaic pattern to maintain cover and forage for wildlife while promoting ponderosa pine and aspen, and reducing ladder fuels. Portions of the stands would be thinned to (1) reduce understory competition from around large ponderosa pine trees, (2) thin heavily-stocked groups of trees on sites historically dominated by ponderosa pine, and (3) remove conifer competition from within and around quaking aspen. To reduce understory competition around large ponderosa pine, and move areas toward or maintain multi-storied ponderosa pine structure, within 50 feet of ponderosa pine trees larger than 17 inches d.b.h. remove all but two trees. The retained trees should be of varied size and age classes. In areas dominated by ponderosa pine, but lacking live trees greater than 17 inches d.b.h., trees would be thinned to 48 to 109 trees per acre depending upon tree size. Ponderosa pine snags greater than 17 inches d.b.h. would be favored for retention to meet Forest Plan direction for snags. Conifers less than 17 inches d.b.h. would be removed up to 100 feet of existing aspen patches. Post-thinning, slash would be jackpot burned or hand-piled and burned to reduce fuels. Treatments would affect up to 50 percent of these units. Figure 33. Alternative 3 treatments Direct and Indirect Effects Prescription Groups Group 9 effects would differ somewhat between those described above as dominated by lodgepole pine and those dominated by Douglas-fir. In Units 30a, 31a, 32a, and 44a, the low-intensity and low-severity underburns would result in sapling and pole tree mortality, with most of the mortality being in the saplings and few poles being killed. Due to the already single-story nature of the stands, the post-treatment diameter distributions would change little, and stand structures would not change. Figure 34 displays the projected post-underburn diameter distribution for Stand 41502043 (Unit 30a and part of Unit 32a). The dead trees are not being shown. The modeling exercise shows the very small trees being killed, but almost no trees above the 8-inch d.b.h. class when compared with the current condition (figure 24).  Title: Stand 41502043 post underburnFigure 34. Stand 41502043 post underburn In Units 17a, 19a, 20a, and 29a, which were two-story before the mountain pine beetle epidemic and are now more single-story, the underburn would also result in sapling and pole tree mortality with most of the mortality being to the saplings. Stand structures would not change, but the stand understories would be more open. Figure 35displays the projected post-underburn diameter distribution for Stand 41501056 (Unit 17a). The dead trees are not being shown. The modeling exercise shows many, but not all, of the very small trees being killed, but almost no trees above the 8-inch d.b.h. class when compared with the current condition (figure 25).  Title: Stand 41501056 post underburnFigure 35. Stand 41501056 post underburn Group 10 treatments would reduce stand mid-stories and understories and the stands would be more open, but since only up to one-half of the stand areas are being treated they would become patchier. Stand structures would not change. Figure 36 and figure 37 display the projected post-underburn diameter distribution for Stand 42303130 (Unit 46a). Figure 36 scale is the same as shown above for the current condition (figure 18), and figure 37 scale has been changed to better display the larger trees. The post-treatment stand would have 974 TPA, with about 13 TPA greater than 17 inches d.b.h. About 632 TPA less than 1 inch in d.b.h. are not being displayed.  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46a) post-treatment in Alternative 3Figure 36. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46a) post-treatment in alternative 3  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46a) post-treatment in Alternative 3Figure 37. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46a) post-treatment in alternative 3 Biophysical Settings and Vegetation-fuel Classes Proposed treatments would change vegetation-fuel classes in the project area as described above. Table 24 displays our projected vegetative fuel class matrix for each BpS under alternative 3 (A3), the current vegetation-fuel class matrix (Cur), and the desired (Ref) vegetation-fuel class matrix. Table cells that are colored red or orange BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations are under-represented on the landscape, those that are colored green and yellow are over-represented, and no color is close to that desired. All but the CLSO, BMSC, and DLSO vegetation-fuel class for the upper subalpine fir BpS, the BMSC and DLSO vegetation-fuel classes for the lower subalpine BpS, and the DLSO vegetation-fuel class for the moist Douglas-fir BpS would move toward the desired levels. Four of the vegetation-fuel class/BpS combinations are within 20 percent of the desired condition and we consider them “close” to the desired. Table 24. Alternative 3 post-treatment, current and desired vegetation-fuel classes by BpS BpS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Dry) 6/ 2/ 15 25/ 31/ 25 8/ 4/ 20 14/ 8/ 25 47/ 55/ 15 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains (Moist) 4/ 1/ 15 27/ 35/ 25 11/ 5/ 20 16/ 10/ 25 42/ 50/ 15 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir 11/ 1/ 15 20/ 31/ 10 7/ 0/ 25 16/ 1/ 40 45/ 67/ 10 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest 5/ 1/ 20 15/ 21/ 40 12/ 7/ 10 32/ 25/ 5 37/ 46/ 25 BpS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref A3/ Cur/ Ref Interior West Upper Subalpine Forest 3/ 0/ 20 21/ 22/ 25 11/ 11/ 25 27/ 22/ 15 38/ 46/ 15 Yellow – High (Greater than desired but less than 180 percent of desired) Orange – Low (Greater than or equal to 20 percent but less than desired) No Color – Within 20% of desired Green – Very High (Greater than or equal to 180 percent of desired) Red – Very Low (less than 20 percent of desired) Species of Interest Ponderosa Pine This alternative would increase ponderosa pine presence in treated stands, with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand. Depending upon the treatment and unit, ponderosa pine would increase due to (1) retaining PP over less preferred species during thinning increasing PP as a portion of future stand stocking relative to less preferred species, (2) increased natural establishment of PP, and (3) planting PP. The degree of PP increase is displayed in table 25. Ponderosa pine would increase to some degree on about 13 percent of the project area. Table 25. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on ponderosa pine Treatment Degree of PP Increase Acres Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection to long-term small increase in number of trees due to increased establishment in more open stands 181 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin Increase in presence relative to less preferred species, no increase in number of trees. Note that in some units PP is not currently present. 447 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration Substantial short and long-term increase due to planting and natural regeneration 547 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration Substantial short and long-term increase due to planting and natural regeneration 49 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, small due to current “trace” presence 25 Group 6 – Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches Increase in presence relative to other species due to higher ponderosa pine fire-tolerance and in tree numbers due to PP establishment in open areas 326 Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches Increase in presence relative to other species due to higher ponderosa pine fire-tolerance and in tree numbers due to PP establishment in open areas 0 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches Increase in presence relative to other species due to higher ponderosa pine fire-tolerance and in tree numbers due to PP establishment in open areas 1168 Group 9 - Low-intensity and severity prescribed burning Increase in presence relative to less fire-resistant species (Units 31a, 32a, 44a, 45a) 196 Group 10 – Mix of Intermediate Increase in presence relative to less preferred species 200 Treatment Degree of PP Increase Acres Harvest and no treatment during thinning tree selection to long-term very small increase in number of trees due to increased establishment in more open stands Quaking Aspen Alternative 3 would also increase the presence of quaking aspen (AS) as a stand component where it is found in treated stands, with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand. The degree of AS increase is displayed in table 26. Quaking aspen would increase to some degree on about 6 percent of the project area. Table 26. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on quaking aspen Treatment Degree of AS Increase Acres Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection and increase in suckering, may be some top-killing of aspen during burning 83 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection and increase in suckering 326 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration Increase in suckering, may be some top-killing of aspen during burning 396 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration Increase in suckering, may be some top-killing of aspen during burning 0 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, may be a small increase in suckering 25 Group 6 – Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches May be some top-killing of existing stems, increased suckering due to increases in growing space 146 Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches May be some top-killing of existing stems, increased suckering due to increases in growing space 36 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches May be some top-killing of existing stems, increased suckering due to increases in growing space 337 Group 9 - Low-intensity and severity prescribed burning May be some increase as a response to MPB mortality and prescribed burning 39 Group 10 – Mix of Intermediate Harvest and no treatment Increase in presence due to competing conifer removal <20 Western Larch Alternative 3 would also increase the presence of western larch (WL) as a stand component with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand. Western larch would increase due to (1) retaining larch over less preferred species during thinning increasing its relative presence as a portion of future stand stocking, (2) planting larch in regeneration units, and (3) natural regeneration in regeneration units. The degree of WL increase is displayed in table 27. Western larch would increase to some degree on about 2 percent of the project area. Table 27. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on western larch Treatment Degree of WL Increase Acres Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, mostly small due to trace current stocking of WL 5 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin Increase in presence relative to less preferred species during thinning tree selection, mostly small due to small current stocking of WL 197 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration Substantial increase in numbers due to planting 176 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration Substantial increase in numbers due to planting 91 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 6 – Low-intensity prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 9 - Low-intensity and severity prescribed burning Increase in presence relative to less fire-resistant species 38 Group 10 – Mix of Intermediate Harvest and no treatment No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Whitebark Pine The effects of this alternative would be to increase the presence of whitebark pine (WB) as a stand component where it is found in treated stands, with the degree of increase varying depending upon the type of treatment and the individual stand (table 28). Whitebark pine would increase due to (1) retaining WB over less preferred species during thinning increasing its relative presence as a portion of future stand stocking, (2) natural regeneration in burning units. The degree of WB increase is displayed in table 28. Whitebark pine would increase to some degree on about 14 percent of the project area. Table 28. Alternative 3 effects of treatment groups on whitebark pine Treatment Degree of WB Increase Acres Group 1 –Intermediate Harvest No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 2 –Pre-commercial thin No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 3 - Seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 4 – Clearcut harvest/regeneration No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 5 - Remove dead and dying trees, slash noncommercial-sized trees No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 6 – Low-intensity Increase in presence due to 0 Treatment Degree of WB Increase Acres prescribed burning with 5-10 acre mortality patches establishment in open areas Group 7 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 5, 10, 20 acre mortality patches No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 8 – Mixed-severity prescribed burning with 30-75 acre mortality patches Increase in presence due to establishment in open areas 3,265 Group 9 - Low-intensity and severity prescribed burning No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Group 10 – Mix of Intermediate Harvest and no treatment No increase expected due to lack of presence 0 Insects and Diseases Mountain Pine Beetle Under Alternative 3, treatments would reduce stocking on about 6,564 acres containing lodgepole, whitebark, or ponderosa pine trees. These treatments would reduce stocking and so mountain pine beetle risk with the effects lasting into the long term. However, as noted above, the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic has already reduced stocking in many stands, effectively reducing risk. Douglas-fir Beetle Under alternative 3, thinning and prescribed burning activities would reduce the risk of losing large Douglas-fir in treated stands into the long-term on at least 5,203 acres. Outside of the treatment units DFB activity would continue as discussed above for untreated stands. Prescribed burning would result in a relatively small and short-term increase in Douglas-fir beetle risk to individual large Douglas-fir on about 3,031 acres. There would be a very small increase in risk to Douglas-fir over the landscape. Western Spruce Budworm All treatments proposed in this alternative would reduce Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir and so the predisposition of stands to be impacted by WSB on about 5,288 acres. These effects would continue into the long term. On the remaining untreated area, WSB populations would continue as described above. White Pine Blister Rust As with alternative 2, the presence of white pine blister rust would not be reduced by the treatments, but small openings would be created to increase the regeneration of whitebark pine which may have some degree of resistance to the rust. About 2,265 acres of unit area would be treated within which the treatment would (1) thin around present whitebark pine, increasing vigor and the progression of the disease, and (2) increase the establishment of whitebark pine in small openings. The thinned areas and openings would comprise a small portion of the treated unit acreage. Dwarf Mistletoe As in alternative 2, the presence of dwarf mistletoes would in general be reduced due to (1) preference in retaining other species over lodgepole pine, (2) preference in retaining less infected trees over more infected trees in mechanical treatment units, (3) tendency for infected trees to be damaged and die from prescribed burning, and (4) tendency for infected tree branches to be damaged and die from prescribed burning. Although the presence and magnitude of dwarf mistletoe is not mapped and is certainly not present on all unit acres, this alternative could potentially reduce dwarf mistletoe about 6,564 acres containing lodgepole pine. Armillaria The presence of armillaria would not be directly reduced by the treatments, but treatments in stands would reduce both short-term and long-term impacts from the disease due to increases in more resistant tree species, promoting tree vigor, and reforesting to tree species suitable to the sites (Rippy et al. 2005). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans More information about compliance with standards and direction from the Forest Plan is in appendix B. Compliance of alternative 3 with Forest Plan forestwide standards pertinent to this discussion are displayed in volume 2, appendix B, table B-10. Compliance with management area standards is displayed in table B-11, and compliance with Forest Plan direction for regeneration harvest is displayed in table B-12. Alternative Comparison Purpose and Need: Enhance and Restore Aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine species and habitats To compare the three alternatives success in restoring and enhancing aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine, in this analysis we compare (1) how the alternatives would result in within-stand changes in tree species compositions as a result of proposed treatments and the (2) proportion of the analysis area on which quaking aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine would increase in presence. Since whitebark pine has been declining in presence due to disease and bark beetle activity and is now considered a sensitive species in Region 1, we also included it in this discussion. As discussed above, whether a treatment would result in an increase in a particular tree species depends upon the type of treatment, the characteristics of the tree species, and the current presence of the tree species in the area receiving the treatment. Treatments vary widely in the opportunity they provide to manipulate the presence of a particular species. Intermediate treatments provide a great deal of control through tree selection preferences applied during thinning if the tree species is present and regeneration treatments provide a great deal of control through control of seed sources and planting of preferred species. Prescribe burns provide opportunities to increase fire-tolerant or shade-intolerant early seral species such as ponderosa pine, western larch, and quaking aspen through killing competing fire-intolerant species and through creating open areas for regeneration although the degree of control is not great simply due to the variable nature of prescribed burning. For alternative 2, tables 9, 10, 11 and 12 display the expected degree of increase for ponderosa pine, quaking aspen, western larch, and whitebark pine for each treatment group and acreage estimates over which those increases would occur. The same information for alternative 3 can be found in tables 16, 17, 18 and 19. In table 29 that follows, we summarize the effects of the three alternatives upon within-stand tree species compositions by treatment group and as a proportion of the landscape. Alternative 1 would continue the current condition in which the four species have declined in presence within stands and upon the landscape due to succession and the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic. In the long-term, those four species would continue to decline as succession continues. Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in an increase in the presence of all four species, with alternative 2 leading to the greatest increase due to the greater treatment area involved, and the greater area in regeneration and intermediate treatments which have the greatest potential for modifying species composition at the stand level. Table 29. Alternative comparison for ponderosa pine, western larch, whitebark pine, and aspen Issue Indicator Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Within stand changes in tree species compositions in proposed treatment units by prescription group All groups: little short-term change from current condition, long-term widespread increase in Engelmann spruce (ES), subalpine fir (SAF), and Douglas-fir (DF) due to succession; long-term continuation of lodgepole in individual stands as it regenerates following the bark beetle epidemic and long-term landscape-level decline due to succession; long-term decrease in ponderosa pine, quaking aspen, western larch, and whitebark pine in individual stands and on the landscape Group 1: reduce Engelmann spruce (ES), subalpine fir (SAF), lodgepole pine (LP), and Douglas-fir (DF) on 974 acres; increase in ponderosa pine (PP) on 845 acres, western larch (WL) on 5 acres, aspen (AS) on 547 acres, whitebark pine (WB) on 0 acres Group 2: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 1,132 acres; increase PP on 651 acres, WL on 303 acres, AS on 402 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 3: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 745 acres; increase PP on 633 acres, WL on 184 acres, AS on 410 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 4: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 223 acres; increase PP on 102 acres, WL on 146 acres, AS on 15 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 5: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 25 acres; increase PP on 25 acres, WL on 0 acres, AS on 25 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 6: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 449 acres; increase PP on 326 acres, WL on 0 acres, AS on 146 acres, WB on 123 acres Group 7: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 410 acres; increase PP on 374 acres, WL on 0 acres, and AS on 410 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 8: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 8,564 acres; increase PP on 2,506 acres, WL on 0 acres, and AS on 337 acres, WB on 3,894 acres Group 1: reduce Engelmann spruce (ES), subalpine fir (SAF), lodgepole pine (LP), and Douglas-fir (DF) on 232 acres; increase in ponderosa pine (PP) on 181 acres, western larch (WL) on 5 acres, aspen (AS) on 83 acres, whitebark pine (WB) on 0 acres Group 2: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 822 acres; increase PP on 447 acres, WL on 197 acres, AS on 326 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 3: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 664 acres; increase PP on 547 acres, WL on 176 acres, AS on 396 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 4: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 152 acres; increase PP on 49 acres, WL on 91 acres, AS on 0 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 5: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 25 acres; increase PP on 25 acres, WL on 0 acres, AS on 25 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 6: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 326 acres; increase PP on 326 acres, WL on 0 acres, AS on 146 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 7: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 36 acres; increase PP on 0 acres, WL on 0 acres, and AS on 36 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 8: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 3,265 acres; increase PP on 1,168 acres, WL on 0 acres, and AS on 337 acres, WB on 3,894 acres Group 9: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 637 acres; increase PP on 196 acres, WL on 38 acres, and AS on 39 acres, WB on 0 acres Group 10: reduce ES, SAF,LP, DF on 403 acres; increase PP on 200 acres, WL on 0 acres, and AS on <20 acres, WB on 0 acres Landscape-level changes Short-term would be no change in Ponderosa pine: increase to some degree on about 23 Ponderosa pine: increase to some degree on about 13 Issue Indicator Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 in the presence of aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, and whitebark pine ponderosa pine, western larch, whitebark pine, slight increase in quaking aspen; long-term decline in all four species percent of project area Quaking aspen: increase to some degree on about 10 percent of project area Western larch: increase to some degree on about 3 percent of project area Whitebark pine: increase to some degree on about 17 percent of project area percent of project area Quaking aspen: increase to some degree on about 6 percent of project area Western larch: increase to some degree on about 2 percent of project area Whitebark pine: increase to some degree on about 14 percent of project area Purpose and Need: Improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects To compare how the three alternatives would improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape, we compare (1) the expected within-stand changes in stand structures and species compositions in terms of tree diameter distributions for proposed treatment type groups, and (2) landscape-level changes in stand structures in terms of the proportion of change within BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations. In table 30 we display the expected effects of the three alternatives on within-stand species compositions. Under alternative 1, the current condition would persist, and the general track of tree species on the landscape would be toward increases in Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce and decreases in the early seral species—ponderosa pine, quaking aspen, western larch, whitebark pine, and lodgepole pine. Lodgepole pine would regenerate in many areas in which it was a major component before the mountain pine beetle epidemic, becoming a component in mixed-species stands with Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir. Treatments in both alternatives 2 and 3 would modify the current condition and increase ponderosa pine, western larch, quaking aspen, and whitebark pine as discussed above. Both alternatives would improve the mix of tree species in treated areas, resulting in tree species mixtures that would be more diverse and resilient. Alternative 2 would result in greater effects than Alternative 3 due to the greater acreage treated, and the greater acreage treated with intermediate and regeneration treatments. In table 30 we compare the effects of the three alternatives on stand structures in terms of tree diameter distributions for proposed treatment type groups. Alternative 1 would continue the current condition in the short term and long term; stand understories would become denser and the stands more closed. Stand diameter distributions as displayed in figures 2 through 9 would remain the same in the short term and in the long term would tend to become more steeply weighted toward smaller diameters due to ingrowth and natural mortality of the larger diameter classes. Treatments in both alternatives 2 and 3 would modify the track that the stands are on with the degree and nature of the effects depending upon the type of treatment. Intermediate harvests (Groups 1 and 10) would “flatten” the diameter distributions by thinning small and mid-sized trees while retaining the largest trees—creating open multi-story structures. Precommercial thinning (Group 2) would create open, single-story stands by pre-commercially thinning even-aged, closed, single-story plantations. Regeneration treatments (Groups 3 and 4) would create even-aged stands with a small number of older and larger trees present as seed sources, shelter, or retention trees. Removing dead and dying trees and slashing undesirable understory trees (Group 5) would create stands that are open and almost single-story. Low-intensity prescribed burns (Groups 6 and 9) would flatten the diameter distributions due to killing many of the smaller diameter trees and would create stands that are more open and still multi-story. Mixed-severity prescribed burns (Groups 7 and 8) would create areas that are mosaics of structures including open and closed single-story, open and closed multi-story, and early-seral grass/forb/shrub openings. The effects of all treatments would last into the long-term but eventually the stands would become more closed and multi-story as trees grow and as the stand understories fill in. Table 30. Alternative comparison for stand structures ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 All groups: little short-term change from current condition; long-term increase in stand understories as stands impacted by mountain pine beetle regenerate and as shade-tolerant trees continue to become established; single-story stands would become multi-story Group 1 (974 acres): Stand diameter distributions would become almost flat (figure 10) compared to the current condition (figure 2); stands would be open multi-story structure in the short term but would become more closed multi-story in the long term as understories become denser Group 2 (1,132 acres): Stand diameter distributions would become more single-story (figure 11) compared to current condition (figure 2) due to thinning of small suppressed trees; stands would be open single story in the short term, becoming closed single-story in the long term Group 3 (745 acres): Stands would have larger green trees remaining (figure 11); they would be single-story and very open in the short-term and would become two-story and less open in the long term as they regenerate Group 4 (223 acres): Stands have only small groups and individual reserve trees remaining; they would be very open in the short term and would become single-story and less open in the long term as they regenerate Group 5 (25 acres): Stand diameter distributions would become more single-story (figure 12) compared to the current condition (figure 2) due to thinning the understory; they would be open and almost single-story in the short-term and would become closed and two-story in the long term as understories redevelop Group 6 (449 acres): Stand diameter distributions would become a little flatter (figure 13) than the current condition (figure 4) due to prescribed burn mortality in small trees; they would be open multi-story in the short term and would become closed multi-story in the long term as understories redevelop Group 7 (410 acres): Stand structures would be very complex with tree distributions reflected in figures 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11, and 12 being found within the burn units due to the highly variable nature of the treatment Group 8 (4,604): Same as for group 7 Group 1 (232 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 2 (822 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 3 (664 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 4 (152 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 5 (25 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 6 (326 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 7 (36 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 8 (3,265 acres): Same as for Alternative 2 Group 9 (637 acres): Stand diameter distributions would become flatter (figures 18 and 19) than the current conditions (figures 8 and 9) due to the smallest diameter trees being mostly killed by the treatments; they would become more open in the short-term but structures would not change from their current single-story and 2-stories. In the long term the single-story stands would become more 2-story. Group 10 (403 acres): Stand diameter distributions would become flatter (figure 20) compared to the current condition (figure 2); because only up to one-half of the stands would be treated, they would be a combination of open multi-story structure and closed structure in the short-term but would become closed multi-story in the long term as understories become denser in the treated areas In table 31 we compare the effects of the three alternatives on stand structures at the landscape level by comparing the proportion of change within Biophysical Setting/vegetation fuel class combinations. The table displays the percent of BpS area in each vegetation/fuel class for the current condition (Cur) discussed in the Stone Dry Vegetation Report (Milburn et al. 2009), the reference condition (Ref) discussed in the Stone Dry Vegetation Report, that estimated to occur under alternative 2 (A2), and that estimated to occur under Alternative 3 (A3). Note that as discussed above, the current condition is from the Stone Dry Vegetation Report (Milburn et al. 2009) which does not include an in-depth analysis of vegetation-fuel class changes due to the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic. As discussed above: (1) the current condition may not fully reflect changes in vegetation-fuel classes due to the recent mountain pine beetle activity, and (2) changes in vegetation-fuel classes due to proposed treatments are modeled estimates, therefore one must not take the current and alternative estimates as precise values. In this analysis, we use table 31 to discuss and compare the direction and magnitude of vegetation-fuel class change. As discussed and displayed above, under alternative 1 in the short-term the current condition would persist, which in general is below desired in (1) early seral and mid-seral open for all Biophysical Settings, (2) mid-seral closed in the two subalpine fir Biophysical Settings, and (3) in late-seral open for the two Douglas-fir and the ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir Biophysical Settings (table 14). Vegetation-fuel classes are above desired in all other combinations. Long-term trends under alternative 1 would be: decreasing early seral, mid-seral closed, mid-seral open, and late-seral open in almost all Biophysical Settings due to tree growth and filling in of stand understories (table 14). Both alternative 2 and alternative 3 would: (1) increase area in early-seral for all BpS, (2) decrease area in mid-seral closed for all BpS, (3) increase area in mid-seral open for all but upper subalpine BpS, (4) increase area in late-seral open for all BpS, and (5) decrease area in late-seral closed in all Bps. Alternative 2 would bring about greater change than alternative 3 due largely to the greater acreage treated. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would move the vegetation-fuel classes toward the reference condition, but largely due to the small portion of the analysis area proposed for treatment there would still be relatively great differences between present and reference condition for many BpS/vegetation-fuel class combinations. Table 31. Alternative comparison for landscape-level stand structures BPS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains-Dry (23 percent of analysis area) 2/7/6/15 31/21/25/25 4/12/8/20 8/19/14/25 55/41/47/15 Douglas-fir Interior Northern and Central Rocky Mountains-Moist (24 percent of analysis area) 1/6/4/15 35/22/27/25 5/14/11/20 10/18/16/25 50/39/42/15 Ponderosa Pine-Douglas-fir (32 percent of analysis area) 1/14/11/15 31/16/20/10 0/11/7/25 1/24/16/40 67/35/45/10 Interior West Lower Subalpine Forest (14 percent of analysis area) 1/5/5/20 21/15/15/40 7/12/12/10 25/32/32/5 46/37/37/25 Interior West Upper 0/3/3/20 22/21/21/25 11/11/11/25 22/27/27/15 46/38/38/15 BPS AESP BMSC CMSO DLSO ELSC CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF CUR/A2/A3/REF Subalpine Forest (2 percent of analysis area) Purpose and Need: Forest health in terms of reduced susceptibility (increased resistance) of individual stands and the landscape to diseases and insects found within the project area of concern In table 32we compare the three alternatives in terms of susceptibility to several insects and diseases that are impacting stands in the project area. Under alternative 1, in the short term there would be little change from the current condition, which in general is (1) low and long term decreasing risk for those insects and diseases dependent upon early seral trees such as the pines (e.g. mountain pine beetle), (2) higher and long-term increasing risk and impacts from those dependent upon Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce, and (3) relatively low but long-term increase in susceptibility to armillaria which affects all conifers but for which pines and western larch are more resistant than the other conifers. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would generally reduce susceptibility to insects and diseases in treated stands and on the landscape. Exceptions to this would be white pine blister rust, for which we cannot say that the treatments would directly reduce the disease and Douglas-fir beetle for which the prescribed burning may increase risk in the treated areas to a small degree and short period of time. Over the landscape, both alternatives would increase resistance to insects and diseases by increasing tree species diversity and age class diversity, reducing stocking and so increasing individual tree resistance, and modifying structures. Alternative 2 would reduce susceptibility to a greater degree than alternative 3, largely because a greater area is being treated. Table 32. Alternative comparison for insects and diseases ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Mountain pine beetle: risk would be low in most stands and at a landscape level due to the recent epidemic; increasing stocking would result in increased risk to remaining large ponderosa pine Douglas-fir beetle: little change in the short term; increasing risk in the long term due to increasing stocking and increases in presence of larger Douglas-fir Western spruce budworm: little change in the short term; long-term increase due to increases in host species and multi-story stands Mountain pine beetle: 8,506 acres of treatment would reduce risk to remaining pine trees into the long term Douglas-fir beetle: 7,172 acres of treatment would reduce risk to Douglas-fir into the long term with a possible small short-term increase in activity due to prescribed burning Western spruce budworm: Host species (Engelmann spruce, Douglas-fir, subalpine fir) would be reduced on about 7,172 acres with a shift toward non-host species White pine blister rust: rust would not be reduced directly by the treatments, treatments would promote natural regeneration from remaining whitebark pine which may be resistant to the rust and would increase vigor of white pine which have been thinned around reducing the progression of the disease Dwarf mistletoe: lodgepole pine dwarf mistletoe would potentially be reduced on about 8,516 acres containing lodgepole with a long-term decrease due to increases in non-host species Mountain pine beetle: 6,564 acres of treatment would reduce risk to remaining pine trees into the long-term Douglas-fir beetle: 5,203 acres of treatment would reduce risk to Douglas-fir into the long term with a possible small short-term increase due to prescribed burning Western spruce budworm: Host species (Engelmann spruce, Douglas-fir, subalpine fir) would be reduced on about 5,288 acres with a shift toward non-host species White pine blister rust: rust would not be reduced directly by the treatments, treatments would promote natural regeneration from remaining whitebark pine which may be resistant to the rust and increase vigor of white pine which have been thinned around reducing the progression of the disease ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 White pine blister rust: no change in levels from current condition Dwarf mistletoe: short term no increase from current levels; long-term impacts from lodgepole pine dwarf mistletoe in current infected understory trees Armillaria root rot: short-term little change from current condition; long-term increase due to increase in less susceptible species and stocking Armillaria root rot: increase in short-term and long-term resistance to the disease where found over 8,564 treatment acres Dwarf mistletoe: lodgepole pine dwarf mistletoe would potentially be reduced on about 6,564 acres containing lodgepole with a long-term decrease due to increases in non-host species Armillaria root rot: increase in short-term and long-term resistance to the disease where found over 6,564 treatment acres Transportation Introduction Vegetation management treatments proposed in the Stonewall project include precommercial thinning, commercial thinning, and regeneration harvest and prescribed burning. The objective is to restore the ecosystem to a historic or natural state or trajectory. Proposed thinning and regeneration harvest treatments would include removal of material, and would therefore require haul route access. Haul route improvements are the primary topic addressed by this section. Methodology Region 1 Timber Strike Team engineers visited the project area and surveyed approximately 75 percent of the project haul routes, documenting improvement needs for haul vehicles and water quality improvements in line with Montana Best Management Practices (BMPs) (Logan 2001). The transportation planner then visited a sample of project roads in September 2010. Geographic information systems (GIS) tools were used to track and analyze road location, mileage and density within the project area. The HNF Transportation Atlas (Helena National Forest 2011) was used for the analysis, which includes the inventory of routes. On-the-ground reconnaissance was completed on most project routes to observe current conditions and determine needs for short- and long-term treatments. Incomplete and Unavailable Information Engineering road surveys and accompanying road logs were completed for approximately 75 percent of the project haul routes. This information and the associated cost estimates were then extrapolated and applied to the remaining 25 percent of unsurveyed roads. Overview of Issues Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on plants were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Indicators Indicators used in this analysis to discuss how the alternatives would address the purpose and need for the project are: · Existing road mileage and road density within the project area · Proposed activities involving the existing transportation network for project implementation Affected Environment Existing Condition An extensive road network exists within the project area to support community access and management activities of National Forest System (NFS) lands, including mining, grazing, and timber management. The 76.4 miles of existing roads located within the boundary of the Stonewall Project area equates to a road density of approximately 2.04 miles per square mile. The additional 11.3 miles of roads outside the project area are included in the transportation analysis because they connect to and provide access to the project area. Primary project access routes from Montana State Highway 200 include Forest Roads 626, 1800, 1824 and 4106. Sections of these routes are under Lewis and Clark County jurisdiction and access NFS roads within the project area. Table 33. Stonewall project area roads summary by jurisdiction ROAD MILEAGE JURISDICTION 3.3 miles Private 1.5 miles State of Montana 4.7 miles Lewis & Clark County 78.2 miles Forest Service Environmental Consequences The Responsible Official directed the interdisciplinary team that the Stonewall Project minimize changes to the Forest transportation system because the subsequent Route and Area Designation Process will be addressing travel management changes related to motor vehicle use. Therefore, the Stonewall Project transportation activities only accommodate the associated vegetation treatments. Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis Spatial analysis boundaries for transportation systems are limited to 75.6 miles of existing roads within the project area boundary and approximately 11.3 miles of roads outside, but adjacent to and accessing, the project area. A total of 86.9 miles of existing roads would be included in analysis for the Stonewall Vegetation Project. Analysis timeframes for this project cover the schedule for implementation of the prescribed vegetation and fuels treatment, which is estimated to take up to 10 years from decision date. The proposed transportation system changes for this project are included. Connected Actions, Past, Present, and Foreseeable Activities Relevant to Cumulative Effects Analysis The Forest Service would continue to apply recurrent road maintenance for National Forest System roads within the analysis area. Other routes in the analysis area and not on the Forest Transportation System would be maintained by the applicable owner and users. Road surface blading and culvert cleaning are typical annual maintenance tasks. Under the Forestwide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction — Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project (Helena National Forest 2010), danger trees located within approximately 125 feet of open roads would be felled and removed to improve the safety of road users. Associated roads in the Stonewall Project area include National Forest System roads 1800, 1824, 4106, 607, 607-D1, 607-H1 and 626. In addition, treatments would occur to fell and remove danger trees in and adjacent to Pine Grove Campground and the Lincoln Cemetery, and Old Lincoln Townsite Administrative Sites. Haul roads associated with danger tree removal would include varying amounts of maintenance depending on condition of the road and magnitude of project use proposed on the road. Two existing 48-inch diameter culverts in the project area are scheduled to be replaced under a separate Southwest Crown Collaborative Forest Restoration project effort. These are located on National Forest System Road 4106 at the crossings with Klondike and Theodore Creeks. Finally, the Pine Grove Campground would continue to receive use and traffic during the open season from May 15 to November 15 each year. Alternative 1 – No Action Direct and Indirect Effects Under the no action alternative, no changes would be made to the existing transportation network on and adjacent to the project area. Roads would continue to receive use for utilization and administration of NFS lands and access to locations such as Lincoln Gulch, Pine Grove Campground, private mining claims, and southern Scapegoat Wilderness. Roads would be maintained periodically to comply with BMPs. However, roads would not be improved to accommodate safe use of haul vehicles at this time. Cumulative Effects Under the no action alternative, there would be no cumulative effects or impacts on the project transportation network. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The no action alternative complies with the HNF Forest Plan and State and Federal law. Other Relevant Mandatory Disclosures There are no other disclosures for the Stonewall Vegetation Project. Summary of Effects No changes would be made to the existing transportation network on and adjacent to the project area. There would be no cumulative effects or impacts on the project transportation network. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Figure 38 that follows displays the transportation system for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, alternative 2, by jurisdiction.  Title: Transportation system for alternative 2-proposed actionFigure 38. Transportation system for alternative 2-proposed action Design Features and Mitigation Measures The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to transportation and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The design features in table 9 pertaining to transportation are RDS-1, through RDS-10. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to both action alternatives. Specific design features listed above applicable to transportation are designed to protect other resources such as water and soil. Direct and Indirect Effects Under the proposed action, approximately 48.2 miles of roads would access vegetation treatment units and connect with Montana State Highway 200. Nearly 45.6 miles of existing roads would serve as project access and haul routes. Another 2.6 miles of new roads would be constructed to access treatment units. These roads would be closed, obliterated and rehabilitated immediately following vegetation treatments. Existing road maintenance (45.6 miles) would involve improvement activities in accordance with BMPs, as well as work necessary to accommodate haul vehicles. This work includes the following activities: roadside brushing; surface blading and reconditioning; cleaning, repair, and new installation of drainage structures, including culverts, water bars, and rolling dips; aggregate surfacing; cattle guard cleaning and repair; minor realignment and curve widening to accommodate haul vehicles and trailers; and silt/sediment trap installation. There are a few roads and road segments (including Forest Roads 626, 1800, 1824, and 4106) not under Forest Service jurisdiction and planned for use as timber haul routes. Before implementation, Forest Service coordination with the appropriate agency or landowner would be necessary in order to acquire the appropriate access and use agreement. Approximately 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, and would involve the minimal construction standard needed to provide short-term haul vehicle and equipment access to treatment units. This road work involves clearing vegetation, grubbing roots and stumps, excavating and shaping a travelled way, and installing drainage structures as necessary to ensure the road properly drains. These roads would be built to the minimum density, cost, and standard necessary for the intended need, user safety, and resource protection. These roads would be closed (e.g., gates, barricades) during operations to limit use to operators only. Intersections with roads would be blocked by rocks, wood or earthen berms, and would be slashed in and/or ripped and covered with slash or seeded within site distance of existing open roads to reduce potential for use after the project activities are completed. There would be no long-term changes to the amount of miles in the permanent road system or open road density in the project area under alternative 2. Danger trees would be removed on all project roads, approximately 1. tree lengths (e.g., 125 feet) from the roadway, as needed for safe hauling and project implementation. To provide for public safety, temporary warning and other signing in accordance with Forest Service signing standards would be used during project implementation. Haul routes would also be restricted or temporarily closed to provide for public safety. Existing open routes would be left in a similar condition and drainage structures shall be left in functional condition. Table 34 contains a breakdown of project roads by Helena National Forest LRMP Management Area. Table 34. Summary of proposed action haul route miles by Forest Plan Management Area Management Area Project Haul Route Total Mileage Roads Built then Obliterated Mileage M1 2.18 - T1 7.44 0.89 T2 8.04 - T3 11.97 0.80 T4 7.24 0.92 Other Lands 11.32 - See figure 38 for spatial information on the proposed action haul routes In addition to haul-related work in accordance with BMPs, other additional restoration treatments would occur on project roads. · A new culvert would be installed where National Forest System Road 626-B1 crosses the tributary to Lincoln Gulch, and a sediment filtering device (i.e., riprap, weed-free straw bales, filter fence, and/or slash filter windrows) would also be included at the crossing outlet. · A sediment filtering device (i.e., weed-free straw bales, filter fence, bio-logs/waddles, and/or slash filter windrows) would be installed where National Forest System Road 607-E1 parallels Stonewall Creek. See the separate Transportation Road Work and Costs spreadsheet available in the project record. Also see the Economic Resource Report for more information on project costs. Cumulative Effects Under the proposed action alternative, cumulative effects of past, present, and foreseeable actions are expected to have minor impacts on the project transportation network. Project haul routes would be maintained and improved in accordance with BMPs to accommodate haul vehicles. Sediment sites would be mitigated to reduce long-term sediment delivery. Annual road maintenance activities would also occur on National Forest System roads. It is expected that adjacent State and private roads would continue to receive annual maintenance also. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The proposed action complies with the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest, Forest Service policy, and State and Federal law. Other Relevant Mandatory Disclosures There are no other disclosures. Summary of Effects See figure 38 for more specific information regarding each road proposed for use during the project. See the separate Transportation Road Work and Costs spreadsheet available in the project record for more specific information about the proposed treatments. Alternative 3 Figure 39 that follows displays the transportation system for the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project, alternative 3, by jurisdiction. Title: Transportation system for alternative 3Figure 39. Transportation system for alternative 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Effects of alternative 3 would be similar to alternative 2, however with slightly fewer miles of road use. Under alternative 3, nearly 44.3 miles of haul routes would be used to access vegetation treatment units and remove material in haul vehicles. Approximately 43.8 miles of existing roads would serve as project access and haul routes. Approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal; these roads would be closed (e.g., gates, barricades) during operations to limit use to operators only. Existing road maintenance (43.8 miles) would involve improvement activities in accordance with BMPs necessary to accommodate haul vehicles. This work includes the following activities: roadside brushing; surface blading and reconditioning; cleaning, repair, and new installation of drainage structures including culverts, water bars, and rolling dips; aggregate surfacing; cattleguard cleaning and repair; minor realignment and curve widening to accommodate haul vehicles and trailers; and silt/sediment trap installation. There are a few roads and road segments (including Forest Roads 626, 1800, 1824, and 4106) not under Forest Service jurisdiction and planned for use as timber haul routes. Before implementation, Forest Service coordination with the appropriate agency or landowner would be necessary in order to acquire the appropriate access and use agreement. Approximately 0.4 mile of road would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, and would involve the minimal construction standard needed to provide short-term haul vehicle and equipment access to treatment units. The construction work involves clearing vegetation, grubbing roots and stumps, excavating and shaping a travelled way, and installing drainage structures as necessary to ensure the road properly drains. These roads would be built to the minimum density, cost, and standard necessary for the intended need, user safety, and resource protection. These roads would be closed (e.g., gates, barricades) during operations to limit use to operators only. Intersections with roads would be blocked by rocks, wood or berms and would be slashed in and/or ripped and covered with slash or seeded within site distance of open roads to reduce potential for use after the project proposed harvest activities are completed. There would be no long-term changes to the amount of miles of permanent road system or open road density in the project area under alternative 3. Danger trees would be removed on all project roads, approximately 1. tree lengths from the roadway (e.g. 125 feet), as needed for safe hauling and project implementation. To provide for public safety, temporary warning and other signing in accordance with Forest Service signing standards would be used during project implementation. Haul routes would also be restricted or temporarily closed roads in active project areas to provide for public safety. Existing open routes would be left in similar condition and drainage structures shall be left in functional condition. Table 35 that follows contains a breakdown of project roads by Helena National Forest LRMP Management Area.  Table 35. Summary of Alternative 3 haul route miles by Forest Plan Management Area Management Area Project Haul Route Total Mileage Roads Built then Obliterated Mileage M1 2.18 - T1 6.03 0.13 T2 8.04 - T3 10.19 0.10 T4 6.49 0.18 Other Lands 11.32 - See figure 39 for spatial information on the alternative 3 haul routes. In addition to haul-related work in accordance with BMPs, other additional restoration treatments would occur on project roads. · A new culvert would be installed where National Forest System Road 626-B1 crosses the tributary to Lincoln Gulch, and a sediment-filtering device (i.e., riprap, weed-free straw bales, filter fence, and/or slash filter windrows) would also be included at the crossing outlet. · A sediment-filtering device (i.e., weed-free straw bales, filter fence, bio-logs/waddles, and/or slash filter windrows) would be installed where National Forest System Road 607-E1 parallels Stonewall Creek. See the Transportation Report (Bielecki 2012) for estimated roadwork items and associated cost estimates. Also see the Economic Resource Report (Lahey 2012) for more information on project costs. Cumulative Effects Under Alternative 3, cumulative effects of past, present, and foreseeable actions are expected to have minor impacts on the project transportation network. Project haul routes would be maintained and improved in accordance with BMPs to accommodate haul vehicles. Sediment sites would be mitigated to reduce long-term sediment delivery. And annual road maintenance activities would also occur on NFS roads and also on adjacent State and private roads. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Alternative 3 complies with the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest, Forest Service policy, and State and Federal law. Other Relevant Mandatory Disclosures There are no other disclosures for the Stonewall Vegetation Project. Summary of Effects Figure 39 displays specific location and information regarding each road proposed for use during the project. See the separate Transportation Road Work and Costs spreadsheet available in the project record for more specific information regarding road treatments and costs regarding the roads proposed for the project.Fire and Fuels Introduction Portions of the Stonewall Vegetation Project area identified in the Tri-County Community Wildfire Protection Plan (2005) and are in the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) (figure 44). The project proposes various prescribed burning treatments on approximately 8,560 acres. In this section, we discuss the existing condition and provide an overview of the fuels treatments and effects of those treatments by alternative. Methodology and Limitations The fuels specialist made a field visit to the project area in 2010 to observe fuel conditions where treatments are being proposed. Fuels data was obtained from unit diagnoses, photos and the 2009 Helena National Forest Eastside Existing Vegetative Map (VMAP). The VMAP data was adjusted by forest personnel in an attempt to show the mountain pine beetle mortality in the project area. The data represents “post kill” data and is assumed to be a time period in the future once the red needles have fallen off the trees. Because of this adjustment, fire modeling of the existing crown fire potential is likely underestimated. Fire behavior fuel models used were derived from Scott and Burgan (2005) as a measure to display general changes in fuel profiles by vegetative cover type. All data was processed through the FlamMap fire behavior model (Finney 2006) to assess the distribution of fire behavior potential in the project area. Post treatment modeling was also completed for the action alternatives to simulate the effects of the proposed treatments on fuel model and forest canopy characteristics including canopy cover, canopy bulk density, canopy base height, and canopy. The effectiveness of proposed treatments may not be accurately displayed in the modeling because the existing condition data also provided a foundation for modeling the alternatives. Given the uncertainty of any modeling exercise, the results are best used to compare the relative effects of the alternatives, rather than as an indicator of absolute effects (Graham et al. 2004). Sources of Information Information sources used for this analysis are listed below and represent some of the best available science obtainable at the time of report completion. There is a large body of literature that makes the case for treating fuels. There is even some controversy about the effectiveness of treatments of forest landscapes to reduce fire hazard. Please see Appendix 6 - Fuel Reduction Science–Selected Discussions from Literature, in the Fire/Fuels Report (Buhl 2012) in the project record for more information regarding treating fuels and ecological restoration science. · Individual treatment unit diagnosis completed by Helena National Forest personnel and updated in the fall of 2009. These can be found in the project record. · 30-meter Digital Elevation Model (DEM) Geographic Information Systems (GIS) raster layers from which we attained elevation, percent slope and aspect · National Agricultural Imagery Program (USDA Farm Service Agency 2011) aerial photo digital imagery. · Site visits during the summer of 2010 · GIS spatial data acquired from the Helena National Forest and other sources where noted: · VMAP spatial data including classification for tree dominance type, tree canopy cover class, and tree diameter. · Helena National Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) management area boundaries · Property ownership boundaries · Project area boundary · Historic wildfires · Past management activities · Wildland urban interface classification and boundaries · Fire regime condition class (FRCC) data · Scientific literature · Other unpublished documents Assumptions A number of assumptions are made in this analysis and are listed below: · Current Forest Plan and other pertinent management direction would continue indefinitely into the future · No major disturbance, such as wildfire, blow down or insect epidemics would occur from the baseline year of 2010 until implementation is completed. This analysis discusses future risk and probable effects if a disturbance occurs. It is not a future projection of the occurrence. · Regional Existing Vegetation Mapping Program (VMAP). · Helena National Forest VMAP (post kill) PK and Stonewall_g data. · The accomplishment year for analysis purposes is 2012 · FlamMap modeling can provide an estimate of the potential fire behavior before and after treatment. · The Stonewall Vegetation Project area is sufficient to analyze and discuss effects to the fire and fuels resource. · Information contained in the Stone Dry Fuels Report (Kurtz 2009) and the Stone Dry Vegetation Report (Milburn et al. 2006) and can also be applied to the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. Overview of Issues The purpose of this project as it relates to the fire and fuels resource includes the following needs: · Develop a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. · Modify fire behavior to enhance community protection opportunities while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. The issues summarized below were identified from internal and external scoping of the project, and are related to the fire and fuels resource. Wildland Fire and Homes: Proposed treatments may be inefficient and ineffective in reducing home losses due to fire. Fire Behavior: Proposed fuels reduction work would not reduce fire behavior. Prescribed Burning: Concerns over risk of fire escaping burn boundaries during prescribed burning operations. Measurement Indicators The measures to assess how well each alternative meets the purpose and need are as follows: · Change in potential flame length within the project area - The Stonewall Vegetation Project includes National Forest System lands adjacent to homes and private property. Desired flame lengths are generally less than 4 feet allowing for safe direct attack by fire crews. Flame lengths greater than 4 feet require deployment of additional resources such as dozers and aircraft. Deploying additional resources increases the time needed to apply successful fire suppression activities. Flame lengths beyond 8 feet increase the likelihood of torching, crowning and spotting. 3 · Change in the potential fire type - Measured as acres of surface fire versus passive crown fire or active crown fire4, low-severity surface fire allows for safe fire suppression activities as discussed above. 3 Rothermel, Richard C. 1983 59 4 Surface Fire: Fire that burns loose debris on the surface, which include dead branches, leaves, and low vegetation. Surface fire burns only in the surface fuelbed. Passive Crown Fire: consuming single or small groups of trees or bushes. Active Crown Fire: The surface fire ignites crowns and the fire spread is able to propagate through the tree canopy. Affected Environment Existing Condition The existing condition of the project area has been shaped by decades of wildfire activity (figure 40) and suppression, past silvicultural treatments, fuels reduction and prescribed burning treatments, livestock grazing, noxious weeds, fire wood cutting and recreational activities (appendix C). Barrett et al. (1982) stated that after more than 80 years without fire, dense pole sized under stories of conifers (much of it relatively shade-tolerant Douglas-fir) have developed beneath the partially cut old-growth pine. In many stands in the Douglas-fir and grand fir series in western Montana, long-term fire exclusion, with or without partial cutting has now brought about dense overstocking and large, continuous buildups of fuels, particularly live, ladder fuels that could allow fires to crown and destroy the stand. Fellin (1979) noted the overstocking and shift in composition to more shade-tolerant species might also increase susceptibility to insects and diseases. Fire Regimes The natural or historic fire regime is a general classification of the role fire would play across the landscape in the absence of modern human intervention, but including the influence of burning by indigenous people. The natural or historical fire regimes are classified by numbers of years between fires (frequency) and fire severity, which reflects percent replacement on the dominant overstory vegetation. The native fire regime is perhaps the most important ecosystem process altered by fire exclusion (Arno and Brown 1991). The historical fire regimes created shifting mosaics of patches, processes and habitats on the Rocky Mountain landscapes (Agee 1993). Keane et al. (1996) noted that these landscapes tend to become more homogeneous as fire is removed, because succession would eventually advance all stands to similar communities dominated by shade tolerant species. Fires generally become less frequent and more severe with active suppression. Modern wildfires on late-seral landscapes tend to be larger, more intense and more severe because of high biomass loading and multi-layer stand structure. Fires on fire-altered landscapes may burn more area in fewer years, meaning that rare fire years, like 1910, may be especially high in fire activity (Bessie et al. 1995). The increasing numbers of large, severe fires in 1fire-year would make suppression and control increasingly difficult further risking human life and property (Keane 2002). Fire Regime Condition Class Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) is an interagency, standardized tool for determining the degree of departure from reference condition vegetation, fuels and disturbance regimes (FRCC 2011). FRCC uses various parts of a biophysical setting (BPS)5 by comparing the current conditions to documented reference conditions; then gives a rating for each BPS based on various factors including succession conditions, fire frequency6 and fire severity7. The three condition classes FRCC uses to describe a BPS departure from reference condition are defined in the following table. 5 Biophysical settings (Bps) are the primary environmental settings used to determine a landscape’s natural fire regime and fire regime condition class (Hann and Bunnell, 2001; Hann and Strohm, 2003 6 Fire frequency is defined as the average number of years between fires or the mean fire interval (Baker and Ehle, 2001; Hann and Bunnell, 2001) 7 Fire severity is defined as the effects of a fire on the vegetation and forest floor, and is measured in terms of surface and overstory fuel consumption and heat transference to the organic and mineral soil (DeBano et al. 1998). Table 36. The three condition classes as described in FRCC CONDITION CLASS DESCRIPTION Low departure (<33%) from reference condition is defined as Condition Class 1 Vegetation composition, structure, and fuels are similar to those of the natural regime and do not predispose the system to risk of loss of key ecosystem components. Wildland fires are characteristic of the natural fire regime behavior, severity, and patterns. Disturbance agents, native species habitats, and hydrologic functions are within the natural range of variability. Moderate departure (33-66%) from reference condition is defined as Condition Class 2 Vegetation composition, structure, and fuels are different from those of the natural regime and predispose the system to risk of loss of key ecosystem components. Wildland fires are moderately uncharacteristic compared to the natural fire regime behaviors, severity, and patterns. Disturbance agents, native species habitats, and hydrologic functions are outside the natural range of variability. High departure (>66%) from reference condition is defined as Condition Class 3 Vegetation composition, structure, and fuels are very different from the natural regime and predispose the system to high risk of loss of key ecosystem components. Wildland fires are highly uncharacteristic compared to the natural fire regime behaviors, severity, and patterns. Disturbance agents, native species habitats, and hydrologic functions are substantially outside the natural range of variability. (Hann and Bunnell, 2001; Hann and Strohm, 2003) Biophysical Settings Biophysical Settings (BpS) are land delineations based on the physical setting, (e.g. elevation and aspect) and the potential vegetation community that can occupy the setting. A national team has established in the FRCC system a set of descriptions for BpS found within regions of the United States (FRCC 2005). Helena National Forest ecologists, fuel specialists, and silviculturists reviewed the BpS descriptions applicable to the project area and determined that the descriptions could be used without modification (Milburn et al. 2009). For this analysis area, Helena National Forest personnel spatially assigned BpS based upon habitat type (Milburn et al. 2009). Detailed descriptions for each BpS can be found in project records and a more detailed discussion of each BpS can be found in Milburn et al. (2009). The FRCC analysis was completed for the project area (Olsen 2010) including updates to the BpS classification. Data from that analysis was used for the Stonewall project and is summarized in the following sections. Table 37 that follows, shows the current departure from reference condition for each biophysical setting located in the Stonewall Project area. The analysis shows fire frequency and fire severity are outside of Fire and Fuels – Chapter 3 – Stonewall Vegetation Management Project 176 the reference condition for the majority of the biophysical settings. The moderate and high departure ratings are of most concern and it is probable these areas would continue to move further from reference condition without management or fire disturbance. Refer to the FRCC NFMA Analysis (Olsen 2010) or the Silviculture Report (Amell 2012) for more information on biophysical settings. Table 37. Current FRCC Rating for Biophysical Settings in Stonewall Project Area BIOPHYSICAL SETTING PERCENT OF AREA FIRE REGIME CONDITION CLASS RATING FIRE FREQUENCY SEVERITY RATING STONEWALL PROJECT AREA CURRENT CONDITION CURRENT CONDITION Ponderosa Pine Douglas-Fir (PPDF1) 32% High (99%) High (71%) Douglas-Fir Warm (DFIR2-D) 23% High (84%) Mod (60%) Douglas-Fir Cool (DFIR2-M) 24% Mod (47%) Mod (47%) Lower Subalpine Fir (SPFI1) 13% Mod (52%) Low (12%) Upper Subalpine Fir (SPFI2) 2% Low (33%) Low (24%) Mountain Grasslands (MGRA3) 6% Low (25%) Low (25%) Carbon Storage The entire Atmospheric Carbon Report may be found in the project file (Amell and Klug 2013). Changes to atmospheric carbon release or storage resulting from the proposed activities for the action alternatives correspond to changes in forest vegetation cover and condition. The predicted effects of the proposed alternatives are described in qualitative and relative terms, as opposed to a quantitative analysis. The scale of carbon storage or release from the Stonewall Project is so minor relative to the scale of global or U.S. carbon storage and greenhouse gases (GHG) release that discussing the effects in detail would be meaningless. Milburn et al. (2006) and the Stonewall Silviculture Report (Amell 2012) note forests in the Stonewall area have become denser, and late-seral fire-intolerant tree species have increased as a result of fire exclusion. Along with these changes there may have been an increase in stored carbon, however without a detailed and quantified analysis we are speculating. Fellows and Goulden (2008) found that carbon storage decreased with forest thickening due to increased mortality of large trees. Also, a substantial portion of the overstory and mid-story pine trees have recently been killed by mountain pine beetles and are no longer storing carbon, but have become sources for GHG. As the trees decay, GHG release would be relatively slow, but if and when wildfires burn in these stands a large portion of the decaying wood would be consumed (Skinner 2002, Knapp et al. 2005) and the carbon abruptly released. The recent mortality has most likely resulted in many stands now being sources of GHG rather than sinks. In the long term, as stands fill in and trees grow larger, the rate at which carbon is being stored would increase and the stands would eventually again become sinks rather than sources. Due to increases in fire-intolerant trees and stand densities, future fires are anticipated to cause a great deal of mortality. This means the currently stored carbon would become relatively unstable with a high likelihood of such stands converting carbon sinks to sources for GHG emissions. The general effects of activities proposed for the action alternatives would be similar and so we discuss them together; the major difference between the two alternatives being acres of area treated. About 8,564 acres would be treated under alternative 2 and 6,564 acres would be treated under alternative 3 within the 24,000-acre project area. Both alternatives comprise a variety of treatments including prescribed burning, live tree thinning with removal and fuels treatments, and dead tree cutting with removal and fuels treatments. The immediate direct and indirect effects of the action alternatives to atmospheric carbon would be a combination of results involving storage on-site, storage off-site, and release to the atmosphere. The net result would be less carbon stored within the forest. Carbon in treated units would be: · Retained on site as live trees · Retained on site as dead standing trees (snags) or coarse woody debris to be relatively slowly released to the atmosphere · Removed from the forest for use in harvested wood products—which would be considered off-site storage · Removed from the forest for burning as residential or industrial heat, or to produce electricity, which could be considered to be replacing the GHG emissions from fossil fuels · Released to the atmosphere through prescribed burning, either directly through consumption or through killing small trees and making them sources rather than sinks Activities proposed for the action alternatives would increase the stability of stored carbon in treated stands and on the landscape by pushing the stands toward dominance by early seral and fire-tolerant tree species. Activities are designed to create more of a mosaic of stand ages and structures on the landscape, which would decrease stand-level and landscape-level fire intensity and severity (Buhl 2012). Carbon storage decreased in the project area due to the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic. Succession has resulted in denser stands of smaller average diameters, and a greater proportion of fire-intolerant trees. Although a high level of carbon is stored in the forests relative to what the site and forest types are capable of, the carbon is unstable due to susceptibility of stands and the landscape to severe wildfires. Alternative 1 would not change the condition. Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in some carbon being removed from the forest for storage elsewhere and some carbon being released. Due to the nature of the treatments and the small area treated, most of the carbon contained in live trees in the project area would remain on site. The affected forest lands in this proposal would remain forests, not converted to other land uses, and long-term forest services and benefits would be maintained. Stored carbon in treated stands and over the landscape would be more resistant to wildfires and so more stable in the long term. Fire Frequency and Severity A brief description of the reference fire frequency and fire severity for each biophysical setting in the Stonewall Project area as rated by FRCC is discussed below (Milburn et al. 2006) and displayed in table 38. Ponderosa Pine Douglas-Fir (PPDF1) The reference fire frequency for this setting was a 22-year mean fire interval; the current frequency is 70 years. The reference severity, which represents the amount of over story mortality that would occur in a wildfire, was 24 percent while the current severity is 70 percent. Fire return interval and severity are very different from reference conditions. The amount of tree mortality from a wildfire would be substantially greater than what would be expected under reference conditions. Douglas-Fir Warm (DFIR2-D) The reference fire frequency for this setting was a 30-year mean fire interval; the current frequency is 70 years. The reference severity, which represents the amount of over story mortality that would occur in a wildfire, was 10 percent while the current severity is 70 percent. Fire return interval and severity are very different from reference conditions. The amount of tree mortality from a wildfire would be substantially greater than what would be expected under reference conditions. Douglas-Fir Cool (DFIR2-M) The reference fire frequency for this setting was a 30-year mean fire interval; the current frequency is 70 years. The reference severity, which represents the amount of overstory mortality that would occur in a wildfire, was 10 percent while the current severity is 70 percent. Fire return interval and severity are very different from reference conditions. The amount of tree mortality from a wildfire would be substantially greater than what would be expected under reference conditions. Lower Subalpine Fir (SPFI1) The reference fire frequency for this setting was a 111-year mean fire interval; the current frequency is 140 years. The reference severity, which represents the amount of over story mortality that would occur in a wildfire, was 67 percent while the current severity is 75 percent. Frequency and severity are not substantially different from reference conditions. A wildfire would not behave uncharacteristically due to those factors. The disparity of the vegetation fuel classes to the reference composition would likely cause greater over story mortality than under reference composition. Upper Subalpine Fir (SPFI2) The reference fire frequency for this setting was a 143-year mean fire interval; the current frequency is 140 years. The reference severity, which represents the amount of overstory mortality that would occur in a wildfire, is 57 percent while the current severity is 70 percent. The fire return interval is not different from the reference but the amount of tree mortality from a wildfire would be greater than what would be expected under reference conditions. Mountain Grassland with Shrubs (MGRA3) Wildland fires are characteristic of the natural fire regime behavior, severity, and patterns. While this setting would likely benefit from fire, it is characteristic of reference conditions. Table 38. Fire frequency and severity by biophysical settings in the Stonewall Project area Biophysical Setting Reference Fire Frequency (MFI)* Current Fire Frequency Reference Fire Severity (%) Current Fire Severity (%) Ponderosa Pine Douglas-Fir (PPDF1) 22 MFI 70 years 24% 70% Douglas-Fir Warm (DFIR2-D) 30 MFI 70 years 10% 70% Douglas-Fir Cool (DFIR2-M) 30 MFI 70 years 10% 70% Lower Subalpine Fir (SPFI1) 111 140 years 67% 75% Upper Subalpine Fir (SPFI2) 143 MFI 140 years 57% 70% Mountain Grassland with Shrubs (MGRA3) Characteristic of reference condition Characteristic of reference condition Characteristic of reference condition Characteristic of reference condition *Mean Fire Interval (MFI)-An arithmetical index of fire frequency, expressed as the average number of fire intervals within a given time period (Firewords.net) Fire History and Occurrence Fire has been the major influence on vegetation patterns, composition, structure, function, age and development of both individual stands and the larger landscape (Arno 2000). Fire history data from the Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project region (ICBEMP), which includes the Stonewall Project area, suggest that extensive fire activity occurred at least every ten to twenty years between the mid-1500s and the early 1900s (Barrett et al. 1997). Agee (1993) added that changing land use patterns and attempts to exclude fire have succeeded in greatly reducing the scope of fire on the landscape. In the Stonewall area, 66 fires were reported from 1920 until 2011. Although many fires had no accompanying written information and therefore were not included in fire occurrence maps, this data does give a glimpse of the fire suppression history in the Stonewall area. Fires that escaped detection would not be included. The fire occurrence data was digitized as point source data from historical maps that portrayed fires by year, size class, and cause for 1920 to 1969. For the period from 1970 to 2009, fire occurrence information was developed from Kansas City fire database (KCFast). The records from this period have detailed information including acreage, cost, and physical location. The Snow/Talon fire burned 36,012 acres adjacent to the project area in 2003. The Keep Cool Fire burned 302 acres at the edge of the project area in 2006 and cost approximately one million dollars to suppress. In 2007, the Bull Mountain Fire burned 30 acres. In 2011, the Lone Point fire burned 3 acres within the Stonewall project area. In addition, the Porcupine fire burned 133 acres and the Arrastra Fire burned 472 acres, both within 1.5 miles of the project area. The NFMA report (Kurtz 2009) includes the fire history within all ownerships in the Stone Dry watershed area, which includes the Stonewall project area. This report noted 188 fires were reported from 1920 through 2009. For 1920 to 1969, approximately 1,243 acres on all ownerships burned and during the period from 1970 to 2009, 125 fires burned approximately 531 acres within the watershed area. Therefore, no more than 1,774 acres or less than 4 percent of the project area has burned across all ownerships since 1920. Acreage for fire size classes are as follows: (A) less than 0.25 acres, (B) 0.26-9.9 acres, (C) 10-99 acres, (D) 100 – 299 acres, (E) 300-999, (F) greater than 1,000 acres. Figure 40 spatially displays the fire history of the project area. Fire and Fuels – Chapter 3 – Stonewall Vegetation Management Project 180 Table 39 shows the fires per decade by size class within the Stonewall Project area. Acreage for fire size classes are as follows: (A) less than 0.25 acres, (B) 0.26-9.9 acres, (C) 10-99 acres, (D) 100 – 299 acres, (E) 300-999, (F) greater than 1,000 acres. Figure 40 spatially displays the fire history of the project area. Table 39. Number of fires in the Stonewall Project area per decade by size class DECADE A B C D E TOTAL 1920-1929 1 1 1930-1939 6 1 7 1940-1949 5 5 1950-1959 4 1 1 6 1960-1969 6 1 7 1970-1979 6 3 1 10 1980-1989 5 3 1 9 1990-1999 7 3 1 11 2000-2009 5 3 1 9 2010-Current 1 1 Total 45 15 4 1 1 66 Source: Stonewall_PrjBdyFirepts_092111.xlsx  Title: Fire History - Description: Fire History Map of the Stonewall Project AreaFigure 40. Fire History Map of the Stonewall Project Area Fire Behavior and Fuel Condition Fire behavior is driven by the combination of fuels, topography, and weather across the landscape. Surface fires spread according to the direction and speed of wind and the steepness of a slope. Passive crown fire encompasses a wide range of fire behavior from individual trees torching to nearly active crown fire. Active crown fire spreads rapidly and involves surface and canopy fuels and spreads from tree to tree through the canopy. Crown fires are more difficult to control and have more severe effects compared to a surface fire due to higher rates of spread, increased fire intensity, and increased probability of spot fires igniting ahead of the fire front. Fuel conditions exist in the project area that could contribute to high-intensity fire adjacent to private land. Treatments that decrease surface, ladder and canopy fuels8 generally make the area more resistant to stand-replacing wildfires. Keane and others (2002) state that since the early 1930s, fire suppression programs in the United States and Canada successfully reduced the amount of wildland fires in many Rocky Mountain ecosystems. This lack of fires within many forest and range landscapes has resulted in atypical accumulations of fuels that pose a hazard to many ecosystem characteristics. 8 Surface fuel is defined as fuel lying on or near the surface of the ground, consisting of leaf and needle litter, dead branch material downed logs, bark, tree cones, and living plants of low stature. Ladder fuels are defined as fuel that provides vertical continuity between surface fuel and canopy fuel strata, increasing the likelihood that fire will carry from surface fuel into the crowns of shrubs and trees. Canopy fuels are the foliage and fine branchwood of trees. (Scott 2008)  9 Litter is defined as leaves, needles, fine twigs, and other organic material on the forest or grassland floor that have undergone little or no decomposition. A fire behavior fuel model represents the fuelbed characteristics necessary to predict surface fire behavior in fire behavior modeling systems. In 2005, Scott and Burgan presented a new set of fire behavior fuel models that expanded on the original 13 created by Anderson in 1982. Advantages of this new set include: increased precision in surface fire intensity prediction and subsequent crown fire behavior prediction, increased ability to simulate changes in fire behavior as a result of fuel treatments, and improved accuracy of fire behavior predictions outside of the severe period of the fire season (Scott and Burgan 2005). For these reasons the Scott and Burgan models are used in the fire behavior modeling systems used in this analysis. The distribution of fuel models mapped in the Stonewall project area is shown in table 40. Thirty-two percent of the project area is mapped as fuel model TU1 which depicts a combination of forest litterfigure 41). 9 and a low load of grass and shrub fuel as the primary carrier of fire. Fuel model TU5 comprises 24 percent of the area. The primary carrier of fire in fuel model TU5 is heavy forest litter with a shrub or small tree understory which can likely lead to crown fire due to the abundance of ladder fuels (Fuel model TL5 comprises twenty seven percent of the project area. The primary carrier of fire in TL5 is a high load of conifer litter, slash and mortality fuel. Although fire behavior is relatively low in TL5 this fuel model also includes downed logs which can increase resistance to control by firefighters. With concentrations of dead fuels, individual trees or groups of trees may torch, and fire may continue through the crowns aided by high winds. The majority of the non-forested fuel models within the project area are mapped as GR1. The flame length and rate of spread in GR1 is low compared to other grass fuel models and is primarily used to represent the grassland areas.  Title: Figure 1. Photo showing understory ladder fuel component combined with overstory conifers - Description: Photo showing understory ladder fuel component combined with overstory conifersFigure 41. Photo showing understory ladder fuel component combined with overstory conifers Table 40 Current distribution of fire behavior fuel models in the project area. Fuel Model Code Description Acres % Of Total GR1 (101) Short, sparse dry climate grass 1,243 5 GR2(102) Low load, dry climate grass 295 1 GS2 (122) Moderate load, dry climate grass-shrub 83 <1 TU1(161) Low load, dry climate timber-grass-shrub 7,734 32 TU5(165) Very high load, dry climate timber-shrub 5,669 24 TL3 (183) Moderate load conifer litter 2,215 9 TL4(184) Small downed logs 11 <1 TL5 (185) High load conifer litter 6,568 27 TL7(187) Large downed logs 31 <1 TL8 (188) Long needle litter 147 <1 A current risk to a significant portion of the landscape in the project area is a stand-replacing fire event such as the one that occurred in 1988 during the Canyon Creek Firetable 42) that support the risk of stand-replacing fire. Other reasons include, (1) fire suppression within the Stone Dry area has been quite effective since records were 10 in the Scapegoat Wilderness, and in 2003 during the Snow-Talon Fire in the Copper Creek drainage northeast of Lincoln. The project area has similar fuel types and weather patterns (10 The Canyon Creek Fire burned 247,000 acres of which approximately 160,000 acres burned in a single burning period, the largest ever recorded.  kept in 1920, (2) the removal of fire as an important process has affected the current fire regime, (fire interval and fire severity), and (3) a substantial number of stands have been classified as mid- and late-seral closed canopy. The location of the town of Lincoln and the surrounding community is a concern for large wildfire in the project area, as north/northwest winds are common with cold fronts that would push a fire towards the community (Kurtz 2009). A visual indicator of fireline intensity is flame length (Rothermel 1983). Flame length is widely used as a means to relate visible fire characteristics and interpret general suppression strategies. These flame-length classes and interpretations are familiar to fire managers and are widely accepted as an intuitive communications tool. Table 41 compares fireline intensity, flame length, and fire suppression difficulty interpretations. Table 41. Fireline intensity interpretations Fireline Intensity Flame Length Interpretations Low Less than 4 feet Direct attack at the head and flanks with hand crews; hand lines should stop spread of fire Moderate 4-8 feet Fires are too intense for direct attack on the head by persons using hand tools. Hand line cannot be relied on to stop fire spread. Equipment such as dozers, engines, and retardant aircraft can be effective. High 8-11 feet Fires may present serious control problems such as torching, crowning, and spotting. Control efforts at the fire head are likely ineffective. This fire would require indirect attack methods Very High > 11 feet Crowning, spotting, and major fire runs are probable; control efforts at the head are likely ineffective. This fire would require indirect attack methods Table based on Rothermel (1983) Geospatial fire modeling was used to evaluate the flame length and crown fire potential within the project area under a weather scenario conducive to high fire behavior on the Helena NF. Weather conditions that occurred during the Snow Talon Fire in 2003 were used for this scenario. The modeling was conducted for current and future scenarios under the proposed alternatives. The current condition results are summarized for the project in table 42 and visually displayed in figure 42. Table 42. Potential fire behavior characteristics modeled with 25 mph upslope 20-foot winds. Potential Fire Behavior Characteristic Percent A Flame Length Less than 4 feet 32 Greater than 4 feet 68 Fire Type Surface Fire 65 Crown Fire 35 a -Percent of burnable acres- Non-burnable acres are not shown in table Figure 42. Existing condition fire behavior potential displayed as flame length Title: Fire Behavior potential - Description: Existing condition fire behavior potential displayed as flame length As shown in table 42, modeling suggests that 68 percent of the project area has potential fire behavior characteristics that would make direct suppression strategies ineffective or unsafe for firefighters. Portions of the project area exhibiting these conditions are of concern due to the proximity of private land. Conditions like these can lead to high acreage burned and significant adverse effects on resources. Local fire managers state that significant fire spread on the HNF is generally due to spotting and wind-driven crown fires. The Snow Talon Fire in 2003 was an example of this type of fire behavior. In one afternoon the fire grew 20,000 acres due to heated fuels and the alignment of westerly winds as noted by Studebaker’s Incident Management Team in the Lincoln Complex Operations Narrative (USDA 2003). Areas expected to experience crown fire have the potential for spotting. Figure 43 shows the areas that have the highest potential for crown fire in the project area. Fires initiating within these areas have the potential to spread through spotting and threaten private land adjacent to the project area.  Title: Fire behavior potential - Description: Existing condition fire behavior potential displayed by fire typeFigure 43. Existing condition fire behavior potential displayed by fire type Wildland Urban Interface The Tri-County Fire Working Group, which is composed of representatives from Broadwater, Jefferson and Lewis and Clark counties, developed the Regional Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP 2010). Membership of the group includes individual citizens, local government, state and federal agencies, interested contractors and fire suppression departments. The CWPP identifies goals and objectives for mitigating wildland fire hazard. Some of the objectives are: · Propose and implement projects to protect communities at risk from wildfire. · Focus first on the wildland urban interface communities at risk. · Encourage the Federal and State agencies to continue creating fire defensible space around homes that border agency land. The CWPP defined the wildland-urban interface (WUI) as, “… the area within 4 miles from interface communities that possess a population density exceeding 250 people per square mile” (CWPP 2005). WUI boundaries were defined utilizing input from local residents, available GIS technology, known fuel hazards and fire history of the area, local topographic features, weather patterns and understanding the fire response and suppression capabilities in the area. Proposed projects in the WUI would become a priority for accomplishment and would be assigned a numerical value of risk based on the existing fuel hazard, number of people in the immediate area and past history of wildland fires starting in the immediate area. Lincoln, Montana is identified as a “Community-at-Risk” in the Federal Register (CWPP 2005). The Fire Ignition Probability map showed the area surrounding Lincoln, including the Stonewall project area, as a moderate to high occurrence of fire starts based on the data years of 1990-2000. Portions of the Stonewall Project area are ranked as high to very high with regard to fuel hazard rating. These areas represent the potential for high intensity crown fires with extreme rates of spread. Thirty-nine percent of the Stonewall project area is classified as wildland-urban interface. The CWPP further identifies the Stonewall project as a priority fuel hazard reduction project. The decision maker considered treatments recommended by the Lincoln Restoration Committee, along with treatments identified by forest specialists that would move towards Forest Plan goals for fuel reduction and increase habitat diversity for associated wildlife species. Table 43 that follows displays the wildland-urban interface classifications within the Stonewall Vegetation Project area, approximate acres that lie within each classification and the proportion of the project area represented by each classification. Figure 44 shows spatially the WUI classifications within the project area. Table 43. Wildland Urban Interface classifications within Stonewall Project area Wui Classification Acres Proportion Of Project Area (%) Outside WUI Zone 11,452 48 Low Risk 7,785 32 Moderate Risk 2,087 9 High Risk 1,502 6 Very High Risk 1,180 5 Total 24,006 100   Wildland Urban Interface ClassificationsFigure 44. Fire risk ratings for Wildland Urban Interface within the Stonewall Project boundary Environmental Consequences Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis Spatial Bounds: The spatial scale for effects analysis is dependent upon the measurement indicator and focused within the Stonewall project area boundary to assess treatment effectiveness in reducing fire behavior. Temporal Bounds: The year 2010 is the baseline used for the existing condition and this analysis. It is estimated proposed treatments would be completed in approximately 10 years. Re-entry into the units for maintenance prescribed burning is desired to maintain treatment effectiveness and to continue restoration efforts. Past, Present, and Foreseeable Activities and Connected Actions Relevant to Cumulative Effects Analysis. Direct, indirect and cumulative effects for the fire and fuels resource consider the impacts of the alternatives when combined with fuel profile changes resulting from other activities including silvicultural treatments, wildfires and fuels reduction activities. These actions contributing to cumulative effects were selected because they have caused or have the potential to cause changes in fire behavior. Past Activities Past activities that have shaped the existing condition of the project area include wildfire, fire suppression, prescribed burning and other fuels reduction activities, silvicultural treatments and insect and disease activity. Previous fire (table 39) and fuels reduction or prescribed burning activities have influenced the project area. From 1950-present there has been approximately 7,922 acres11 treated within the Stonewall project area. There have also been approximately 5,067 12acres of silvicultural treatments from 1950 to the present (Amell 2012b). Other past actions including livestock grazing, fire wood cutting, noxious weed treatment and recreational activities generally had a small or localized effect on fuels in the project area and have been considered in describing the current condition. 11 The number of acres treated may also include overlap from areas that have been re-treated over the decades. 12 The number of acres treated may also include overlap from areas that have been re-treated over the decades.  Current and Future Activities Current and future activities predicted to influence the fire and fuels resource include a Forestwide hazard tree removal and fuels reduction project. This project involves removing hazardous trees up to 175 feet from the edge of road right-of-ways. This treatment would overlap portions of treatment units under the proposed action. Connected Actions Connected actions are considered necessary in order to implement proposed treatments. Fire control lines are a connected action to the fuels resource and are proposed with this project. Prior to prescribed burning it may be determined control lines are needed to assure prescribed fire remains within designated unit boundaries. Control lines are defined as, “all constructed or natural fire barriers and treated fire edges used to control a fire” (NWCG 1994). This includes but is not limited to the following: black line, hand line, pruning, mowing, saw line and hose-lays. Control lines would occur along existing trails and ridgelines or in areas of thinner vegetation when feasible. Alternative 1 – No Action Direct Effects There would be no direct effect to fuels under this alternative. The no-action alternative would not alter the fuel profile to reduce fire behavior and would not meet the purpose and need of this project. Potential fire behavior characteristics would be similar to those described under the existing condition and summarized in table 42. In the absence of human-caused or natural disturbance such as vegetation treatment activities and wildfire, there may be an increased accumulation of surface and ladder fuels due to insect and disease activity, blow down and the progression of forest succession. Indirect Effects Over time, the no-action alternative would indirectly lead to increased surface, ladder and crown fuels that affect flame length, contribute to the torching of trees, and make crown fire more likely (Peterson et al. 2005, Graham 2004). Increases in fuel loading would make overstory trees more susceptible to damage from wildfire. It is probable the fire-tolerant trees would continue to be replaced by trees that are less fire tolerant and therefore less resistant to stand-replacing fires. Wildfires that escape initial attack may impact adjacent private lands and other resource values. It is probable that another large wildfire, like the Snow Talon fire, may threaten adjacent private lands. Direct suppression tactics by firefighting forces would not be as effective in the project area under the no-action alternative as compared with the results of the treatments proposed for the action alternatives. The no action alternative would restrict local fire managers from utilizing fire for meeting various land management objectives. Fire suppression activities would continue in the project area. Case studies of watersheds in two national parks in California found the impacts of suppression on fire return interval departure (FRID) were substantial. The results showed if all ignitions were allowed to burn, the fire return interval would have improved from a high departure rating to a low departure rating in one of the study areas. The author noted the consequences of suppressing fires included substantial impacts to the fire return interval which may have a substantial impact on an entire ecosystem (Miller 2012). Average snag numbers were shown to exceed Forest Plan standards in all tree size classes without taking into account mortality in the years 2009 and 2010 (Amell 2012). It was estimated snags greater than or equal to 7 inches d.b.h. ranged from 47-49 tons per acre, which is approximately 25 times the Forest Plan required level. Tree mortality, as a result of insect and disease activity and natural forest succession, would continue into the future and would exacerbate the amount of standing and downed fuels in the project area and adjacent to private land. These unprecedented fuel levels have the potential to significantly affect fire behavior should another wildland fire occur within or adjacent to the project area. Cumulative Effects Present or reasonably foreseeable future fuels reduction and vegetation management projects in the areas would complement other federal and private fuel reduction treatments that have occurred or are occurring by collectively reducing fire behavior (flame length and crown fire potential) within the areas they are applied by removing surface, ladder and crown fuels. Public firewood cutting has occurred in the project area and would continue into the future having a localized effect on fuels. The Helena National Forest’s has begun implementing the “Forest-Wide Hazardous Tree Removal & Fuels Reduction Project” (USDA Forest Service 2010). This project would remove hazardous trees within National Forest System roads rights-of-way and around administrative sites. The Stonewall Project area would benefit from this project due to a reduction in fuel loading once the activity fuel loading levels are reduced. Removing standing dead and down fuels in road rights-of-ways would provide safe areas for firefighters to initiate fire suppression activities. It is also expected that these areas would improve fire line construction efficiency. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The no-action alternative would fail to achieve goals set forth in the National Fire Plan and would not comply with the Helena National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan direction. In addition, the no-action alternative would be unresponsive to the Tri-County Community Wildfire Protection Plan (2010), as well as the Lincoln Restoration Committee and Montana Forest Restoration Committee’s recommendations. Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the treatments proposed for the action alternatives described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to fire and fuels and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The design features in table 9 pertaining to fire and fuels are FUEL-1 through FUEL-8. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to both action alternatives. Specific design features listed above that are applicable to fire and fuels are designed to protect other resources such as water and soil. Alternative 2 - Proposed Action, Treatment Descriptions Group 1: This group includes 18 treatment units comprising about 974 acres. Treatment objectives for this group are to develop mature, open forests comprised mostly of fire-resistant species. The proposed treatments would thin live trees, remove dead trees, and prescribe burn surface fuels. All tree thinning would be "from below" to favor retaining larger trees over smaller trees except that thinning regimes would favor retaining smaller trees of a more desirable species over larger trees of a less desirable species, and would favor keeping smaller, healthier and disease-free trees over larger, diseased trees. In general, the species preference for retention would be aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir in descending order. This general order of preference may be modified for individual stands to address management objectives such as retaining species diversity, site factors, and other stand-specific factors such as relative species presence as noted in individual stand/unit prescriptions. Trees would be thinned to an average spacing of 20 to 40 feet (109 to 27 TPA), but spacing could vary widely. Thinning would be by hand or machine. All cut, live trees of a merchantable size would be removed for utilization. All merchantable dead trees would be removed, except those needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements). The thinning and removal units that follow would be underburned or jackpot burned to reduce fuels. Group 2: This group includes 25 treatment units comprising about 1,132 acres. Treatments would thin small-diameter trees of little to no merchantable value. The thinning regime would generally be as described above for Group 1, except that post-thinning average tree spacing would range from 12 to 20 feet (109 to 303 TPA). Thinning would be by hand and/or machine, depending upon tree size. In several units, thinning slash would be piled by hand and burned. Group 3: This group includes 19 treatment units comprising about 745 acres. Treatments proposed are seedtree and shelterwood harvest/regeneration systems (appendix B). Most trees, except as needed for shelter and seed production would be removed. In some of the shelterwood treatments, trees would be retained in groups; in others the remaining trees would be relatively evenly distributed. All cut, live trees of a merchantable size would be removed for utilization. All merchantable dead trees would be removed, except those needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements). Many of the units would be burned to reduce fuel loads and prepare sites for natural regeneration or planting. Many of the units may be planted with some combination of ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and western larch where needed to regenerate the stands to the desired seral and fire-resistant species. Group 4: This group includes 11 treatment units comprising about 223 acres. Treatments proposed are clearcut harvest/regeneration systems in which all trees would be removed except for scattered clumps or individuals. Retained trees would mostly be Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, or western larch. All live and dead merchantable trees would be removed for utilization. Following cutting and removal, units would be prescribe burned, the type of burn varying by individual unit fuels reduction and site preparation treatment need. Natural regeneration by Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine is expected to occur to some degree and Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, and western larch may be planted, the mixture differing by individual unit. Group 5: This group includes two treatment units comprising about 25 acres. The treatments would remove dead and dying trees, slash non-commercial-sized trees, and reduce fuels by handpiling and burning. All cut merchantable trees would be removed for utilization using ground-based equipment except as needed to meet other resource concerns. Group 6: This group includes three treatment units comprising about 449 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. The prescribed burning would create openings less than 5 or 10 acres, the opening size depending upon the unit. Units would be prescribed burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and preparing sites for natural regeneration. Group 7: This group includes three treatment units comprising about 410 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. Where the opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around available whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir trees to enhance the regeneration of those species. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. The treatments would create patches of mortality up to 5, 10, or 20 acres depending upon the treatment unit. Group 8: This group includes seven treatment units comprising about 4,604 acres. The treatments would cut small trees on portions of the treatment areas to create fuelbeds conducive to low-intensity prescribed burning. Where the opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around available whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir trees to enhance the regeneration of those species. Units would be prescribe burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. The treatments would create patches of mortality up to 30 or 75 acres depending upon the treatment unit. Aspen is in a number of units proposed for treatment. The aspen can be considered seral to either subalpine fir or Douglas-fir, depending upon the unit and site. In many unit exams, the aspen is simply recorded as being present, as rare, or as a trace; while in several other units it comprises a substantial, although still minor, portion of the stocking, for example Unit 3. Comments concerning the aspen in unit exams range from “suppressed in the understory” to “vigorous in the overstory, but proportionally not much suckering.” In general, we can characterize aspen in proposed units and the project area as (1) small clones, (2) heavily competing with—to suppressed by— conifers, and (3) a minor stand component (with a few exceptions). Whitebark pine can be found in several units from groups 6, 7, and 8. In general, the whitebark pine in the project area is considered highly infected by white pine blister rust, and can be considered seral to subalpine fir. On sites where it is a seral species in the Northern Rocky Mountains, whitebark pine depends upon fire to maintain its dominance or presence (Arno 2001, Keane 2001, Kendall and Keane 2001, Morgan and Murray 2001). In the absence of fire, subalpine fir has increased in presence, and the combination of increased subalpine fir and whitebark pine mortality, and lack of regeneration due to white pine blister rust and mountain pine beetle have resulted in a decline in whitebark pine. Alternative 3 Treatment Descriptions Groups 1-8: Under alternative 3, treatments for units in groups 1-8 would be the same as discussed previously under alternative 2. The treated areas would change from that discussed in alternative 2 because under alternative 3 several units are not proposed for treatment and 12 units are proposed for treatment under new groups 9 and 10. Treatment acreages for alternatives 2 and 3 are displayed in table 45. Group 9: Under alternative 3, about 1,040 acres would be treated with a low-intensity and low-severity prescribed burn (underburn). The purposes of the underburn would be to reduce surface and ladder fuels (small trees) and so modify future fire behavior while minimizing impacts to stand overstory and midstory stocking from the prescribed burn. Group 10: This group includes units 46a and 47a. Treatments would be designed in a mosaic pattern to maintain cover and forage for wildlife while promoting ponderosa pine and aspen, and reducing ladder fuels. Portions of the stands would be thinned to (1) reduce understory competition from around large ponderosa pine trees, (2) thin heavily-stocked groups of trees on sites historically dominated by ponderosa pine, and (3) remove conifer competition from within and around quaking aspen. Treatment guidelines are as follows: · To reduce understory competition around large ponderosa pine, and move areas toward or maintain multi-storied ponderosa pine structure, within 50 feet of ponderosa pine trees larger than 17 inches d.b.h. remove all but two trees. The retained trees should be of varied size and age classes. · In areas dominated by ponderosa pine, but lacking live trees greater than 17 inches d.b.h., trees would be thinned to 48 to 109 trees per acre depending upon tree size. · Ponderosa pine snags greater than 17 inches d.b.h. would be favored for retention to meet Forest Plan direction for snags. · Conifers less than 17 inches d.b.h. would be removed up to 100 feet of existing aspen patches. · Post-thinning, slash would be jackpot burned or hand-piled and burned to reduce fuels. · Treatments would affect up to 50 percent of these units. Table 44 displays the proposed treatment acreages for the action alternatives by prescription group. Table 44. Prescription group acres by alternative Prescription Group Alternative 2 Acres Alternative 3 Acres 1 974 232 2 1,132 822 3 892 664 4 223 152 5 25 25 6 303 326 7 410 36 8 4,604 3,265 9 0 1,040 Total 8,564 6,564 Direct and Indirect Effects Common to Alternatives 2 and 3 Proposed treatments would reduce surface, ladder and crown fuels and change the fuel model profile, thereby decreasing the area with potential for flame lengths greater than four feet and reducing potential crown fire risk. In addition, alternative 2 or 3 would reduce the risk of wildfire impacts to adjacent private lands and other resource values. Collins (2010) stated larger individual treatments have a greater potential to reduce fire behavior and slow fire spread, which ultimately impacts adjacent untreated stands and should enhance suppression opportunities and increase firefighter safety. By treating these areas, they become more resilient to stand-replacing wildfire and allow greater protection within the WUI zone. Minore (1979) noted that mixed-severity fires kill a large proportion of the most fire-susceptible tree species, such as subalpine fir, which tend also to be the shade-tolerant species favored by fire exclusion. Barrett (et al 1982) concluded implications for management of wilderness and other natural areas (such as roadless areas) are that lightning fires may not be frequent enough to re-create pre-settlement conditions. It may be necessary to set prescribed fires to achieve initial fuel reduction for returning some ecosystems to pre-settlement conditions. Such human-ignited prescribed fires in wilderness natural areas may also be justifiable in terms of resuming an ancient approach of using fire to accomplish multiple objectives. Treatments would also help fire managers introduce more low-intensity prescribed fire in the future. National Forest System lands and adjacent private lands would be positively affected from the reduction of hazardous fuels and subsequent modification of potential fire behavior. In addition breaking up the continuous horizontal and vertical fuels could warrant changing portions of the Stonewall project area from a Fire Management Unit13 1 (FMU) “full suppression” to FMU-2 “modified suppression” and allow fires to be managed for resource benefit. (Kurtz 2009) 13 Fire Management Unit is a unique land management area defined by land objectives, topographic features, values to be protected, political boundaries, fuel types, or major fire regimes. (2011 Helena FMP) Scientific findings indicates the most appropriate fuel treatment strategy is often thinning (removing ladder fuels and decreasing crown density) followed by prescribed fire, piling and burning fuels, and mechanical treatments. These treatments would provide maximum protection from severe fires in the future (Peterson 2005). Other research shows that areas treated before a fire begins can decrease severity (Strom and Fulé 2007, Peterson et al. 2005, Omi and Martinson 2004, Agee and Skinner 2005, Graham 2004, Pollet and Omi 2002, Fulé et al. 2001). Reinhardt et al. (2010) noted post-harvest slash treatment (mastication, whole tree yarding or no treatment) were not as important as harvest and prescribed fire treatments over time. “This may be because the slash treatments affected the surface fuels only and not the subsequent development of the stand. Thinning and prescribed fire, which change stand structure and composition, have much more lasting effects on fuels and fire potential.” However, in extreme weather conditions, such as drought and high winds, fuel treatments may have little effect on fire spread or severity (Pollet and Omi 2002). Treatments on National Forest System land would reduce fire intensity and crown fire potential but may not directly protect all homes. Studies indicate that wildfire mitigation focused on structures and their immediate surroundings is the most effective way to reduce structure ignitions (Cohen 1999, 2000, 2003; Scott 2003). While individual home-by-home treatments can also help reduce the risk of loss to individual homes, relying solely on such treatments would forego strategic opportunities for controlling fires within this wildland urban interface area. Although homes in the path of a wildfire are perhaps the most immediately recognized value at risk, research shows that treatments need to go beyond the home ignition zone for other resource values (Graham 2004). A study conducted by Graham and others (2009) of wildfires during the summer of 2007 that burned over 500,000 acres within central Idaho found that the limited loss of structures and resource damage was largely due to the existence of the fuel treatments and how they interacted with suppression activities. In addition to modifying wildfire intensity14, the burn severity15 to vegetation and soils within the areas where the fuels were treated was generally less compared to neighboring areas where the fuels were not treated. They noted that by modifying the fire behavior, the fuel treatments presented suppression opportunities that otherwise may not have been available. These opportunities ranged from providing locales to conduct burnouts16, to the location of both hand and machine constructed fire lines. In particular, the mechanical fuel treatments were very effective in creating conditions where surface fires dominated. Because of the lower intensity of the surface fire in these areas, there were safe zones for firefighters and crews who could then readily suppress the numerous spot fires that often occurred. Their observations suggest fuel treatments that create irregular forest structures and compositions, both within and among stands, tend to produce wildfire resilient forests. Miller (2012) found that fires allowed to play their natural role created additional fuel breaks and reduced fuel loading. 14 Fire intensity is defined as the amount of energy of heat release per unit time. 15 Fire severity is defined as the effect of a fire on ecosystem properties, usually defined by the degree of soil heating or mortality of vegetation. 16 Burnout is defined as the act of setting fire inside a control line to consume fuel between the edge of the fire and the control line. Fire modeling suggests the proposed treatments would effectively reduce fire behavior. Following implementation of a chosen alternative, the treated areas should exhibit surface fire under the modeled conditions, making fire suppression efforts safer and more effective. With these alternatives, desired fuel loadings and fire behavior characteristics would be achieved and natural or prescribed fire could occur with less risk. Little is known about treatment longevity but a few studies suggest that benefits to fire effects are limited to about 10-15 years (Finney et al. 2005). Collins et al. (2010) noted that in dense fire-excluded stands, multiple burns would be needed to achieve more long-lived effects. Baker (2009) noted the need for land managers to reduce vulnerable fuels near housing, infrastructure, roads and other locations where human-set fires could spread into restoration areas. Implementing the alternatives would meet the collaborative restoration vision for the Southwestern Crown of the Continent, which includes prescribed fire and natural ignitions as tools to restore species composition and structure in a predictable and beneficial manner. As climate change modifies forest ecology, fire management is appropriately adjusted. Forest restoration and fuel management activities facilitate the reduction of wildfire management costs while re-establishing natural fire regimes (Southwestern Crown Collaborative 2010). Impacts of the treatments on standing dead trees would differ according to the various treatments. Regeneration harvest and intermediate harvest treatments are expected to reduce snag numbers, thereby reducing fuel-loading levels. Many of these treatments are located adjacent to private land, and it is expected treatments would reduce fuel loading to acceptable levels meeting fire and fuels management objectives. Post mechanical treatment burning may generate a small degree of mortality; however, it is not expected to negatively affect the fire and fuels resource. In units proposed for mixed-severity prescribed burning only, there would be substantial mortality in the neighborhood of 60 TPA, however it must be noted that almost 80 percent of the dead trees would be between 7 and 12 inches d.b.h. (Amell 2012). Cumulative Effects Common to Alternatives 2 and 3 Past wildland fire events have had an effect on the landscape and would continue in the future. Decades of fire suppression in many western forests have resulted in high tree densities from infilling with shade-tolerant, fire-sensitive tree species. Cumulative effects from wildfires and past management activities are discussed in the existing condition section. The existing condition has been influenced by fire exclusion and large fires, as well as natural and artificial activities including insects and disease and past timber harvest. It is impossible to predict when wildfire may occur in the future, or the subsequent effects of that fire. Alternative 2 or 3 combined with other fuels reduction activities previously discussed under the no action alternative, would modify fire behavior by contributing to the overall reduction of surface, ladder, and crown fuels, thereby reducing fire intensity and crown fire potential within and adjacent to the project area. There is an indeterminate amount of fuels reduction activities (Fire Wise) work occurring on private lands adjacent to the project area. These combined treatments would complement the purpose and need goals for fire and fuels management by modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection opportunities, while creating conditions that allow for the re-establishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Alternative 2 and 3 comply with Helena National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan goals, standards, and guides and National Fire Plan goals. The alternatives are responsive to the Tri-County Community Wildfire Protection Plan, and the Lincoln Restoration Committee and Montana Forest Restoration Committee’s recommendations and objectives, and are in-line with the collaborative group’s 13-Guiding Principles. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action With alternative 2, we are proposing to treat approximately 8,564 acres, which is equivalent to about 36 percent of the project area. The proposed treatments include under burning, jackpot and broadcast burning17. Site preparation burning is proposed, and would take place after harvesting is completed to prepare areas for tree planting. Prescribed burning is proposed as a stand-alone treatment in 15 units. Most of the prescribed burn only units are located in inventoried roadless areas. Where there is sparse vegetation in these units, small-diameter trees (less than 6 inches d.b.h.) would be cut and scattered. Cutting small trees ensures there are adequate surface fuels to carry the fire. 17 Under burn is defined as a fire that is constrained to surface fuel and therefore has a low to moderate fireline intensity (less than 300 kW/M) (2008 Firewords v1.0.2). Jackpot burning is prescribed burning of concentrations of woody fuels. Broadcast burning is a prescribed burning activity where fire is applied generally to most or all of an area within well-defined boundaries for reduction of fuel hazard, as a resource management treatment, or both (NWCG 2011). Helena National Forest personnel developed eight prescription groups to describe thinning and prescribed burning treatments for the proposed action. Prescription groups 1-5 would receive a silvicultural treatment prior to a prescribed burning treatment. Silvicultural treatments are discussed in detail in the DEIS (Amell 2012) and include precommercial thinning, intermediate harvest and regeneration harvest. Prescribed burning involves controlled application of fire to natural or activity created fuels. Natural accumulated fuels and activity fuels generated as a result of harvest would be offered as fire wood to the public in areas where there is a large amount. In other areas, fuels would be piled and burned or underburned to reduce fuel loading levels. In prescription groups 6-8, prescribed burning is proposed as a stand-alone treatment on 5,463 acres. The objective is to reduce surface, ladder and canopy fuels and break up contiguous vegetation. These treatments would reduce potential fire behavior and provide fire managers the opportunity to reintroduce fire to the landscape. Prescribed burning would be conducted using ground or aerial firing methods. Approximately 5,014 acres would be burned with varying fire intensities resulting in mixed-severity fire18 effects. The majority of these units are typically high-elevation lodgepole pine stands with concentrations of subalpine fir and whitebark pine intermixed. The mixed-severity units are strategically placed to break up the continuous vegetation within the higher elevations, promote age class diversity, aspen regeneration and enhance whitebark pine habitat by creating openings suitable for regeneration (Kurtz 2009). Individual mixed-severity fires typically leave a patchy, erratic pattern of mortality on the landscape that fosters development of highly diverse communities (Arno et al. 2000). Overall, these fires kill a large proportion of the most fire-susceptible tree species, such as subalpine fir, and a smaller proportion of fire-resistant species including ponderosa pine, western white pine and whitebark pine, which are replaced successionally by shade tolerant species with fire exclusion (Arno et al. 1997). To meet objectives, approximately 20-60 percent of prescribed fire units would be blackened, creating a mosaic19 of burned and unburned patches. Areas of prescribed burn units would result in mixed-severity fire effects with portions of the overstory canopy being blackened. Overstory canopy openings from approximately 5 acres to less than 75 acres are desired. The range of openings varies depending on the prescription group. 18 Mixed Severity Fire is a broad fire severity classification that refers to fire effects intermediate between the low severity and replacement severity (FRCC Guidebook 2010). 19 Mosaic Fire is any landscape-scale mixed fire that has scattered patches across the fire perimeter, resulting in a mosaic of burned and unburned patches (Hann 2004). 20 Slashing involves cutting small-diameter trees less than 6 inches diameter breast height (d.b.h.). Of the 5,463 acres proposed for prescribed burning (without harvest), the remaining 449 acres would have low-intensity fire applied and are expected to result in low-severity fire effects. These units are primarily low-elevation, open Douglas-fir or mixed Douglas-fir/ponderosa pine stands with intermittent lodgepole pine. Low-intensity and prescribed fire would retain or promote open stands, reduce encroachment , retain large-diameter Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine, reduce the risk of crown fire, and reintroduce fire into a fire-adapted ecosystem. To meet objectives, estimated overstory canopy openings would equate to less than 20 percent in these units. These openings would range from 5 acres to approximately 10 acres. Slashing20 treatments using chainsaws are proposed in prescription groups 6-8 (prescribed-burning units) prior to burning. Slashing small trees increases surface fuel loading to ensure there is sufficient fuel to carry the fire. This enables fire managers more flexibility in accomplishing prescribed fire objectives at lower temperatures, higher relative humidity and creates varying fire intensity levels. Fire intensity variations would create a mosaic burn more representative of a natural fire (see appendix B, table B-1 for treatment descriptions by unit). All prescribed burning would occur when weather and fuel conditions are favorable. All burning would take place under the guidelines in the prescribed fire burn plan developed specifically for project-related burning activities. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality, contingency resources and potential escapes. Table 45 displays the prescription groups and the approximate number of acres that would receive prescribed burning treatments.  Table 45 Proposed burning treatments and approximate acres of prescription group for alternative 2 GROUP GROUP TREATMENT TITLE ACRES* 1 Prescribed under burning and jackpot burning following harvest 974 2 Pile burning following harvest 1,132 Under burning or slash treatment adjacent to private Under burning following harvest 3 Prescribe under burning, jackpot and broadcast burning following harvest 745 Site prep burning following harvest Pile burning following harvest 4 Prescribe under burning, jackpot and broadcast burning following harvest 223 Site prep burning following harvest 5 Piling and burning of excess fuels following harvest 25 6 Low Severity Prescribed Fire, canopy openings of approximately 5 to 10 acres 449 7 Mixed Severity Fire, canopy openings of approximately 5 to 20 acres 410 8 Mixed severity fire, canopy openings of approximately 30 – 75 acres 4,604  Total 8,564* *The total represents the total acres of prescription groups, not all acres would be treated. Fire modeling was used to evaluate the potential flame length associated with fireline intensity and crown fire under alternative 2. The results for potential flame length for alternative 2 are shown in table 46 and visually displayed in figure 45. Fire type potential is also summarized in table 46 and displayed in figure 46. Table 46 Fire behavior potential under alternative 2 POTENTIAL FIRE BEHAVIOR CHARACTERISTIC PERCENT A Flame Length <= 4 feet 89 > 4 feet 11 Fire Type Surface 87 Crown 13 a -Percent of burnable acres- Non-burnable acres are not shown in table  Alternative 2 – proposed action fire behavior potential displayed as flame lengthFigure 45. Alternative 2 – proposed action fire behavior potential displayed as flame length  Alternative 2 – proposed action fire behavior potential displayed by fire typeFigure 46. Alternative 2 – proposed action fire behavior potential displayed by fire type Maximum Management Area (MMA) Maximum Management Areas (MMAs) have been identified for the Stonewall Project area. A maximum management area is a pre-identified boundary that allows a prescribed fire to exceed the unit boundary. An MMA generally follows natural barriers, old fire scars and access points. MMA treatment areas would enable fire managers more flexibility in implementing prescribed burning operations. Establishing MMAs was determined to be an important component of implementing this project because there are contiguous fuels with few natural barriers, limited access into remote units, more complexity in prescribed fire prescriptions due to location of burn units and the existing and projected condition of vegetation and fuels. As long as the prescribed fire stays within the MMA boundary, it does not have to be declared a wildfire and can be managed as a prescribed fire as long as the following conditions are met. The anticipated effects of a prescribed fire that leaves unit boundaries and encroaches into the pre-defined MMA area would be similar to the effects expected within prescribed burn units. Vegetation in MMA areas would exhibit similar post-burn conditions as prescribed burn units, and it is estimated no more than 50 percent of each MMA would be burned. Project Design Features (PDFs) are established to minimize impacts to resources throughout the project area, and would also apply to MMA areas. All burning in MMA areas would take place under guidelines set forth in a prescribed fire burn plan developed specifically for this project area. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality, and contingency resources. · Any fire that moves outside the prescribed burn unit boundary has to meet burn plan prescriptions and objectives for resource benefit. · Total burned area within the MMA would not exceed 50 percent · If the 50 percent margin is reached, acres from the units not yet burned would be dropped to not exceed 50 percent · A prescribed fire that exceeds the MMA would be declared a wildfire. · Ignition operations would not occur outside prescribed unit boundaries. Alternative 3 Some units in alternative 3 were dropped from treatment, unit boundaries were modified and treatment methods changed as compared to alternative 2. Under alternative 3 we are proposing to treat 6,564 acres, approximately 27 percent of the project area (table 47). Prescription groups 9 and 10 were developed for this alternative, and include low-intensity under burning. Group 9 includes approximately 1,040 acres in 10 units. Treatment units or portions of units were removed from prescription groups 1, 3 and 4 and added to group 9. Low-severity under burning in these units would reduce surface and ladder fuels while minimizing impacts to overstory residual trees. Prescription group 10 includes units 46a and 47a, which were originally included in Group 1 under alternative 2. Treatments in group 10 would be designed to maintain cover and forage for wildlife while still meeting fuels management objectives by reducing fuels.  Table 47. Proposed burning treatment and total acres of prescription groups under alternative 3 GROUP GROUP TREATMENT TITLE ACRES 1 Prescribed under burning following harvest 232 2 Pile burning following harvest 822 Under burning or slash treatment adjacent to private Under burning following harvest Pile burning and under burning 3 Prescribe under burning, jackpot and broadcast burning following harvest 664 Site prep burning following harvest Pile burning following harvest 4 Prescribe under burning and broadcast burning following harvest 152 Site prep burning following harvest 5 Piling and burning of fuels following harvest 25 6 Low intensity and low severity Prescribed Fire, with canopy openings of less than 5 acres 326 7 Mixed severity fire, with canopy openings of 5-20 acres 36 8 Mixed severity fire, with canopy openings of 30-75 acres 3,265 Mixed severity fire, openings <75 acres 9 Low intensity, Low severity Jackpot and under burning 637 10 Jackpot and/or hand pile burning activity fuels as needed 403  Total 6,564* *The total represents the total acres of prescription groups, not all acres would be treated. Fire modeling was used to evaluate the potential flame length associated with fireline intensity and crown fire under alternative 3. The modeled outcomes are summarized in table 48 and visually displayed in figure 47. Fire type is also summarized in table 48 and displayed in figure 48. Under alternative 3, the fuel profile is modified over less area than under alternative 2, resulting in less overall change in fire behavior.  Table 48. Fire behavior potential under alternative 3 Potential Fire Behavior Characteristic Percent Flame Length <= 4 feet 76 > 4 feet 24 Fire Type Surface 85 Crown 15  Alternative 3 fire behavior potential displayed as flame lengthFigure 47. Alternative 3 fire behavior potential displayed as flame length  Alternative 3 fire behavior potential displayed by fire typeFigure 48. Alternative 3 fire behavior potential displayed by fire type How the Alternatives Meet the Identified Issues The following issues or concerns were identified for this project during the scoping period. The alternatives would address the issues as follows. 1. Identified Issue/Concern: Wildland Fire and Homes: Proposed treatments may be inefficient and ineffective in reducing home losses due to fire. Proposed treatments would reduce surface, ladder and crown fuels and change the fuel model profile, thereby decreasing the area with potential for flame lengths greater than four feet and reducing potential crown fire risk. In addition, alternative 2 or 3 would reduce the risk of wildfire impacts to adjacent private lands and other resource values. By treating these areas, they become more resilient to stand-replacing wildfire and allow greater protection within the WUI zone. 2. Identified Issue/Concern: Fire Behavior: Proposed fuels reduction work will not reduce fire behavior. Fire modeling suggests the proposed treatments would effectively reduce fire behavior. Following implementation of a chosen alternative, the treated areas should exhibit surface fire under the modeled conditions, making fire suppression efforts safer and more effective. With these alternatives, desired fuel loadings and fire behavior characteristics would be achieved and natural or prescribed fire could occur with less risk. 3. Identified Issue/Conern: Prescribed Burning: Concerns over risk of fire escaping burn boundaries during prescribed burning operations. All prescribed burning would occur when weather and fuel conditions are favorable. All burning would take place under the guidelines in the prescribed fire burn plan developed specifically for project-related burning activities. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality, contingency resources and potential escapes. Summary The mechanical treatments proposed would reduce surface fuels, raise canopy base heights by reducing ladder fuels and stand density, resulting in modified fire behavior potential. The result would be safer, more efficient and direct initial attack of unwanted fires by fire suppression forces. The prescribed burn treatments would reduce fuels and break up contiguous vegetation to create a heterogeneous fuelscape so that areas with high fire behavior potential are interspersed with areas of mixed and low fire behavior potential, thereby limiting the potential for high-intensity crown fire to spread towards the WUI. Fire management has evolved over time and fire managers look for opportunities to manage fire for multiple objectives. Reintroducing fire to the landscape and allowing it to occur as a natural process is desired in order to move the landscape toward the desired condition as outlined in the LRMP. The Stonewall Vegetation Project would be important to the success of future fire suppression efforts and complements past treatments and those currently occurring or being proposed on adjacent federal, state and private lands. Air Quality Introduction The smoke from combustion contains a number of pollutants, including microscopic particles referred to as “particulate matter” (PM). Exposure to PM can cause significant health problems, especially for people suffering from respiratory illnesses. Smoke also adversely affects the clarity of the air, or visibility. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has revised the air quality standards to provide improved health and visibility protection. With these standards in place land managers must consider using techniques that minimize prescribed fire emissions and the adverse impacts of smoke on public health and the environment. Careful planning and cooperation among land managers, air quality regulators, and local communities ensures that prescribed fire, clean air and public health goals can be met. This analysis describes the existing condition of the air quality resource within the project area and evaluates the potential effects of the proposed action and the no-action alternative. We used the best available science in this analysis; however, we understand that opposing science exists. A literature review listing the opposing science sent to the project in public comment scoping responses, and the accompanying Forest Service response, is in the project record at the Lincoln Ranger District. Methodology Analysis of smoke production used current versions of FOFEM 5 (First Order Fire Effects Model), CONSUME 2.1, and SIS (Smoke Impact Spreadsheet) smoke production models (Schaaf and Norville 2002). Embedded in SIS is a module that calculates emissions using FOFEM 5 and the CONSUME 2.1 Pile Wizard. A dispersion module is also incorporated into the spreadsheet that calculates down-wind concentrations using the CALPUFF dispersion model. The use of each model is recommended through guidance specific to USDA Forest Service Region 1 Forests, and encouraged by State open burning regulations defining Best Available Control Techniques for prescribed wildland open burning in ARM 17.8.601(1)(a)(iii). Threshold for Significance The threshold for significance is the Federal and State regulatory standard of 35 .g/m. for PM2.5 and how the modeled PM2.5 emissions compare with the regulatory standard. Assumptions and Variables Used In the Models: All model runs were conducted using the following vegetation types: SAF 210 Interior Douglas-fir and SAF 218 Lodgepole Pine. For alternative 1 analysis, it was assumed a natural wildfire burning during the summer would burn 230 acres per day, the wildfire was burning through fuel model G with a natural fuel load, and the meteorological values and mixing heights used resulted in an excellent ventilation index. An additional model run for alternatives 2 and 3 was conducted using slash fuel loading conditions for a prescribed burn in the fall. It was assumed the entire burn unit selected for modeling would be ignited all at once to show the maximum result of emissions that could be produced under the circumstances. For alternatives 2 and 3 pile burning, it was estimated there would be 15 piles burned per day with forty-minute ignition intervals. The piles were modeled as 25 feet wide by 10 feet high with a 10 percent packing ratio. Limitations Because model inputs are constant and there is no avenue to incorporate variability due to landscape, weather changes or human factors, the models do not precisely determine the exact amount of smoke or pollutant released. The possibility of increased smoke production and duration of smoke release exists due to the potential for multiple day burn windows, unpredicted stable air masses settling over the burn area and unexpected changes in weather conditions. Given the uncertainty of any modeling exercise, the results are best used to compare the relative effects, rather than as an indicator of absolute effects (Graham et al. 2004). Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis Spatial Bounds A maximum perimeter distance of 50 miles was considered for effects. This allows for consideration of the effects to Class 1 areas. Temporal Bounds The time span of 1-5 days was chosen because smoke from prescribed burning is usually transitory in nature and impacts to air quality are expected to be relatively short lived, lasting 1-5 days after ignition is completed. Measurement Indicators The measurement indicator is the predicted smoke emissions (PM2.5) on sensitive receptors up to 50 miles downwind of the project area. Overview of Issues There is a concern about the possible effects on human health from smoke as a result of prescribed burning operations. There is also concern the proposed project would negatively affect air quality and visibility in the surrounding communities and nearby wilderness areas. Indicators The measurement indicator is the predicted smoke emissions (PM2.5) on sensitive receptors up to 50 miles downwind of the project area and how that compares with appropriate Federal and State regulatory standards and requirements. Affected Environment Existing Condition Analysis Area The project area lies within Montana/Idaho Airsheds 3B and 6. A portion of the project area lies in Powell County with the remainder in Lewis and Clark County. Airsheds are defined and managed by Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). Air Quality Air quality within the project area is generally good. Limited local emission sources exist including residential wood burning, debris burning, road dust, light industry, vehicles, construction equipment and wildland fire. The greatest emissions occur during the winter from residential wood burning stoves used for indoor heat. Wildland fires can produce substantial emissions in the summer and fall for short to moderate durations. Generally, dispersion of emissions within the project area is good due to the terrain and wind activity. There is consistent wind dispersion during much of the year. Up valley winds during the day and down valley winds (cold air drainage) at night can dominate more than overall prevailing wind direction on ridge tops. Inversions sometimes develop in the valley during winter burning periods with stable atmospheres. Visibility at Class 1 Areas The Clean Air Act (1963) establishes as a national goal “the prevention of any future, and the remedying of any existing impairment of visibility in mandatory class 1 Federal areas which impairment results from manmade air pollution” (42 U.S.C. §7491 et seq.). The Clean Air Act Amendment of 1977 designated wilderness areas existing at that time to be class 1 areas. Areas designated Wilderness after 1977 are classified as class 2, unless they are additions to existing class 1 areas. The class 1 areas nearest to the Stonewall Vegetation Project area are the Scapegoat Wilderness, 1 air mile north, the Bob Marshall Wilderness approximately 18 air miles northwest, Mission Mountain Wilderness 48 air miles northwest, Gates of the Mountains 36 air miles southeast and the Flathead Reservation 40 air miles west. These areas could be affected by the proposed project during periods of atmospheric stability. The Clean Air Act also allows the states to designate future wilderness areas as class 1 using normal state processes. These national park and wilderness areas are afforded visibility protection from anthropogenic sources of air pollution, including emissions from prescribed burning. Montana has twelve mandatory class 1 federal areas as outlined in 40 CFR 81.417. Figure 49 displays the geographic locations of Montana’s mandatory class I federal areas: Visibility impairment is a basic indicator of air pollution. The EPA has determined that regional variation in visibility needs to be addressed. The Regional Haze Regulations for Protection of Visibility in National Parks and Wilderness Areas (1997) are intended to improve visibility or visual air quality in 156 national parks and wilderness areas across the country. These regulations apply to all states, including those that do not have class 1 areas, because pollution that occurs in those states may contribute to impairment in other states or class 1 areas and must be accountable. The regional haze regulations propose “presumptive reasonable progress targets” for improving visibility in each class 1 area. The progress targets are described in terms of deciviews, a measure for describing perceived changes in visibility. For example, a deciview of zero represents pristine conditions. A requirement of Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) in class 1 areas is that new stationary sources must have a PSD permit. A stationary source is a source of pollution well defined, such as a smokestack. The Stonewall Vegetation Project is not considered a major stationary source and is not subject to the PSD permitting requirement. Figure 49. Montana Class 1 Area Map Title: Montana Class 1 Area Map - Description: MT Class IA reasPollutants Airsheds can include both attainment and nonattainment areas; designations EPA uses to describe the air quality in a given area for any of six common pollutants referred to as “criteria pollutants.” The pollutants are: carbon monoxide (CO), lead (Pb), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), sulfur dioxide (SO2) and particulate matter (PM). Carbon monoxide in high concentrations can be extremely hazardous to humans and animals, but its health impacts are usually only significant for personnel directly exposed to smoke (e.g. firefighters) (Hardy et al. 2001). In addition to effects on health, some pollutants may also contribute to the formation of ozone in the atmosphere (Malm 1999). Lead at low levels can cause health problems either by inhalation or ingestion. Nitrogen dioxide may cause increased respiratory illnesses and harm lung function in people with existing respiratory illnesses. Breathing ozone can also trigger health problems and worsen bronchitis and asthma. Sulfur dioxide may also have adverse respiratory effects on humans with existing respiratory illnesses. The main pollutants monitored for prescribed fire emissions are particulate matter. Particulate matter is fine material, of any substance, in sizes small enough to remain suspended in air for long periods. Two standards apply to particulate matter and they are distinguished by the size of particulate matter described. PM10 describes all fine particles no larger than 10 microns in size. These particles can be harmful to human health because their small size allows them to bypass the filtration of the upper respiratory system and become lodged deep within the lungs. Particles with diameters between 2.5 and 10 micrometers are referred to as "coarse." Sources of coarse particles include crushing or grinding operations and dust from paved or unpaved roads. Other particles may be formed in the air from the chemical change of gasses; they are indirectly formed when gases from burning fuels react with sunlight and water vapor. These can result from fuel combustion in motor vehicles, at power plants and in other industrial processes. PM10 has been the pollutant particulate level standard against which EPA has been measuring Clean Air Act compliance. Based on newer scientific findings, the Agency is considering regulations that would make PM2.5 the new standard (EPA 2011a). The description PM2.5 refers to particles that are no larger than 2.5 microns (approximately 1/30th the average width of a human hair). These are harmful in the same way as larger PM10 particles, but can lodge even deeper in the lungs due to their smaller size, and are associated with serious health problems and premature mortality. Particulate matter also has an adverse effect on maximum sight distance and scenic visibility. Sources of fine particles include all types of combustion activities (motor vehicles, power plants, wood burning) and certain industrial processes. The particulate level PM2.5 would have the most significant impact in the project area as well as the area and people surrounding the project area, and is the focus of this analysis. Nonattainment Areas If a community does not attain the National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) for one or more pollutants, the EPA would designate it a nonattainment area. States must demonstrate to the public and the EPA how a nonattainment area would meet the NAAQS, based upon the control of emission sources. Such demonstrations employ control plans that are part of each State Implementation Plan (SIP), including emissions from prescribed fire. Lewis and Clark County is in nonattainment for Sulphur Dioxide (SO2) and Lead (Pb) as determined by the EPA: Criteria Pollutant Area Summary Report (Green Book) (EPA 2011b). Smoke-sensitive Areas Smoke-sensitive areas are defined as: “The distance and direction of sensitive areas should be disclosed. These are areas that could be impacted by the proposed burning activity and are considered sensitive due to legislation, air quality concerns, or public concerns. Examples of sensitive areas are Class I areas, non-attainment areas, impact zones identified by the Montana / Idaho State Airshed Group, or major transportation corridors near or downwind from the proposed burning activity and population centers. To be consistent with other air quality permitting, it is suggested that areas within a 100 km radius, especially those areas downwind, should be identified” (Acheson et al. 2005). Table 49 displays a list of some of the sensitive receptors that could be impacted by smoke out to 50 miles from the project area (list is not all-inclusive). A mapped overview of the potential smoke impact area is in figure 2 in appendix A of this document. Fugitive Dust from Vehicle Traffic on Unpaved Roads Fugitive road dust is a result of motorized vehicle use on dry unpaved roads and is caused by the force of the wheels moving across the road surface causing pulverization of surface material. Dust is then lofted by the rolling wheels and the turbulence caused by the vehicle itself. This air turbulence can persist for a period of time after the vehicle passes. The quantity of dust emissions from a given segment of unpaved road varies linearly with the volume of traffic. Variables that influence the amount of dust produced include the average vehicle speed, vehicle weight, number of wheels per vehicle, the road surface texture, and the fraction of road surface material classified as silt as well as the moisture content of the road surface. The moisture content of the road surface has the greatest influence on the amount of fugitive dust produced. Several activities may contribute to fugitive dust effects within the project area including equipment and vehicle travel on forest roads during mechanical and prescribed burning operations, as well as felling, skidding and piling of material at landing sites. These activities are not anticipated to result in significant impacts to regional air quality because of the transitory nature of fugitive dust, and therefore were not modeled for this analysis. Table 49. Summary of sensitive receptors adjacent to or near the project area SENSITIVE RECEPTORS DIRECTION TO LOCATION OF POTENTIAL RECEPTOR APPROXIMATE DISTANCE (MILES) FROM PROJECT AREA TO POTENTIAL RECEPTOR Seeley Lake Community NW 38 Ovando W 15 Helmville SW 12 Deerlodge S 42 Helena SE 37 Wolf Creek SE 25 Augusta N 37 Drummond SW 26 Phillipsburg SW 49 Lincoln Community SE 4 Missoula Impact Zone W 44 Flathead Reservation (class-1) W 44 Bob Marshall Wilderness (class 1) N 20 Scapegoat Wilderness (class 1) N 1 Gates of the Mountains (class 1) E 40 State Highway 279 E 10 State Highway 200 S adjacent US Highway 287 E 24 Interstate Highway 90 S 25 State Highway 83 W 27 Environmental Consequences Effects Common to All Action Alternatives There is a concern about the possible effects on human health caused by smoke generated from prescribed burning operations under the action alternatives. There is also concern the proposed project would negatively affect air quality and visibility in the surrounding communities and nearby wilderness areas. Alternative 1 – No Action Direct Effects This alternative has no direct effect on air quality because no treatment activities are proposed. Indirect Effects Under this alternative, no treatments would occur and there would be no anthropogenic emission contribution to degrade air quality. However, this alternative could lead to increased accumulation of ground fuel due to insect and disease activity and continuous natural forest succession. This accumulation of ladder and ground fuels may lead to an increased probability of high intensity wildfire in the future which could result in air quality degradation. Air quality can be degraded by smoke from wildfires to the point of human illness in some instances. Hardy (2001) noted emissions from wildfire are typically greater than emissions from a prescribed fire on the same acreage due to greater emission factor, fuel consumption, and fire intensity. Wildfires are also known to result in high levels of emissions, and associated NAAQS violations. Smoke from wildfire can cause visual impacts to the surrounding area and create hazardous driving conditions on adjacent state, county, and Forest Service roads for extended periods of time. Should a wildfire occur, dust emissions from fire suppression equipment could also show a marked increase. In the short-term air quality impacts from alternative 1 would be less because prescribed burning and pile burning would not occur. In the long term, the no-action alternative would not meet the purpose and need of this project, which includes modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection. For example, under the no action alternative the emissions from a hypothetical wildfire was modeled and the results are displayed in table 3 that follows. The modeling results include projected emissions from a 230-acre wildfire scenario burning during the summer. The estimated PM2.5 concentration is 153.47 .g/m. 0.1 mile downwind of the hypothetical wildland fire exceeding the PM2.5 threshold of 35.g/m.. Table 50. PM2.5 concentrations from wildfire burning under no action alternative Downwind Distance from Wildland Fire Scenario (miles) 24-Hour Average PM2.5 Concentrations (.g/m.) .1 153.47 1.0 17.61 5.0 6.01 10.0 4.11 20.0 2.51 30.0 1.80 40.0 1.40 50.0 1.14 Cumulative Effects There are no activities proposed for the no-action alternative, therefore it does not have a direct effect on air quality. This alternative does have the potential for a major indirect effect if a wildfire were to occur in the untreated project area. Previous wildfire activity and increasing conifer mortality due to insect and disease can influence the amount of material available for consumption in the event of a future wildfire. Emissions sources contributing to particulate matter and other pollutants would continue to be present. These sources include wood burning stoves, vehicle exhaust, emissions from recreational campfires, emissions associated with prescribed fire, fugitive dust and wildfires within or near the project area. Wildfire frequency is expected to continue as it has been observed in the past. An unwanted wildfire could lead to negative cumulative effects and would be dependent upon the size and intensity of the wildfire. Visibility impairment and human health impacts due to sudden and dramatic pollutant release are likely with a large wildfire event. Cumulative effects of smoke are unknown because the intensity and size of a wildfire is unknown. Research indicates wildfires can produce nearly twice the amount of smoke as prescribed fire (Huff et al. 1995). Alternative 2 and 3 Alternatives 2 and 3 propose the same type of fuel treatments including; jackpot burning, pile burning, underburning, site preparation burning and mixed- and low- severity prescribed fire. Air quality modeling focused on prescribed fire and landing pile burning. Although alternative 2 would include more acres of all prescribed burning, only a certain number of acres could be burned per day under either alternative. Therefore, the daily effects of both alternatives are described here together. Table 51 shows the total acres for each alternative. Table 51. Acre comparison by treatment for each alternative Treatment Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Under burning 1,824 1,648 All other burning including Jackpot, Site Prep 752 878 Prescribed Fire 5,463 3,627 Total 8,039 6,053 Table 52 and table 53 show the modeling results for a prescribed burn scenario conducted in the fall and for a pile-burning scenario conducted in the winter. The projected PM2.5concentration at .01 mile downwind is well below the Federal NAAQS and State MAAQS 24-hour average concentration threshold of 35.g/m. for both scenarios. Since the nearest class 1 area is approximately 1 mile away, the results further show there would be no significant impacts to any class 1 area (figure 50). The smoke concentrations from prescribed burning operations under these alternatives are expected to be within NAAQS and state of Montana air quality standards. Montana’s smoke management program is EPA-certified, and the prescribed fire activities associated with the Stonewall Vegetation Project would meet Clean Air Act General Conformity Rule requirements. Table 52. Alternatives 2 and 3 prescribed burning concentrations RESULTS FOR A FALL PRESCRIBED BURN SCENARIO Downwind Distance from Burn Unit (miles) 24-hour Average PM2.5 Concentrations (.g/m.) 0.1 26.15 1.0 8.71 5.0 3.79 10.0 2.38 20.0 1.34 30.0 .92 40.0 .72 50.0 .62  Table 53. Alternative 2 and 3 pile burn concentrations RESULTS FOR A LANDING PILE BURN SCENARIO DOWNWIND DISTANCE FROM PILE (MILES) 24-HOUR AVERAGE PM2.5 CONCENTRATIONS (.G/M.) 0.1 31.27 1.0 13.25 5.0 4.28 10.0 .96 20.0 .30 30.0 .13 40.0 .11 50.0 .094  Figure 50. Stonewall Project potential smoke impact map Title: Stonewall Project potential smoke impact map - Description: This is a map that displays the affected area for smoke from burning starting at the project area and projecting in a 50-mile radius. It shows airsheds, highways, cities, wilderness areas, class 1 areas and impact zones. Project Design Features All prescribed burning would be implemented in full compliance with the Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) air program with coordination through the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group and reported to the Airshed Coordinator on a daily basis. Burning would be dependent upon site conditions and weather conditions. Notice of the pile and prescribed burning timeframes, or burn windows, would be shared with the public through paper notices and announcements on the Forest website. Direct Effects Prescribed burning treatments would have direct, short-term impacts on air quality in the project area and possibly to regional air quality. Prescribed fire treatments for this project would occur during the spring and/or fall seasons and when weather conditions and dispersion forecasts are favorable. Burning of landing piles and hand piles generally occur during late fall, early winter or spring, and typically after an area has received significant rain or snow to prevent the pile from spreading and reduce the risk of escape. All burning operations are conducted under the guidelines set forth in a prescribed fire burn plan developed by fire managers specifically for the project area. Prescribed burn plans address parameters for weather, air quality and contingency resources. All burning would occur over the life cycle of the project estimated at 5 to 10 years. Transitory smoke as a result of implementation of alternative 2 or 3 could produce some smoky days in the local area, and may also result in the form of nuisance smoke, smell, or haze. Smoke would also be expected to settle into the lower draws and drainages during the evening hours following ignition. This would most likely occur during the burn smoldering phase. Indirect Effects One objective of the project is to modify fire behavior to enhance community protection in the event of a future wildfire. Wildfires present a risk to public health and result in damage to both the environment and property. Wildfires are known to result in high levels of emissions and associated NAAQS violation and worst visibility. Vegetation management treatments provide the opportunity on a long-term basis to reduce the magnitude of wildfire air quality problems. According to (Wiedinmyer and Hurteau 2010) wide-scale prescribed fire application can reduce CO2 fire emissions for the western US by 18 to 25 percent. The total amount of pollutants released by prescribed burning under alternative 2 and 3 would be spread out over several years and would occur when emissions would be unlikely to have significant adverse effects on human health and visibility. After implementation, it is estimated that subsequent wildfires in the project area could produce less pollutants due to less fuel available to burn. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects on air quality as a result of the implementation of alternative 2 or 3 would result in an incremental decrease in air quality as pollutants from this project combine with other particles produced by the implementation of other aspects of this project, specifically fugitive road dust. Emitted pollutants from fire do have an effect on an area, which depends on atmospheric conditions at the time of the fire. Pollutants from fires can be cumulative with emissions from many local and regional sources, including other fires, vehicles, industrial sources, buildings and agriculture. Because of the widespread and short-lived impacts of emissions from fire, no other projects were explicitly considered for cumulative impact analysis. It is impossible to predict what pollution sources may be present at the time of a fire occurring at an unspecified date in the future. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans All prescribed burning would be implemented in full compliance with MDEQ air program with coordination through the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group. All action alternatives would meet Forest Plan Standards for air quality by following coordination requirements. The project complies with the Federal Clean Air Act.Habitats of Special Concern Introduction This section discusses snag and old growth availability as well as proposed treatment effects in the Stonewall Vegetation Project analysis area. Methodology The discussion below identifies information sources, analysis assumptions and analysis methods used. Information sources are not described in detail. For details concerning individual information sources see the Vegetation Section and the Stonewall Silviculture Report (Amell 2012). All information for this section was provided by the Helena National Forest or was acquired from the Region 1 and 4 Forest Health Protection Program. Information Used Information used in this analysis includes: · Individual treatment unit diagnosis completed by Helena National Forest personnel and last updated in fall 2009 · Formal stand exam data collected for selected stands by Helena National Forest personnel · Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) “grid intensification” sample plot data collected by the HNF contained in the Field Sampled Vegetation database (FSVeg) · Informal exam data collected, and stand diagnosis data collected and produced during the fall of 2009 and 2010 by HNF personnel · Site visits during the summer of 2010 · Past management activity data located in the Forest Service Activity Tracking System (FACTS) database · GIS spatial data acquired from the Helena National Forest including: · VMAP spatial data including classification for tree dominance type, tree canopy cover class, and tree diameter · Helena National Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) Management Area boundaries · 2001-2010 aerial insect and disease detection (ADS) survey data · Project area boundary · Historic fire activities · Past management activities · Old-growth · Other documents as referenced in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Old Growth and Snag report (Amell 2012b). Assumptions Ecosystems are dynamic, American public desires and expectations change, and climatic conditions change. These factors require that a number of assumptions, from great to small, be made in any analysis. In this analysis we do not include as assumptions that natural processes which are certain to happen would continue to happen. For example, succession is a natural process constantly occurring due to differences in plants abilities to colonize, survive, grow, and propagate as conditions change. The process of succession would always happen and we do not consider it an assumption that it would do so. We do include as assumptions factors such as climate change-the direction, magnitude, and effects of which cannot yet be considered as “known”-and the occurrence or non-occurrence of disturbances such as wildfires which can modify the direction of succession. Assumptions we make in this analysis applying to both old growth and snags include: · Management direction displayed above would continue indefinitely into the future · In the long-term time frame of the analysis, no additional major disturbances, such as wildfire or bark beetle epidemics would occur: the analysis concerns future risk and probable effects if the disturbance occurs and is not a future projection of the occurrence of any disturbance · Climate change has occurred to some degree and will continue to occur in the future. Ramifications of a changing climate for the project area are likely to be (Amell 2012b, Karl et al. 2009): · More of the winter precipitation will fall as rain · Snow levels will raise in elevation · Snow melt will occur earlier in the spring · The late-spring to summer dry season (fire season) will increase in length · Summer dry seasons will be drier and warmer · Prolonged drought periods will increase, but their occurrence will probably be variable · Storms will become more intense with a larger portion of annual precipitation falling in the heaviest storms · Night-time minimum temperatures will increase · Growing season and number of frost-free days will increase · Wildfires are likely to become more frequent and the area burned averaged annually likely greater · Weather conditions conducive to bark beetle mortality are likely to become more frequent · The accomplishment year for analysis purposes is 2012 · No unforeseen occurrences such as fire, blowdown, or insect mortality would occur from 2010 until the time of implementation Additional assumptions used for the old growth analysis include: · Climate changes will most likely bring about some change in site characteristics leading to climax plant community changes, but the direction and magnitude of the changes are unknown and would be very small within the time frame of this analysis · Minimum stand characteristics found in Green et al. (1992, errata corrected 2005) are appropriate to define old growth in the project area · Designated old growth does not have to meet minimum tree characteristics described in Green et al. (1992, errata corrected 2005) to be managed as old growth to meet the Forest Plan standard · Intensive stand examinations provide the best data available for quantifying stand characteristics · The algorithm (R1 Old Growth Utility, FSVeg) is the best tool available to identify stands that have old growth characteristics · Since 10 acres is the minimum old growth stand size in Forest Plan old growth management direction, stands, or combinations of stands, of less than 10 contiguous acres are not designated as old growth for determining Forest Plan compliance, but are included in an assessment of “potential” old growth outside of 3rd-order drainages · FVS modeling can provide a reasonable estimate of the magnitude and direction of proposed treatment effects on stand species compositions, tree diameter distributions and tree establishment · Stands with old growth characteristics exist outside of 3rd-order drainages. The Forest Plan Desired Future Condition of the Forest (USDA 1986) states that old growth in the first decade “will be well distributed over the forest” and that in the fifth decade that “a good balance will be scattered throughout the Forest.” To maintain old growth benefits within the project area outside of the 3rd-order drainages, we are assuming that there is a desire to manage some of the stands within the project area outside of the 3rd-order drainages as old growth Additional assumptions used for the snag analysis include: · FIA grid intensification plot data can provide an average of snag numbers at the landscape level in the year the plot data was collected · Past harvest/regeneration activities would contain no snags · ADS data provide a reasonable estimate of trees killed by bark beetles at the landscape level · ADS mortality estimates need to be adjusted remove trees greater than seven inches d.b.h. · FVS modeling of proposed prescribed burning can provide mortality estimates that can be used to estimate snag additions to landscape-level snag levels · Adequate snags would be retained to meet Forest Plan standards through implementation of Stonewall Vegetation Project Design Features. In particular, “WL-6” would be applied to intermediate and regeneration units to retain snags in all cutting units to ensure snags are well distributed throughout the project area · No snags would be created or removed in pre-commercial thin units · In treatment units where tree removal is followed by prescribed burning a very small degree of mortality from the prescribed burning can be expected to occur, but for simplicity sake in this analysis, we are assuming no mortality in these units of trees greater than seven inches d.b.h. · In units being prescribed burned, we are assuming no loss due to burning of snags Helena National Forest Old Growth Identification and Analysis Process Other information sources use the term “watershed” to denote the area drained by a stream. In this analysis we use the term “drainage” to be consistent with Forest Plan direction. As mentioned above the HNF identifies old growth when drainages are proposed for a management entry that could affect the old growth. The HNF designates old growth primarily where there is stand-level inventory data (stand exam) available to confirm characteristics. Since stand exams are typically completed when vegetation projects are proposed, the majority of these inventories have been focused in timber management emphasis areas with wilderness areas as well as many roadless areas and non-timber management areas receiving few exams. Stand-level inventories have also typically targeted the most productive stands with a high probability of containing commercial timber for sampling which provides an incomplete sample of stands within each third-order drainage analyzed. Due to incomplete sampling, the inventories reflect a minimum amount of potential old growth. Following Forest Plan direction, old growth is identified in this process to represent five percent of each 3rd-order drainage. The stream order is a method of numbering streams as part of a drainage basin network where the smallest un-branched mapped tributary is called “first order” and the stream receiving the tributary is called “second order”, and so on (USDA Forest Service 1986). In HNF spatial data, there are two 3rd-order drainages within the project area, “0203” which encompasses about 4,849 acres and “0204A” which encompasses about 6,834 acres. The rest of the project area (11,198 acres) is not within a 3rd-order drainage. The two 3rd-order drainages comprise about 49 percent of the project area, with 51 percent of the project area not within a 3rd-order drainage. In this analysis we analyze old growth for each 3rd-order drainage to show consistency with the Forest Plan and we analyze old growth for the entire project area to show that old growth is being retained at a landscape-level. Based upon available data, stands at least 10 acres in size (or smaller in adjacent groups) are designated first. If these areas do not constitute five percent, additional areas are designated which may not meet old growth definitions yet, but are the “next best thing” to be managed to meet them in the future. Old growth is not a static condition and can be affected by insect and disease activity, wildfires, and forest management. When stand characteristics change substantially, the stand is no longer considered old growth. Stands designated as old growth are reviewed at the project scale when treatments are proposed including a review of proposed treatment units for old growth characteristics. For further details of the HNF old growth analysis see Milburn (2009). Identifying and designating old growth on the HNF progressed through several steps: 4. Stand exams were used to identify stands with old growth characteristics. The R1 Inventory Analysis Team ran a FSVeg utility that compared exam data with activity data in FACTS to determine if exams were still representative, that is they did not have an activity was more recent than the exam. Those exams without more recent overlapping activities were considered “clean.” The “clean” exams list was most recently updated against FACTS in 2007. Clean stands for the HNF were then run through the R1 Old Growth Utility in FSVeg to identify old growth. This report identified stands that meet minimum criteria (Green et al.1992, errata corrected 2005). The data report included an estimate of years until stands could become old growth. This utility can also be used to analyze FIA data to determine old growth quantity at broad scales. 5. The results of the previous process were combined with other GIS layers such as 3rd-order drainage boundaries, past activities, insect aerial detection surveys (ADS), and the project area boundary. Stands that the previous process indicated met minimum old growth characteristics were checked to determine if any changes have occurred since the exam. A combination of photo interpretation and walkthrough exams was used to validate the results in the third-order drainage. Stands outside of the 3rd-order drainage did not receive this validation step. Stands that had changes to minimum characteristics were not counted as old growth. Non-adjacent stands smaller than 10 acres were eliminated from the 3rd-order drainage at this time from consideration for meeting Forest Plan Standards, however these small areas were checked against proposed treatments to determine if any old growth would be affected by the proposal. No such overlaps occurred in the 3rd-order drainage. Small stands outside of the 3rd-order drainage were not eliminated from the data nor were they removed from potential treatment units. 6. Each 3rd-order drainage affected by the proposal was assessed. If the drainage had at least five percent of stands meeting minimum old growth characteristics, these stands were used to select approximately five percent to designate for old growth management under the Forest Plan. Old growth in excess of five percent was not designated to manage for old growth, but remained identified for purposes of habitat analysis and assessing if treatments overlapped with existing old growth. Stands were selected for old growth management favoring: (1) the oldest, (2) largest stands or greatest contiguous area, (3) elevation below 6000 feet, (4) riparian areas, (5) management areas other than T-1 through T-5, and (6) non-pine forest types in areas heavily infested with mountain pine beetle. In this process, old growth characteristics discussed by Green et al. (1992, errata corrected 2005) were the primary designation criteria with the other Forest Plan prioritization criteria used as a guide when possible. 7. In drainages with less than 5 percent old growth identified in the previous step, additional areas to manage as old growth were selected as the “next best thing”, using the same criteria (oldest, largest, below 6000 feet elevation, riparian, non-timber emphasis). Other factors such as wildlife habitat needs were considered. The inventoried stands that best meet the most considerations were selected to designate for old growth management. 8. Proposed treatment units were evaluated to assess whether they could be old growth, particularly where there is no stand exam available for the assessment described above in the first step. Specialists used photo interpretation to identify potential old growth, followed by a sample of walkthrough exams. Additionally, HNF personnel conducted diagnoses and informal plots in all units to identify where more intensive exams were needed to determine if the stand was old growth. Diagnosis plots were informal in number and placement, but measured minimum old growth criteria. Areas that had at least one of the old growth minimum criteria, were at least 10 acres, and had no past exam were scheduled for an intensive exam. Based upon the intensive exams, two proposed treatment units (2 and 46) were considered to be partially composed of stands (41502089 and 42303130 respectively) that qualified as old growth. Based on the findings of all the above information, all areas of old growth identified from steps 1-4 were removed from proposed treatment units within the 3rd-order drainage. However, outside of the 3rd-order drainage there are stands within proposed treatment units in one or both of the action alternatives and one stand is partially within the 3rd-order drainage. These stands are discussed individually below. In the above process, old growth is identified and designated at the stand level and analyzed at the 3rd-order drainage level. It can also be informative to estimate the amount of old growth on a broad landscape scale. Utilizing FIA grid intensification plots, the HNF Summary Database can be used to make statistically viable estimates of old growth presence on the HNF, but from the FIA plots along, the old growth cannot be spatially located. The HNF summary database was also used to depict the abundance of old growth habitat type groups. As mentioned above, about 51 percent of the analysis area is outside of mapped 3rd-order drainages. In this area, we assessed stands identified above in Step 1 using available NAIP imagery, ADS survey data, and available stand exam data to determine if the stands had been impacted by the recent mountain pine beetle outbreak and so would no longer qualify as old growth. Those stands that we considered not impacted by the outbreak to a level to which they would not be considered old growth, we retained and discuss and display in this analysis as “potential” old growth. Snag Analysis Process As stated above, the Helena Forest Plan provides for snags to be “managed at 70 percent of optimum (average 2 snags per acre) within each 3rd-order drainage” (emphasis added). In this analysis, we discuss snags within each of the two third-order drainages and for the entire project area. As mentioned above, the two 3rd-order drainages together comprise about 49 percent of the project area. The snag analysis process involves three steps: Average snags per acre present in 2008 by d.b.h. class were computed from FIA grid intensification plot data and a “base level” of snags computed for each third-order drainage and the project area Average total snags created by insect activity from 2008 to 2010 for each third-order drainage and for the whole project area were computed from ADS spatial and tabular data and adjusted using FIA grid intensification plot data to represent only snags 7 inches or larger. The adjusted snag numbers were then added to the base level. FVS was used to model mortality for prescribed-burn only treatments which was then applied to treatment areas to compute snag additions due to the burns. Following the assumption that snags would be reduced to 2 snags per acre to meet Forest Plan standards (Stonewall Vegetation Project Design Criteria WL-6) in mechanical treatments, excepting pre-commercial thinning, we computed the average snag reduction due to the treatments and applied that to the third-order drainage and project area estimates. Affected Environment Existing Condition Snags In 2007 and 2008, the Helena National Forest measured “FIA grid intensification” plots within the Stonewall project area. These plots include all tree mortality through 2008. Within all plots in the project area, there was an average of about 40 snags per acre greater than or equal to 7 inches d.b.h. (table 54) in 2008. For this analysis, we used this average as a uniform 2008 “base level” of snags per acre greater than 7 inches d.b.h. for the 3rd-order drainages and for the project area. Table 54. Snags per acre by d.b.h. class from 2008 FIA intensification plot data d.b.h. Class Average Number of Snags per Acre ≥ 7” and < 12” 26 ≥ 12” and < 20” 13 ≥ 20” 1 Total 40 The base level average cannot be directly applied to the entire 3rd-order drainage areas or project area forested land because past harvest/regeneration activities cannot be expected to have many, if any, snags and no FIA grid intensification plots were located within past harvest/regeneration activities. Since past harvest/regeneration activities are not represented in the FIA grid intensification plots, the base level snag estimates would overestimate snag numbers. For this exercise, we assumed that past harvest/regeneration activities would have no snags and adjusted FIA grid intensification plot snag estimates down based upon the proportion of the area in 3rd-order drainage and the project area that was treated by past harvest/regeneration activities. Our adjusted average 2008 snags per acre (SNA) greater than 7 inches was: 36 SNA for drainage 0203, 35 SNA for drainage 0204A, and 35 SNA for the entire project area. Since the adjusted FIA grid intensification plot snag estimates from the previous step did not take into account mortality from 2008 to 2010, we then adjusted the 2008 average SNA for each 3rd-order drainage, and for the project area, to take into account mortality in the years 2009 and 2010 using Aerial Damage Survey (ADS) data. To show the magnitude of the mortality, figure 51 displays accumulative mortality from ADS spatial data for the years 2009 and 2010 by estimated dead trees per acre (TPA) class. ADS mortality estimates, however are ocular estimates of dead tree numbers of all sizes, although it is reasonable to conclude that the estimates are largely of overstory trees because of the difficulty of seeing and estimating dead tree numbers in stand mid-stories and understories from the air. For this analysis, we computed a weighted average ADS SNA for each 3rd-order drainage and for the project area. Weighted average tree mortality for the years 2009 and 2010 are: 9 trees per acre (TPA) for drainage 0203, 7 TPA for drainage 0204A, and 8 TPA for the entire project area. We then adjusted the ADS weighted averages using FIA grid intensification plot data. In the FIA grid intensification plots, 68 percent of the dead pine trees were 7 inches or larger in d.b.h. Out-adjusted weighted average tree mortality for the years 2009 and 2010 are: 6 trees per acre (TPA) for drainage 0203, 5 TPA for drainage 0204A, and 5 TPA for the entire project area. Adding the ADS estimated mortality to that estimated from FIA Intensification plots indicates that snag numbers greater than or equal to 7 inches in 2011 to be: 42 SNA for drainage 0203, 41 SNA for drainage 0204A, and 40 SNA for the entire project area. The estimates given above are most likely underestimated. At the time of this analysis, 2011 ADS data was not available which would increase average snag levels. The ADS estimates may also have underestimated snag numbers in individual stands. Stonewall project proposed treatment units were visited during 2008 and revisited in 2009. Assessments of stand conditions including snag estimates for individual units can be found in project records and are summarized here. Snag estimates for trees greater than 6 or 7 inches d.b.h. range from zero to “lots.” Of the units where snag numbers were estimated, snags range from 0 to 400 with an average of about 160 snags per acre. Note that the individual stand estimates from site visits are included here only to establish the context that the snag numbers discussed in this analysis are most likely underestimated and are not included in the estimates discussed.  Title: Figure 1. ADS estimated mortality for 2009 and 2010Figure 51. Aerial damage survey estimated mortality for 2009 and 2010 The best currently available information, indicates that at least partially due to recent bark beetle activity, snag levels average over twenty times the minimum levels required by the Forest Plan in the two 3rd-order drainages analyzed and over the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. Due to the recent bark beetle mortality, snags are very abundant in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. Old Growth Old Growth within 3rd-order Drainages Following the process described above, five percent of the 0203 and 0204A 3rd-order drainages were designated to be managed as old growth. Five stands in 0203 (247 acres) were designated and 15 in 0204A (345 acres, table 55 and table 56). Note that in table 55, one stand less than 10 acres in size was designated as old growth management because it is adjacent to another designated old-growth stand. Table 55. 3rd-order drainage designated old growth data Drainage ID Stand ID Old Growth Type Habitat Type Group Elevation Habitat Type Vertical Structure Currently OG Acres 0203 41403075 DF Cool and Moist to Wet 6131 SAF/menziesia C Yes 42 0203 41403071 DF Cool and Moist to Wet 5475 SAF/menziesia 1 Yes 31 0203 41403093 DF Cool and Wet 5541 SAF/queencup beadlily C Yes 38 0203 41403058 DF Cool and Wet 5322 SAF/queencup beadlily C Yes 23 0203 41403048 ES-SAF Cool and Moist to Wet 6147 SAF/menziesia C Yes 113 0204A 42301052 DF Cool and Moist 5192 SAF/twinflower C Yes 36 0204A 42301033 ES-SAF Cool and Moist to Wet 5751 SAF/menziesia 1 No 18 0204A 41401087 ES-SAF Cool and Wet 5730 SAF/queencup beadlily 1 No 14 0204A 41401084 ES-SAF Cool and Wet 6192 SAF/queencup beadlily 2 No 18 0204A 41401083 ES-SAF Cool and Moist to Wet 6099 SAF/menziesia C Yes 20 0204A 41401099 ES-SAF Cool and Moist to Wet 6464 SAF/menziesia C Yes 37 0204A 41401054 ES-SAF Cool and Wet 5638 SAF/queencup beadlily C Yes 19 0204A 42301002 ES-SAF Cool and Wet 5735 SAF/queencup beadlily 2 Yes 4 Drainage ID Stand ID Old Growth Type Habitat Type Group Elevation Habitat Type Vertical Structure Currently OG Acres 0204A 41401051 ES-SAF Cool and Wet 5855 SAF/queencup beadlily 3 No 19 0204A 42303048 DF Cool and Dry to Moist 6226 SAF/beargrass 2 Yes 18 0204A 42302109 DF Cool and Dry to Moist 5746 SAF/beargrass C Yes 24 0204A 42303035 DF Cool and Dry to Moist 6172 SAF/beargrass 2 No 13 0204A 42302096 DF Cool and Moist to Wet 5793 SAF/menziesia C No 33 0204A 42302091 ES-SAF Cool and Wet 5895 SAF/queencup beadlily C No 23 0204A 42302095 DF Cool and Dry to Moist 5902 SAF/beargrass C No 49 1 – Single-story 2 – Two-story C – Multiple-story DF – Douglas-fir ES-SAF – Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir SAF/queencup beadlily – subalpine fir-twincup beadlily SAF/beargrass – subalpine fir-beargrass SAF/menziesia – subalpine fir- SAF/twinflower – subalpine fir-twinflower Designated old growth is Douglas-fir and Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir (table 56). All of the designated old growth is in subalpine fir habitat types. On these habitat types the Douglas-fir can be considered seral and the Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir old growth can be considered late-seral to climax. About 63 percent of the old growth designated is Douglas-fir and 38 percent is Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir. Table 56. Third-order drainage designated old growth type and acres Third-Order Drainage Old Growth Type Acres 0203 DF 134  ES-SAF 113  Total 247 0204A DF 173  ES-SAF 172  Total 345 Due to the evaluation of Stonewall Vegetation Project proposed treatment units, two stands were identified that meet old growth characteristics. These two stands are within Stonewall Vegetation Project Units 2 and 46. Table 57. Outside 3rd-order drainage verified old growth data Stand ID Unit Old Growth Type Habitat Type Group Habitat Type Vertical Structure Acres* 41502089 2 DF Warm and Very Dry DF/snowberry-bluebunch wheatgrass C 55 42303130 46 DF Cool and Moist SAF/twinflower-twinflower C 163 * Acres cited here are delineated stand acreages and not proposed unit acreages, the unit areas include more than one stand. Only a portion (43 acres) of stand 41502046 is within the 3rd-order drainage. This acreage is shown in Figure 57 as “Old Growth verified 2010 exam” and is included in the effects analysis, but is not included in the discussion above for designated old growth. The 120 acres in this stand outside of the 3rd-order drainage are included in the discussion below. Old Growth Not within 3rd-order Drainages As discussed above, about 51 percent of the Stonewall project area is not within a 3rd-order drainage. There are about 436 acres of potential old growth and 175 acres of old growth verified by 2010 stand exam data in the Stonewall project area not within the 3rd-order drainages. This area is not covered explicitly by Forest Plan direction, but we recognize that old growth is a landscape feature and in this analysis are identifying and assessing the availability of old growth stands. Together, the potential old growth and 2010 verified old growth comprise about 611 acres which is about five percent of the project area not within the 3rd-order drainages. In this analysis, we are analyzing effects as if these stands were to be managed for old growth. In table 58 we display the old growth stands in the project area not within the 3rd-order drainages. Included in the table are the potential old growth stands and the two 2010 verified old growth stands. Stand 41502089 partially forms Unit 2 and is in the warm-and-very-dry habitat group for which the minimum number of trees greater than 17 inches d.b.h. required to be classified as old growth is four. Stand 41501130 partially forms Unit 46 and is in the cool-and-moist habitat group for which the minimum number of trees greater than 17 inches d.b.h. required to be classified as old growth is seven. The lower portion of proposed prescribe burn Unit 81 contains three stands that, from available stand exam data, could potentially qualify as old growth (table 58). These three stands are within the warm-and-moist habitat type group in which the minimum number of trees greater than 19 inches d.b.h. required to qualify for old growth is five.  Table 58. Verified and potential old growth not within the 3rd-order drainages Unit ID Stand ID Old Growth Type Habitat Type Group Habitat Type Vertical Structure Acres  41502023 DF Cool and Dry to Moist SAF/beargrass C 10 81 42201139 DF Warm and Moist DF/snowberry-pinegrass C 37 81 42201147 DF Warm and Moist DF/snowberry-pinegrass 2 53 81 42201152 DF Warm and Moist DF/snowberry-pinegrass 2 22  42202023 ES-SAF Cool and Dry to Moist SAF/beargrass-huckleberry C 29  42202038 DF Cool and Dry to Moist SAF/beargrass-huckleberry 1 86  42202054 ES-SAF Cool and Moist to Wet SAF/menziesia C 76  42202067 DF Cool and Moist to Wet SAF/menziesia C 100  42301068 DF Cool and Moist SAF/twinflower 1 8  42301087 DF Cool and Moist DF/huckleberry C 15 2 41502089 DF Warm and Very Dry DF/snowberry-bluebunch wheatgrass C 55 46 42303130 DF Cool and Moist SAF/twinflower-twinflower C 120 1 – Single-story 2 – Two-story C – Multiple-story DF – Douglas-fir ES-SAF – Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir SAF/queencup beadlily – subalpine fir-twincup beadlily SAF/beargrass – subalpine fir-beargrass SAF/menziesia – subalpine fir- SAF/twinflower – subalpine fir-twinflower Figure 52 displays the current diameter distribution for Stand 42201139, which forms part of Unit 81. The stand currently has about 118 trees per acre (TPA) of which 31 are greater than 19 inches in diameter at breast height (d.b.h.).  Title: Stand 42201139 (Unit 81) current conditionFigure 52. Stand 42201139 (Unit 81) current condition Figure 53 displays the current diameter distribution for Stand 42201147, which also forms part of Unit 81. The stand currently has about 498 trees per acre (TPA) of which 18 are greater than 19 inches in diameter at breast height.  Title: Stand 42201147 (Unit 81) current conditionFigure 53. Stand 42201147 (Unit 81) current condition Figure 54 displays the current diameter distribution for Stand 42201152, which also forms part of Unit 81. The stand currently has about 62 trees per acre (TPA) of which 29 are greater than 19 inches in diameter at breast height.  Title: Figure 4. Stand 42201152 (Unit 81) current conditionFigure 54. Stand 42201152 (Unit 81) current condition Figure 55 displays the current diameter distribution for Stand 41502089, which forms part of Unit 2. The stand currently has about 317 TPA of which about 20 are greater than 17 inches d.b.h. Note that the relatively large number of trees in the 1-inch d.b.h. class is not being displayed to better display the distribution in larger trees.  Title: Stand 42201089 (Unit 2) current conditionFigure 55. Stand 42201089 (Unit 2) current condition Figure 56 displays the current diameter distribution for Stand 42303130, which forms part of Unit 46. The stand currently has about 1,442 TPA of which about 13 are greater than 17 inches d.b.h. Note that the trees in the smallest diameter class are not being shown so that larger trees can be better displayed.  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46) current conditionFigure 56. Stand 423031130 (Unit 46) current condition Environmental Consequences Spatial Context for Effects Analysis The spatial scales used in this analysis are the two 3rd-order drainages within the project area, the project area, and for selected individual proposed treatment areas, the individual stand. We chose the project area as the largest spatial scale for this analysis because it includes all Forest System land that: (1) includes the proposed treatment areas, (2) is bounded on the north, northwest, and west sides by drainage divides, and (3) at about 24,000 acres, is sufficiently large to analyze and discuss effects to forest vegetation on a landscape-level without ‘diluting’ the magnitude of the effects with a large area. Temporal Context for Effects Analysis The year 2010 is the existing condition baseline used for this analysis. Proposed mechanical treatment stands were last examined in fall 2009 and 2010, briefly visited in summer 2010, and the last ADS survey used in this analysis was done in 2010. Short-term effects refer to effects over the 10-year period from the time the activity would be accomplished which is 2012, and long-term effects refers to effects from 10 to 50 years from the time the activity would be accomplished. All pertinent past activities and events are incorporated into the previous existing condition discussion. In the cumulative effects analysis that follows, cumulative effects are discussed as changes in the existing condition due to present and future activities, including the effects of the alternative being discussed. Connected Actions, Past, Present, and Foreseeable Activities Past Activities Past activities that have shaped the existing condition discussed and displayed in this document include: (1) 3,872 acres of harvest/regeneration treatments, (2) 373 acres of other harvests cutting, (3) 822 acres of pre-commercial thinning, and (4) 7,922 acres of fuels treatments from 1950 to present (Amell 2012), although some of these treatments were on the same area and so the acreages are not accumulative. In addition to the management actions, vegetation has been shaped by: (1) 87 acres in the Snow/Talon Fire (2003), (2) 261 acres in the Keep Cool Fire (2006), and (3) insect and disease activity as discussed previously and in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Silviculture Report (Amell 2012). Other past actions, such as livestock grazing and recreational activities have played a small role in shaping forest vegetation in the project area, or played a localized role. As mentioned above, these activities have been considered in describing the current condition. Present and Foreseeable Activities All past, ongoing and foreseeable projects identified by the HNF for possible consideration in this analysis are displayed in volume 2, appendix C. Many of the activities listed are not considered in this analysis because they are: (1) outside of the analysis area used in this analysis, or (2) have no effect on snags and old growth addressed in this analysis, or (3) have such a small effect on snags and old growth that they are inconsequential to the analysis. Activities currently ongoing in the project area considered in this analysis are displayed in volume 2, appendix C. Effects Common to All Alternatives Snags The forested landscape will experience additional bark beetle mortality from the ongoing mountain pine beetle (MPB) epidemic. The levels of additional mortality are a matter of speculation, but available research indicates that mountain pine beetle epidemics continue until the available bark beetle habitat is sufficiently reduced that epidemic levels can no longer be sustained (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980, Klein et al. 1978, Mitchell and Preisler 1991). Mountain pine beetles strongly favor infesting the trees of larger diameter each year and over the life of the infestation infesting smaller trees each year until the average host tree diameter declines to a point that the tree habitat cannot produce sufficient numbers of beetles to maintain the outbreak (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980). The outbreaks are relatively short, lasting about 6 years (Cole and Amman 1969, Cole and Amman 1980). Given the magnitude of the mortality that has occurred in the project area as of this writing, we suspect that the epidemic is declining. The lodgepole pine snags will start falling in 3 to 5 years after death (Bull 1983, Mitchell and Preisler 1998). Snag fall rates depend on tree species, tree size, cause of death, and environmental conditions that could affect the speed of bole decay (Bull 1983, Mitchell and Preisler 1998). For lodgepole pine, Bull (1983) found that eight years after death about 75 percent of the snags less than 25 cm had fallen and 42 percent of the snags greater than 25 cm had fallen. Mitchell and Preisler (1998) in their study of mountain pine beetle killed snags in Oregon found that tree size was not a factor in unthinned stands and that in unthinned stands, 50 percent were down in 9 years and 90 percent were down in 14 years. In the short- term, snag numbers would be very high, but in the long-term snag numbers would decline greatly as the lodgepole pine snags fall down. Old Growth Effects to designated old growth in the two 3rd-order drainage are the same under all alternatives because no activities are proposed in designated old growth in these drainages. Following the process described above, about five percent of each 3rd-order drainage is designated to manage as old growth. All old growth would continue to develop successionally under all alternatives. Changes would be slight in the short term, but could be substantial in the long term. Single-story and two-story stands would become more multi-story. Closed canopies would remain closed, and open stands would become closed over time. Down woody fuels would continue to accumulate. About 68 percent of the designated old growth is Douglas-fir type. With continuing succession, more small trees would become established with the species composition trending toward subalpine fir (Fischer and Clayton 1983). These stands are susceptible to Douglas-fir beetle (DFB), western spruce budworm (WSB), and root disease. ADS data appears to indicate that DFB has consistently declined in recent years, while WSB infestation was extensive in 2009, substantially less was recorded in 2010 (Amell 2012). Douglas-fir beetle tends to infest large and old Douglas-fir and heavily stocked stands. Their impacts can also be affected by weather conditions, for example droughts that reduce host tree vigor. With increasing stocking, tree size and age over time, we can expect DFB to continue to impact the stands to some degree, increasing with the next droughty period. Since forests in the area, including the old growth stands, are progressing toward dominance by Douglas-fir and subalpine fir, we can expect the impacts of WSB to continue if not increase. Diseases would continue to impact stands at current levels. In the long term, dense forest conditions with multiple-layer stands and increasing surface fuels would support increasingly intense fire behavior and severe fire effects (Buhl 2012). Stand replacement fire would become more likely on the landscape and old growth stands more susceptible to the impacts. Alternative 1 – No Action Direct and Indirect Effects Snags Under this alternative there would be no direct effects to snag levels. The current conditions described above would not change. The indirect effects of no action would be as described above as effects common to all alternatives. Old Growth Under this alternative there would be no direct effects to old growth. The current conditions described above would not change. The indirect effects of no action would be as described above as effects common to all alternatives. Cumulative Effects Snags In the Forestwide Hazard Tree Removal Project, the Forest would cut trees determined to be hazardous within 75 to 175 feet from the edge of the road. About 382 acres proposed for treatment under the Hazard Tree Removal Project within the Stonewall project area. Firewood cutting would also occur in close proximity to open roads and remove some of the available snags. The hazard reduction treatments would remove snags from about 382 acres, which is two percent of the project area. About one percent of 3rd-order drainage 0203 and two percent of drainage 0204A would be affected. This would reduce the number of snags within the project area by about one snag per acre. The effects on each 3rd-order drainage would be of a similar magnitude. Given the large number of snags available—many times the Forest Plan requirements—the effect of the treatment would be slight. The long-term cumulative effects would be as described above for the indirect and direct effects. Old Growth The Forestwide Hazard Tree Removal Project would not impact old growth stands in the 3rd-order drainage. There is only one designated old growth stand within range allotments in the project area. Livestock grazing would have no impact of the old growth nature of the stand. There are no invasive plants locations within designated old growth, so there would be no effects from herbicide treatments. The cumulative effects of no action for old growth are as discussed above for direct and indirect effects. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Direct and Indirect Effects Proposed Stonewall Project alternative 2 treatments would impact about 44 percent of drainage 0203, 19 percent of drainage 0204A and 37 percent of the project area. For detailed information concerning the individual treatments see the Silviculture Report (Amell 2012) Snags Impacts of the treatments on standing dead trees would differ, with intermediate and regeneration treatments reducing dead tree numbers and prescribed burns increasing dead tree numbers. In treatment units where tree removal is followed by prescribed burning, we can expect a relatively small degree of mortality from the prescribed burn, but for simplicity sake in this analysis, we are assuming no mortality in these units of trees greater than seven inches d.b.h. In units which are proposed for mixed-severity prescribed burning only, there would be substantial mortality but almost 80 percent of the dead trees would be between seven and 12 inches d.b.h. In prescription group nine which was developed for alternative 3, there would be substantial mortality in understory seedling and sapling trees, but we are assuming in this analysis that there is no mortality of larger trees. Prescribed fires can burn up snags also, but recently created snags that are in the low snag decay classes are not prone to burn. Horton and Mannan (1988) found in Arizona ponderosa pine forests that snags in decay class IV burned more frequently than lower decay classes, and Stephens and Maghaddas (2005) found that post-treatment density of snags greater than 15 cm d.b.h. in decay class one increased in fire-only and mechanical plus fire treatments but that there were no statistical difference between snag volumes or density in other size and decay classes. These studies indicate that snag losses due to burning would be low and in this analysis we are assuming no loss. Table 59 displays the number of treatment acres for alternative 2 and percent of area within each 3rd-order drainage and the project area. Snag numbers would be reduced to about two snags/acre in the intermediate and regeneration treatments, and as modeled, increase by about 74 to 76 snags/acre in the moderate severity burns (modeled burn mortality minus ADS mortality), and would not change in the rest of the project area. Post-treatment snag numbers would decrease to about 38 snags per acre in drainage 0203, increase to 47 snags per acre in drainage 0204A, and increase to 46 snags per acre in the project area, which are about 21 to 24 times the Forest Plan minimum requirements. Table 59. Acres and percent of area within 3rd-order drainage and project area by treatment classes Treatment Drainage/Project Area Acres Percent of Area Intermediate and Regeneration 0203 1,210 25  0204A 218 3  Project Area 3,100 37 Prescribed Burning 0203 859 18  0204A 1,050 15  Project Area 5,463 24 Old Growth As mentioned previously, proposed Stonewall Project alternative 2 treatments would impact about 44 percent of drainage 0203, 19 percent of drainage 0204A and 37 percent of the project area.  Title: Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) Units and old growth standsFigure 57. Alternative 2 (proposed action) Units and old growth stands No designated old growth would be treated in the 3rd-order drainages. In the project area not within the 3rd-order drainages, stand data collected in 2010 indicate that there are two stands having old-growth characteristics within proposed Stonewall Vegetation Project units (Stand 41502089 is within Unit 2, Stand 42303130 is within Unit 46). These two stands are displayed in figure 57 as “Old Growth verified 2010 exam.” Less recent stand exam data indicates that there are three stands that may potentially qualify as old growth (Stands 42201139, 42201147, and 42201152) in prescribed burn Unit 81. These three stands are displayed in figure 57 as “Potential Old Growth.” A mixed-severity prescribed burn which would create openings less than 30 acres in size is proposed for Unit 81. The three potential old growth stands are in the lower portion of the unit and within those stands the prescribed burn would be conducted as an underburn to minimize mortality in the large trees-see design criteria in the Stonewall Silviculture Report (Amell 2012). Figure 58 displays the post-treatment diameter distribution for stand 42201139. Compared to the current condition (figure 52), the prescribed burn would reduce stocking up to the 16-inch d.b.h. class, above which the mortality would be slight. Post-treatment, the stand would still have about 96 TPA of which about 31 TPA would be greater than 19 inches d.b.h. and the stand would still be considered old growth (Green et al. 1992, errata corrected 2005).  Title: Stand 42201139 (Unit 81) post-underburn conditionFigure 58. Stand 42201139 (Unit 81) post-underburn condition Figure 59 displays the post-treatment diameter distribution for stand 42201147. Compared to the current condition (figure 53), the prescribed burn would reduce stocking up to the 22-inch d.b.h. class, above which the mortality would be slight. Post-treatment, the stand would still have about 250 TPA of which about 11 TPA would be greater than 19 inches d.b.h. and the stand would still be considered old growth (Green et al. 1992, errata corrected 2005).  Title: Stand 42201147 (Unit 81) post-underburnFigure 59. Stand 42201147 (Unit 81) post-underburn Figure 60 displays the post-treatment diameter distribution for stand 42201152. Compared to the current condition (figure 54), the prescribed burn would reduce stocking up to the 18-inch d.b.h. class, above which the mortality would be slight. Post-treatment, the stand would still have about 53 TPA of which about 28 TPA would be greater than 19 inches d.b.h. and the stand would still be considered old growth (Green et al. 1992, errata corrected 2005).  Title: Stand 42201152 (Unit 81) post-underburnFigure 60. Stand 42201152 (Unit 81) post-underburn Unit 2 is proposed under both action alternatives for prescribed burning with a low-severity fire. The proposed treatment can be expected to kill many small trees but very few large ones. Figure 61 displays the FVS-modeled post-treatment species composition and diameter distribution for Stand 41502089. The post-treatment diameter distribution, when compared with the current condition in figure 55 indicates that most, but not all, of the very small trees would be killed by the underburning with decreasing numbers of trees killed with increasing d.b.h. Above the 18-inch d.b.h. class mortality would be slight. The stand would have about 17 TPA greater than 17 inches d.b.h. following treatment and would still be considered multiple-canopy old growth.  Title: Stand 42201089 (Unit 2) post-underburnFigure 61. Stand 41502089 (Unit 2) post-underburn Unit 46 is proposed under this alternative for an intermediate harvest in which both commercial and pre-commercial trees would be thinned, followed by a prescribed underburn as a fuels treatment. The proposed treatments can be expected to remove many small trees but very few large ones. Figure 62 and figure 63 display the FVS-modeled post-treatment species composition and diameter distribution for Stand 42303130. Note that the scale for figure 62 is the same as in the current condition (figure 56) and the scale for figure 63 has been changed to better display the larger trees.  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46) post-treatmentFigure 62. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment The proposed treatments would remove many, but not all, of the small trees and would create an open stand with a relatively flat diameter distribution. Above the 18-inch d.b.h. class no trees would be removed and mortality from the underburn would be slight. Post-treatment the stand would have about 258 TPA with about 12 TPA greater than 17 inches d.b.h. (note: TPA less than 1 inch d.b.h. are not displayed). Following treatment it would still be considered multiple-canopy old growth.  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46) post-treatmentFigure 63. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment Cumulative Effects Snags As mentioned above, the hazard reduction treatment would remove snags from about one percent of 3rd-order drainage 0203, two percent of drainage 0204A, and two percent of the project area. About one snag per acre would be removed by the treatment. Considering the numbers of snags available in the project area as a result of the mountain pine beetle epidemic, this is a very small number. As described above, under alternative 2, snag levels would still be available at 21 to 24 times the Forest Plan minimum requirements. Cumulative effects would still be that level. Old Growth As discussed above, activities other than the Stonewall Vegetation Project that are or may occur within the project area would have no impact on old growth forests. Cumulative effects of this alternative would be as described above for the direct and indirect impacts. Summary and Forest Plan Consistency Snags As discussed and displayed above, given the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic, snags in the project area are abundant and far exceed forest plan requirements. Under alternative 2, the intermediate and regeneration treatments would reduce snag levels to the forest plan requirements within the treatment units and the mixed-severity prescribed burns would increase snag levels within the burn units. After the treatments are done, snag levels would slightly decrease in the 3rd-order drainage 0203, slightly increase in the 3rd-order drainage 0204A, and slightly increase in the project area. They would still exceed 19 times the forest plan requirements. Old Growth As discussed and displayed above, no designated old growth in 3rd-order drainages would be treated under this project. Forest Plan direction regarding old growth would be met. Outside of the 3rd-order drainages, three stands (42201139, 42201147, and 42201152) that may potentially be old growth would be prescribed burned; one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (41502089) would be prescribed burned, and one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (42303103) would be thinned and prescribed burned. All of the stands proposed for treatment would be changed by the treatments, with species compositions “pushed” toward dominance by seral fire-tolerant conifers, and stand structures “pushed” to or toward open, but still multi-story, structures with relatively flat diameter distributions. Treated potential and verified old growth stands would still qualify as old growth following the treatments. Alternative 3 Snags Snag numbers for alternative 3 would differ slightly from alternative 2, but given the magnitude of the recent mortality and the large number of snags within the analysis area, the difference would be slight. Table 60 displays the number of treatment acres for alternative 3 and percent of area within each 3rd-order drainage and the project area. If snag numbers are reduced to two snags/acre in the intermediate and regeneration treatments, and as modeled, increase by about 74 to 76 snags/acre in the moderate severity burns (modeled burn mortality minus ADS mortality), and don’t change in the rest of the project area, the average snag numbers would decrease to 41 snags per acre in drainage 0203, increase to 47 snags per acre in drainage 0204A, and increase to 48 snags per acre in the project area. Post-treatment snag numbers would still be about 21 to 24 times the Forest Plan minimum requirements. Table 60. Alternative 3, acres and percent of area within 3rd-order drainage and project area by treatment classes Treatment Drainage/Project Area Acres Percent of Area Intermediate and Regeneration 0203 716 15  0204A 218 3  Project Area 2,118 9 Prescribed Burning 0203 244 5  0204A 1,046 15  Project Area 4,445 19 Old Growth In this alternative, Unit 81 would not be treated. The condition for Stands 42201139, 42201147, and 42201152 would remain as described above for the current condition and alternative 1. Unit 2 would be treated the same under alternative 3 as alternative 2 and the effects would be the same as described above. The treatment area for Unit 46 would remain the same, but treatments for most of Unit 46 would change. Unit 46 in alternative 3 is split into Unit 46a and 46b. Unit 46b (27 Acres) would have the same treatment as described above for alternative 2 Unit 46 with the same treatment effects. In Unit 46a, which includes 93 acres of Stand 42303130, the treatment would be modified and is referred to in the Stonewall Vegetation Project as “prescription Group 10.”  Title: Alternative 3 Units and old growth standsFigure 64. Alternative 3 Units and old growth stands Group 10. This group includes Units 46a and 47a. Treatments would be designed in a mosaic pattern to maintain cover and forage for wildlife while promoting ponderosa pine and aspen, and reducing ladder fuels. Portions of the stands would be thinned to: (1) reduce understory competition from around large ponderosa pine trees; (2) thin heavily-stocked groups of trees on sites historically dominated by ponderosa pine, and (3) remove conifer competition from within and around quaking aspen. · To reduce understory competition around large ponderosa pine, and move areas toward or maintain multi-storied ponderosa pine structure, within 50 feet of ponderosa pine trees larger than 17 inches d.b.h. remove all but two trees. The retained trees should be of varied size and age classes. · In areas dominated by ponderosa pine, but lacking live trees greater than 17 inches d.b.h., trees would be thinned to 48 to 109 trees per acre depending upon tree size. · Ponderosa pine snags greater than 17 inches d.b.h. would be favored for retention to meet Forest Plan direction for snags. · Conifers less than 17 inches d.b.h. would be removed up to 100 feet of existing aspen patches. · Post-thinning, slash would be jackpot burned or hand-piled and burned to reduce fuels. · Treatments would affect up to 50 percent of these units. For Stand 42303130 in Unit 46a, up to one-half of the area (47 acres) would be thinned and the fuels reduced, the other one-half of the stand would not be treated. Note that this is the stand area not the unit area because the unit is composed of more than one stand. The post-treatment diameter distribution would be similar to that shown in figure 65 and figure 66. The scale for figure 65 is the same as shown above for the current condition (figure 56).  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46) post-treatment in Alternative 3Figure 65. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment in alternative 3 The scale for figure 66 has been changed to better display the larger trees. The post-treatment stand would have 974 TPA with about 13 TPA greater than 17 inches d.b.h. In figure 65 and figure 66, about 632 TPA less than one inch in d.b.h. are not displayed. Post-treatment, the stand would still qualify as old growth.  Title: Stand 42201130 (Unit 46) post-treatment in Alternative 3Figure 66. Stand 42303130 (Unit 46) post-treatment in alternative 3 Cumulative Effects Snags The hazard reduction treatment would remove snags from about one percent of 3rd-order drainage 0203, two percent of drainage 0204A, and two percent of the project area. About one snag per acre would be removed by the treatment. Considering the numbers of snags available in the project area as a result of the mountain pine beetle epidemic, this is a very small number. As described above, under alternative 3, snag levels would still be available at 21 to 24 times the Forest Plan minimum requirements. Cumulative effects would still be that level. Old Growth As discussed above, activities other than the Stonewall Vegetation Project that are or may occur within the project area would have no impact on old growth forests. Cumulative effects of this alternative would be as described above for the direct and indirect impacts. Summary and Forest Plan Consistency Snags Under alternative 3, the intermediate and regeneration treatments would reduce snag levels to the forest plan requirements and the prescribed burns would increase snag levels. After the treatments are done, snag levels would slightly decrease in the 3rd-order drainage 0203, slightly increase in the 3rd-order drainage 0204A, and slightly increase in the project area. They would still exceed 20 times the forest plan requirements. Old Growth As discussed and displayed above, no designated old growth in 3rd-order drainages would be treated under this project. Forest Plan direction regarding old growth would be met. Outside of the 3rd-order drainages, one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (41502089) would be prescribe burned, and one stand that has been verified by a recent stand exam (42303103) would be partially thinned and the fuels burned. Both stands proposed for treatment would be changed by the treatments, with species compositions “pushed” toward dominance by seral fire-tolerant conifers, and stand structures “pushed” toward open, but still multi-story, structures with flatter than current diameter distributions. They would still qualify as old growth following the treatment. Wildlife Introduction This section analyzes impacts to wildlife and wildlife habitat from federal activities proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. It describes the current wildlife habitat conditions that exist within the Stonewall Vegetation Project area and evaluates effects to federally proposed, threatened and endangered and regionally sensitive (sensitive) species, Helena National Forest (HNF) management indicator species (MIS) and migratory birds. Because wildlife distribution and use is determined by both site-specific and landscape-level conditions, a multi-scale analysis is presented that looks at specific stands proposed for treatment (fine filter analysis), as well as landscape considerations (coarse filter analysis) such as the availability of habitat within and adjacent to the project area. More information on federally listed threatened and endangered (TE) species can also be found in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Biological Assessment (BA )(Reitz 2013). Methodology Analysis Process National Forest Management Act (NFMA) regulations (1976) require that habitat be managed to support viable populations of native and desired nonnative vertebrates within the planning area (36 CFR 219.19). USDA regulation 9500-004, adopted in 1983, reinforces the NFMA viability regulation by requiring that habitats on national forests be managed to support viable populations of native and desired nonnative plants, fish, and wildlife. The following five-step process used in this analysis assesses changes in wildlife habitat and determines possible effects to viability: Step 1: Pre-field Assessment - Once the initial proposed action was developed, information was collected to identify the wildlife present condition or affected environment. This information included aerial photos, GIS data, past timber sale activity, existing wildlife surveys, Forest and District monitoring data, and vegetation data and information on insect and disease related mortality. Step 2: Field Assessment - Sites proposed for treatment were visited by a biologist(s). During this review, observations and incidental sign of wildlife were recorded, and habitat conditions identified in the pre-field assessment were validated. Step 3: Wildlife Screening - Collectively information from the pre-field and field assessments were used to identify project design features (PDFs) or modifications to the proposed action that may be necessary to reduce or eliminate impacts to wildlife. This information was then used in combination with scientific literature, Forestwide and Regionwide assessments and monitoring and species conservation assessments to identify species and habitats most likely to be affected by the proposed activities, and identify the appropriate level of analysis necessary to determine effects to wildlife. Based on information provided in steps 1 and 2, a total of 10 threatened, endangered and sensitive species found on the HNF, 4 MIS species and 2 commonly hunted species were evaluated. Eight species either do not have suitable habitat within the project area, or the project area falls outside the current range. As a result, of the species considered, 16 species are evaluated in detail in this analysis (table 64). Step 4: Habitat & Species Assessment - The analysis of the wildlife resource was done using a multi-scale assessment that includes a combination of three basic strategies. 9. The first strategy is a coarse filter approach (described below), which is used to identify wildlife communities across the landscape. This approach assumes that if the species, genetics, functions and processes are protected at the community level, then the bulk of the biotic species, both known and unknown, would also be protected. 10. The second strategy is the MIS approach (FSM 2620.1, 2621.4, 2620.3), which assesses effects to wildlife species associated with vegetation communities or key habitat components identified in the Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) as management indicators. Potential effects of proposed actions are then evaluated by assessing habitat changes to the selected indicator species 11. The third strategy is to assess habitat and effects to those species considered most at risk or those species with potential viability concerns. These include Federally Threatened and Endangered Species and Regionally Sensitive species (FSM 2670.32, 16 USC 1536). Using information from steps 1-3, anticipated changes in wildlife habitat and the associated communities are predicted under the alternatives considered and associated effects to wildlife and wildlife habitat evaluated. Information from steps 1 and 2 are also used to complete the course filter analysis, identify and evaluate spatial relationships between habitat(s), assess changes in landscape diversity and predict changes and effects to MIS species. Whereas site-specific data is used to assess stand-level changes in habitat and to ensure that unique vegetative and physical habitat conditions are maintained and/or protected. This information is also used to assess changes in population viability in step 5. Step 5: Population Viability Assessment and Determination - Using information from Steps 1-4, the population viability for all MIS and Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive (TES) species evaluated in detail is assessed under each of the alternatives. Region 1 (R1) uses a principle-based approach to population viability analysis (PVA), which follows Regional direction (USDA Forest Service 1999). This assessment is based on the best available forest and rangeland vegetation data, the most current scientific information related to species requirements and effects of proposed actions, and when available, Regionwide and Forestwide conservation assessments. Collectively this information is used to assess the availability of suitable habitat and ultimately assess short- and long-term viability to each species. Collectively, the strategies and assessment described above are used to ensure that National Forest Management Act (NFMA) requirements are met by ensuring that a diversity of plant and animal communities are maintained across the planning area (16 U.S.C. 1604(g)(3)(B); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b); and FSM 2670.12). The information identified in steps 1 through 4 in combination with applicable scientific information (referenced literature) and professional judgment are used to predict anticipated effects, as well as determine the scope of effects. For sensitive species, a determination is made as to whether or not the federal action would cause a trend toward federal listing or a loss of viability. Listing factors are based on 50 CFR 424.11 including; the present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of the species’ habitat or range, overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes, disease or predation, the adequacy of existing regulatory direction or other natural or manmade factors affecting the species’ survival. A loss of viability is determined though the regional process identified above and would occur if anticipated effects included changes in the number or distribution of reproductive individuals that would affect the continued existence of the species on the Forest (36 CFR 219.9). Methodologies used to assess individual species are summarized under the individual species sections. More detailed information related to the habitat relationship models used can be found in the project file. Scale of Analysis The appropriate methodology and level of analysis needed to determine effects are influenced by a number of variables including the presence of species or habitat, the scope and nature of activities associated with the proposed action and alternatives and the potential risks that could ultimately result in adverse effects. Wildlife distribution and use of an area is largely determined by the availability of suitable habitat, and can be influenced by site-specific needs such as the vegetative structure or physical features on a site, as well as by landscape considerations such as the proximity to other habitat or the need for isolation or seclusion. As a result, a multi-scale analysis that looks at site-specific conditions in stands proposed for treatment (fine filter); as well as landscape considerations such as the proximity and availability to other habitat (coarse filter) are considered. The multi-scale of analyses used in this assessment includes the following: Site Level Assessment – This level of assessment involves evaluation of individual stands or sites proposed for treatment. Wildlife use is often influenced by specific conditions only identified at the stand or site scale, and can vary from one to several hundred acres. This level of analysis identifies stand-level habitat conditions that influence wildlife use. It is also used to identify habitat features that may need protection or enhancement, and effects based on localized stand structure. Finally, this level of assessment is used to identify site-specific mitigation measures or project design features (PDFs). Project Area Assessment – Unless otherwise noted in the species specific section, direct and indirect effects to wildlife are assessed by evaluating effects and changes in habitat on NFS lands within the project area boundary. The Stonewall project area encompasses approximately 24,000 acres including 23,668 acres of NFS land and 337 acres of private land. The project area boundary was selected for analysis of direct and indirect effects on wildlife because it includes all areas proposed for treatment and contains an adequate diversity of habitat conditions (vegetative and topographic) to assess wildlife distribution and use. Cumulative Effects Assessment – Cumulative effects (CE) related to wildlife are evaluated by looking at past, present and foreseeable future activities that could adversely affect wildlife when considered cumulatively over time. A complete list of activities considered in this analysis for cumulative effects can be found in volume 2, appendix C of this document. The cumulative effects boundary used in this analysis varies by species. For example, CEs for species with small home ranges would be analyzed across the project area. For species that have large home ranges and select habitat based partially on landscape conditions, the CE analysis area includes the project area combined with adjacent lands affected by mountain pine beetle (MPB) mortality and wildfire. This combined area totals approximately 101,977 acres, including 67,042 acres of NFS land, and 34,935 acres of private land. Rationale for selection of this area includes: · This area is large enough to assess the individual home range for all species analyzed, thereby framing the context and significance of potential impacts to each species. · The CE area includes more developed private lands adjacent to the project area, which contain habitat components or levels of disturbance that may influence wildlife use of NFS lands · This area includes all of the two Elk Herd Units (EHU) and Lynx Analysis Units (LAU) affected. · This area is large enough to assess landscape-level considerations and connectivity, including potential impacts to affected Bear Management Units (BMUs), EHUs and LAUs. · Including lands to the north and northwest would tend to dilute effects because of the large amounts of designated Wilderness and Inventoried Roadless Areas. · The CE area includes over 20,000 acres that have been recently (since 2003) affected by wildfire, which influence landscape level use and effects. · Wildlife habitat conditions and land uses within the area are representative of those found across the larger landscape or watershed(s). A determination of significance is made for each species/habitat evaluated. For the purpose of this analysis, significant cumulative effects are defined as effects that singly or incrementally could result in long-term impacts to wildlife or wildlife habitat that could result in a loss or reduction in viability (defined above). Activities used to evaluate cumulative effects are displayed in volume 2, appendix C. Timeframes Timeframes for direct and indirect effects include short-term effects, which generally go out ten years or until the proposed activities are completed, and long-term effects, which are greater than ten years and may go out several decades. Past activities are summarized in appendix C; ongoing and future activities go out to year 2022, which is when all of the proposed treatments are expected to be completed, and when future projects can be reasonably predicted. Assumptions A number of factors have recently affected wildlife habitat in the project area, and are also likely to change habitat conditions in the future. Additionally, because many wildlife species utilize a wide range of habitat conditions, this analysis is based on representative habitats identified in available scientific literature. The following are some of the assumptions related to preferred habitat and factors that are expected to influence future habitat conditions. Habitat Relationships and Biophysical Settings The analysis of habitats presented here emphasizes vegetation and structural conditions important to wildlife; additional information on biophysical settings evaluated can be found in the SVP Silviculture Specialist Report (USDA Forest Service 2012a), the SVP Fire and Fuels Specialist Report (USDA Forest Service 2012d) and the Montana Partner In Flight (PIF) physiographic plan (PIF 2000). Many species such as pileated woodpeckers, American marten, and northern goshawk, are strongly tied to individual vegetative types, size classes, stand structural characteristics, landscape-scale patterns or topographic features, or combinations of the above. For instance, pileated woodpeckers nest predominantly in large-diameter ponderosa pine or cottonwood snags (McClelland 1977); American marten occur within dense, mid- to late- seral spruce/fir/lodgepole pine forests (Ruggiero et al. 1994); and goshawks nest within multi-storied, mid- to late-seral forests at all but the highest elevations (Reynolds et al. 2006). Although these habitat associations are well researched and accepted in the scientific community, “outliers” or rare occurrences of individuals using uncommon habitats do occur and are acknowledged in the literature. For instance, research shows that goshawks have a preference for stands no less than 30 acres in size (Reynolds et al. 2006), yet McGrath et al. (2003), sampled nest stands that were much smaller. McClelland (1977) found that pileated woodpeckers almost exclusively nest in ponderosa pine, cottonwood, and western larch (west of the divide), but reported a rare use of Douglas-fir snags. Researchers typically acknowledge but disregard outlying results when identifying habitat associations. Consequently the analysis presented assumes that species sustainability is best modeled by using what the scientific literature designates as typical habitat for a species and does not consider atypical outliers unless data collected in the project area supports use of ‘atypical’ habitat relationships. Rate of Mountain Pine Beetle Mortality In western disturbance-prone forests, the distribution of habitats is strongly influenced by the severity and frequency of natural disturbances. While these disturbances are inevitable, it is usually difficult to predict when, where, and to what extent they would occur. Because of this uncertainty, disturbances are disclosed as “risks.” The mountain pine beetle (MPB) outbreak in the Stonewall Project area, however, has approached a point of relative certainty and MPB outbreaks are at epidemic levels. Annual insect and disease detection surveys show greatly increased levels of MPB mortality (USDA Forest Service 2012a). Vegetation data based on R1-VMAP across the project area are categorized as pre-kill data (what R1-VMAP identified as being present in 2005) and post-kill data (current conditions). Mountain pine beetle mortality has increased and is expected to continue into the future, thus, post-kill conditions best describe the existing condition for most species and establish the baseline against which the effects of different alternatives are compared for wildlife. The pre-kill data, however, provides important context for the vegetative changes that have transpired in the last few years, and may be used to display changes in habitat for some species. The data used is discussed under the methodology sections for each species. Rate of Snag Attrition Following Mortality The Stonewall Project area is expected to have a high density of ponderosa pine snags due to anticipated mortality. The Regional Snag Protocol (USDA Forest Service 2000) describes large, old ponderosa pine snags as being highly durable in that they can stand for decades after death. Smith (2000) and Perrakis and Agee (2006) attribute this durability to age, slow growth, and repeated exposure to nonlethal fire scarring that induces damaged trees to exude pitch, which inhibits rot. In contrast, according to Smith (2000), the high density of 80- to100-year-old ponderosa pine snags that result from the current MPB infestation would fall within the decade. This is due to a lack of factors that make these snags durable. The trees are young (80–100 years), grew rapidly, have a high ratio of sapwood, and were not exposed to nonlethal fire-scarring. Observations in the project area and other comparable areas reaffirm Smith’s (2000) findings. Snags typically fall 3–4 years after death. Most appear to have rotted off at ground level. While a few snags may stand longer than 3–4 years, it is expected that virtually all would be on the ground within 10–20 years. Consequently, the availability of snags, including large-diameter ponderosa pine snags preferred by the pileated woodpecker (Bull 1987; McClelland 1977) and flammulated owl Hayward and Verner 1994; Wright 2000) is expected to be greatly reduced under all alternatives. Probability of Severe Wildfires following Mountain Pine Beetle Mortality Wildfires are inevitable (Arno 2000; Arno et al. 1995; Arno et al. 1997). They are essential for many wildlife species, beneficial to some, and detrimental to others, depending upon the magnitude and severity of the fires. Higher-than-normal severity wildfires that cover larger-than-normal expanses can be detrimental to wildlife (Turner et al. 1994), especially when they occur on landscapes that historically had low or moderate severity wildfires. Wildfire severity is typically modeled using NEXUS, FlamMap, or other models (USDA Forest Service 2012d) and is usually based on such factors as stand density and structural complexity (ladder fuels) (Finney 2006). Models are commonly used to address the long-term sustainability of wildlife habitats. In most cases, changes in wildfire severity are considered an indirect effect upon wildlife. Effects are further qualified as to the degree that wildlife habitats can be sustained into the future based on the risks and severity of predicted fires. To some degree, climate change has occurred and will continue in the future. Ramifications of a changing climate on wildlife are likely to include; reduced snowfall or earlier snow melt in the spring, extended periods of drought or extended dry periods in the spring and summer, more frequent and larger wildfires, increased bark beetle mortality and changes in site characteristics that promote climax vegetation or community changes (USDA Forest Service 2007f). These changes cause seasonal ranges and food sources for wildlife to shift and can affect the timing of reproduction. Reduced snowpack and changes in precipitation can affect amphibians by reducing water levels in lakes and ponds, as well as affect species such as Canada lynx, marten and wolverine that rely on deep or persistent snow. Forested tracts and remote habitats can also become isolated, reducing landscape connectivity and habitat for species such as wolverine (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). The timing of spring green up can also affect food availability for migratory birds or forage conditions for big game (United States Geological Survey 2008, USDA Forest Service 2007f, Wolverine Network 2012, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2012, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). The changing climate presents an aspect of uncertainty in future conditions, disturbance regimes, and vegetative and wildlife responses. Strategies that can be used to help reduce impacts include; managing for diverse conditions, maintain healthy and connected populations, reduce the risk of catastrophic fire, prevent and control invasive species, and ensure ecosystem processes and habitat connectivity (Mawdsley et al. 2008). While how well each of the alternatives addresses these strategies varies, it is assumed that to a certain extent, climate change and associated effects to wildlife would occur under all alternatives. Risk of Invasive Weeds on Disturbed Sites Grasses and forbs underlying open, dry ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands provide valuable habitat and forage for wildlife. Invasive weeds such as leafy spurge, spotted knapweed, and Dalmatian toadflax, which are well-adapted to occupy dry sites, can out-compete native grasses and forbs and dramatically reduce the habitat quality (Ortega et al. 2006). Actions that reduce the forest canopy and disturb the soil can make sites vulnerable to invasive weeds. Equipment used to thin forest canopies and roads used for vehicle access further increase the vulnerability of droughty sites to weeds by creating vectors for weed introduction. While measures to avoid invasive weeds can be effective (DiTomaso 2000), it is assumed that future monitoring and treatment would be implemented under all alternatives to help contain or control invasive plants. R1-VMAP and Forest Inventory Analysis (FIA) Intensified Grid Data R1-VMAP data are remotely sensed while FIA (intensified grid data) are from on-the-ground plots. These two datasets are used to describe the habitats in this analysis. R1-VMAP represents a broad-scale, coarse filter depiction. It relies on satellite imagery and describes three main vegetation components—canopy cover, tree dominance type, and stand size. R1-VMAP spatially represents habitats at the landscape level and within the project area. It also provides a context against which to identify treatment effects on a given habitat. The intensified grid data are point data and generally incorporate additional vegetation parameters not included in R1-VMAP. For example, snag and down wood habitat data are collected as part of intensified grid point data and cannot be derived from R1-VMAP. Point data also provide an opportunity to refine and verify broad scale spatial data (i.e., R1-VMAP) and also provide a baseline against which future management actions may be measured. Overview of Issues The following issues were identified as a result of public scoping and used to develop alternatives to the proposed action. Also, these issues as well as other issue indicators identified to measure potential impacts to wildlife from alternatives considered in the project environmental impact statement are displayed in table 61. Effect indicators are collectively used to assess species viability or population changes. · Restoration of vegetation communities · Grizzly bear habitat impacts · Elk security cover and the LRMP standard. · Lynx habitat: Designated Critical Habitat and Stand Initiation Phase acreage · Wildfire hazard, risk, and fuels · Habitats including ponderosa pine, western larch and aspen: maintenance or restoration · Road impacts to elk and grizzly bear habitat as well as disturbance factors Table 61. Wildlife issue indicators Species Indicator Threatened and Endangered Species Grizzly Bear Effects to individuals and changes in security cover and potential conflicts with humans. Security Core habitat, Open Road Density (ORD) and Total Road Density (TRD) are specific measures used to evaluate changes within the recovery area, whereas changes in cover and forage within and outside the NCDE are assessed. Canada Lynx Effects to individuals and acres of stand initiation, multi-story and mid-seral habitat affected in Lynx Analysis Units (LAUs bl-7 and bl-8). Compliance with the Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD) standards and guidelines. Species Indicator Wolverine Effects to individuals and acres of natal denning and foraging habitat. Availability of remote and dispersal habitat and changes in connectivity and human access. Sensitive Species Gray Wolf Effects to individuals and changes in big game. Den, rendezvous and foraging habitat affected. Fisher Effects to individuals and acres of den, rest and foraging habitat. Changes in human access. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat Effects to individuals and acres of and effect to foraging habitat. Bald Eagle Effects to individuals, suitable nest habitat affected, effects to reproduction and nest and foraging habitat availability. Black-backed Woodpecker Effects to individuals, acres of suitable habitat, changes in quality and distribution of suitable snag habitat. Flammulated Owl Effects to individuals and acres of suitable habitat. Short and long-term changes in the quality of suitable open-canopy habitat, availability of large diameter (>=19 inches) snags. Western Toad Effects to individuals, acres of breeding and upland habitat affected. Management Indicator Species Northern Goshawk Effects to individuals and reproduction. Acres of nest and foraging habitat, nest, foraging and post-fledgling habitat affected, landscape level changes in habitat. Ability of the project area to support nesting pairs. Pileated Woodpecker Effects to individuals and reproduction. Acres of old growth habitat, existing and affected suitable habitat, changes in quality of foraging and nesting habitat, large snag (>=20 inches d.b.h.) availability and changes in project area distribution and use. Hairy Woodpecker Effects to individuals and reproduction, acres of suitable habitat, acres of suitable habitat affected, changes in quality of suitable habitat, snag (all size classes) availability. Changes in project area distribution and use American Marten Effects to individuals and reproduction. Existing and affected suitable habitat. Changes in the quality of den and foraging habitat, project area distribution and use, and snag and downed woody debris (DWD) availability. Commonly Hunted Species Elk Acres of hiding and thermal cover, habitat effectiveness, acres of security habitat, changes in access and mortality, acres of foraging habitat, and compliance with the Montana logging study. Changes in hunting opportunity. Mule Deer Acres of hiding and thermal cover, acres of foraging habitat, changes in project area distribution and use and hunting opportunities. Migratory Species Migratory Birds Changes (acres) in available habitat (Biophysical settings), compliance with MBTA. Affected Environment Wildlife Species Evaluated Species considered in this analysis include species listed as federally threatened, endangered, or candidate on the HNF (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2011b), Forest Service sensitive species (USDA Forest Service 2011a) and MIS species identified in the Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986). A total of 24 species were evaluated (table 62). In order to determine the scope of analysis, a preliminary evaluation (Step 3 above) was conducted for each potentially affected wildlife species and table 63 identifies those species that were considered, but would not be evaluated in detail in the analysis. Species evaluated in detail are identified in table 64. Table 62. Wildlife species considered Common Name Scientific Name Status Federally Proposed, Candidate, Threatened and Endangered Species Grizzly Bear Ursus arctos horribilis Threatened, MIS Canada Lynx Lynx canadensis Threatened Black-footed Ferret Mustela nigripes Endangered Sprague’s Pipit Anthus spragueii Candidate Wolverine Gulo gulo luscus Proposed Regionally Sensitive Species Bald Eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus De-listed Peregrine Falcon Falco peregrines anatum Sensitive Black-backed Woodpecker Picoides arcticus Sensitive Flammulated Owl Otus flammeolus Sensitive Harlequin Duck Histrionicus histrionicus Sensitive Bighorn Sheep Ovis canadensis Sensitive Gray Wolf Canus lupus De-listed Fisher Martes pennanti Sensitive Townsend’s Big-eared Bat Corynorhinus townsendii Sensitive Northern Bog Lemming Synaptomys borealis Sensitive Northern Leopard Frog Rana pipiens Sensitive Plains Spadefoot Toad Spea bombifirons Sensitive Western Boreal Toad Bufo boreas boreas Sensitive Management Indicator Species Northern Goshawk Accipiter gentilis MIS Pileated Woodpecker Dryocopus pileatus MIS Hairy Woodpecker Picoides villosus MIS American Marten Martes americana origines MIS Commonly Hunted Species Elk Cervus elaphus nelsoni Big Game Mule Deer Odocoileus hemionus Big Game  Table 63. Wildlife species eliminated from detailed analysis Common Name Rationale for Elimination Determination Spraque’s Pipit No recent documentation (Montana Field Guide 2011) and the project area lacks large low elevation grassland habitat (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2011b). No Effect Black-footed Ferret Outside current range (Montana Field Guide 2011) and project area lacks open grassland/shrub steppe habitat (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2011b) No Effect Peregrine Falcon Project area lacks suitable cliffline nesting habitat. No Impact Harlequin Duck Project area is outside its current range (MFWP 2006). No Impact Bighorn Sheep Project area lacks cliff/rocky habitat required by this species. Species not present. No Impact Northern Bog Lemming Project area lacks suitable high elevation sphagnum moss habitat. No Impact Northern Leopard Frog Project area lacks low-elevation standing water habitat. No Impact Plains Spadefoot Outside the current range (Montana Field Guide 2011). No Impact  Table 64. Wildlife species evaluated in detail Species Habitat Federally Listed Species Grizzly Bear The project area is in the Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem and occurs in two subunits including Arrastra, and Red Mountain. The project area provides suitable foraging and den habitat and Grizzly bears are present. Canada Lynx The project area occurs within critical lynx habitat (Unit 3) and is occupied by lynx. Regionally Sensitive Species** Gray Wolf Wolves are known to occur within the general vicinity of the project area. Also suitable den, foraging and rendezvous habitat is present. Wolves have recently been delisted in Montana (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2011a) and the gray wolf is evaluated as a Forest Sensitive Species. Wolverine Wolverine are uncommon but have been documented within the combined boundary. Suitable remote forest habitat occurs throughout the northern third of the project area and modeled den habitat exists on approximately 12,000 acres. Fisher Documented on adjacent lands, potential suitable habitat exists throughout much of the project area and fisher use is possible; however, the likelihood of occurrence is low based on recent and historic accounts, rareness of the species etc. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat There is no documentation of this species in the Stonewall project area and the closest documented Townsend’s Big-eared bat location is approximately 30 miles from the project area. While the project area does not provide suitable cave/hibernacula, it does contain suitable foraging habitat. Bald Eagle An eagle nest was recently documented in the Beaver Creek drainage, outside the project area, but within the combined boundary (cumulative effects). Suitable foraging habitat also occurs along the Blackfoot river. Although de-listed under ESA, the bald eagle is protected under the Bald and Golden Eagle protection act and is evaluated as a sensitive species. Black-backed Woodpecker Although not documented within the project area, it has been documented adjacent to the area in the vicinity of the Snow Talon fire (2003). As a result and considering that the concentrated mountain pine beetle mortality has created suitable habitat, it is likely that the Black-backed Woodpecker (BBW) is present. Species Habitat Flammulated Owl While not documented within the project area this species has been documented within the combined boundary. Suitable low elevation, open ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir habitat exist is common. . Western Toad Suitable forested wetland habitat exists within and adjacent to the project area and although not documented, occurrence is likely as adult toads travel long distances overland after breeding. Management Indicator Species Northern Goshawk The project area contains two active nest sites and suitable nest, foraging and post-fledgling habitat is common. Pileated Woodpecker Documented from the project area. Suitable habitat occurs at scattered locations across the project area. Hairy Woodpecker The hairy woodpecker occurs within the project area and suitable habitat is widespread. American Marten Although not recently documented, suitable habitat is available and presence is possible. Marten have been trapped along Stonewall Creek in recent years and are known to occur near Reservoir lake and higher toward Huckleberry pass. Commonly Hunted Species Elk The project area provides summer, transition and winter habitat and elk commonly use the project area. Mule Deer The entire project area provides suitable habitat and deer use is common. Most of the project area provides summer and transition range, whereas winter range is limited to lower elevations. **- Includes ESA de-listed and candidate species Wildlife Habitats Evaluated Methodology and Process Wildlife habitats are assessed by looking at existing conditions and changes to biophysical settings and site-level habitats. Biophysical settings are land delineations based on the physical setting (e.g., elevation and aspect) and the potential vegetation community that characterizes the site and are mapped at the landscape scale using geographical information systems (GIS). The Stonewall project area biophysical settings includes: Dry Forests, Cool, Moist Forests, Upper Subalpine Forest (whitebark pine), Mountain Meadow and Shrub, and Riparian communities. Site-level habitats including aspen, snags and downed woody debris (DWD) are based upon Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) data from western Montana and estimates of snag densities from eastside forests (Bollenbacher et al. 2008). More detailed information on biophysical settings and vegetation information collected can be found in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Fire and Fuels Report and the Silviculture Report (USDA Forest Service 2012a and 2012d). Wildlife use of biophysical settings and site-level habitats is based on information provided in the Montana Partners In Flight Bird Conservation Plan (PIF 2000), the Avian Science Center Landbird Monitoring Program (http://biology.dbs.umt.edu/landbird/mpcp/mtpif/TOC.htm) (2006a and 2006b), the Blackfoot Landscape Analysis (USDA Forest Service 1995a), the Montana Natural Heritage Program (http://nhp.nris.state.mt.us), the Coordinated Implementation Plan for Bird Conservation in Western Montana (Montana Steering Committee: the Birds and Burns Network, and Montana’s Comprehensive Fish and Wildlife Conservation Strategy (MFWP 2005). This analysis discusses standing and downed woody debris as it relates to wildlife and wildlife habitat. See the Aquatic Resource Report (Rief 2012) for consideration of large wood recruitment in aquatic systems, the Soils Report (Walters 2011) for a discussion of the importance of dead wood for nutrient cycling, and the Fire/Fuels Report (B. 2012) for a discussion of fuel loading. Also, the Stonewall Vegetation Project Snag Analysis Report (Amell 2012c) summarizes the methodologies used to assess snags and provides more detail on snag availability. The Region 1 Connectivity Protocol (USDA Forest Service (1997) was used to set the context and categories relative to connectivity. Connectivity is discussed relative to the types of corridors utilized by wildlife, whereas effects are evaluated by looking at remote forest habitat (i.e., elk security and grizzly core), increased human access, fragmentation and landscape-level conditions. Species diversity is discussed at the coarse filter scale by assessing changes in habitats of similar vegetation composition and structure. Changes in structural condition resulting from treatment would result in site-specific changes; therefore, direct and indirect effects on habitats are analyzed across the project area. However, to better evaluate possible changes in habitat across the landscape, cumulative effects are evaluated on that portion of the combined boundary in which biophysical settings data is available (approximately 65,000 acres). Dry Forest Habitats (Ponderosa Pine and Douglas-fir) Habitat Description Dry forest types comprise 5 million out of 25 million total forest acres in Forest Service Region 1. Approximately 4 million acres are located in Montana—primarily east of the Continental Divide in a band running through the southwestern, central, and north-central part of the state at lower to middle elevations (5,300 to 7,350 feet) on both public and private lands. Wildlife species associated with dry forests that occur in the project area include flammulated owls, goshawks, Hammond’s and dusky flycatchers, and Williamson’s and red-naped sapsuckers, among others; all listed as high priority species by the Intermountain West Joint Ventures (Montana Steering Committee 2005). This forest community includes open, parkland stands composed almost exclusively of ponderosa pine, with an open understory of shrubs and other herbaceous vegetation at lower elevations. On other dry sites, generally at elevations above the ponderosa pine belt, dry forests include a combination of ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir or grand fir, whereas dry forest sites composed exclusively of Douglas-fir occur on sites that are usually too cold for ponderosa pine (PIF 2000). Prior to the European settlement, fire intervals in the dry forest types ranged from 5 to 25 years (Brown and Smith 2000). These frequent fires were usually of low intensity and promoted a forest structure of open, uneven-aged ponderosa pine or ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands (Arno and Gruell 1983). Douglas-fir encroachment into grasslands was rare and limited to periods with long fire return intervals (Gruell 1983). Due to the increased number of immature trees, dry forests have also changed from stands that were previously open, single-storied and patchy, to stands that are currently dense and relatively continuous across the landscape (Fischer and Clayton 1983; Gruell 1983; Losensky 1993). As a result the rich grass, forb and shrub components have been replaced with young conifers, needle mats and sparse ground vegetation. In the absence of fire, the cool dry forests in central Montana have expanded in previously nonforested grasslands and shrubland habitats. Aspen stands have deteriorated due to competition from Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine and old growth forest has declined due to logging of older trees, particularly low-elevation ponderosa pine (Fischer and Clayton 1983, Gruell 1983, Losensky 1993). This change in fire frequency has also resulted in shifts in wildlife species composition today, from what occurred in dry forests historically (PIF 2000). For example, open grown pre-settlement stands provided a unique combination of overstory structure and ground level forage for herbivores of all sizes (Knight and Wallace 1989). This contrast most stands today, which exhibit closed or open canopies with cluttered, multi-layered understories. This structure provides more hiding cover and structural diversity, but less forage than historic stands. Changes in stand structure have also resulted in modifications to the bird community. For example, due to the increased tree density and canopy cover, migratory species such as the Townsend’s warbler and ruby-crowned kinglet are more common today (Hutto and Young 2002, PIF 2000). Conversely, species that were closely tied to the late-seral, open dry structure that occurred historically such as the flammulated owl, Lewis’s woodpecker, chipping sparrow, Cassin’s finch, Hammond’s flycatcher and red-crossbill have declined and are currently listed as priority I and II species in Montana (Hayward and Verner 1994, PIF 2000). Also the flammulated owl either does not occur or is much less common in dry forests today (PIF 2000). Project Area Dry Forest Habitat Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) biophysical setting data indicate that dry forest habitats dominated by ponderosa pine and dry Douglas-fir comprise approximately 7,742 acres and 5,579 acres respectively of the Stonewall Project area, with ponderosa pine at lower elevations between 4,400-5,500 feet, and a ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir mix at elevations of 5,500-6,000 feet. Ponderosa pine was historically more prevalent in the project area. However due to fire exclusion, dry sites within the project area today include primarily a mixture of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir. Also because of years of fire suppression and past harvest, many dry forest stands have been changed from stands that were previously open, single-storied and patchy, to stands that are currently dense and relatively continuous across the landscape (Fischer and Clayton 1983, Gruell 1983, Losensky 1993). These stands are more susceptible to stand-replacing fires (IWJV 2005), which has increased recently due to the MPB outbreak. The reference fire regime for this setting was one of high frequency (a 22-year mean fire return interval) and low intensity and severity (24 percent overstory mortality). Currently, the fire frequency is much higher (70 years) than the reference and expected severity is higher than reference conditions (70 percent) (USDA Forest Service 2012d). Cool-moist Habitats Cool-moist habitats include Douglas-fir/lodgepole pine communities at mid-elevations and lower subalpine fir at mid- to upper elevations. The following is a discussion of each. Moist Douglas-fir/Lodgepole Pine Douglas-fir forests are difficult to classify and describe, because interior Douglas-fir (var. glauca) has the broadest ecological amplitude of any western tree (Arno 1991). It is moderately shade-tolerant, so it can be a climax species in some areas as well as being a common seral species in many habitat types. The moist Douglas-fir stratum covers the transition zone between warm, dry, lower elevation forests dominated by Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine and the cool, moist higher elevation forests dominated by lodgepole pine and subalpine fir. Historically, these stands were co-dominated by Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine, and experienced mixed severity fire regimes where fire intervals averaged 30 to 100 years (Arno 1980, Barrett et al. 1991, Brown et al. 1994, Arno and Fischer 1995). Mixed severity fire regimes are marked by variability with some trees dying and many surviving (Brown 1995). The result was a patchy, erratic pattern that fostered development of diverse plant communities and wildlife habitats within forested stands and across the landscape as a whole (Barrett et al. 1991). Cool/moist Lower Subalpine Forest Within the lower, subalpine community, lodgepole pine is generally the most common conifer with Douglas-fir, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce occurring as well. Whitebark pine occurs in some of the upper elevations of this setting. Particularly moist sites are dominated by subalpine fir and spruce. Engelmann spruce is prominent particularly on north slopes, in draws, and along streams and other riparian areas. These forests occur at higher elevations in cool, moist conditions, and they occupy all aspects. Historically, fires were relatively infrequent but often burned with high intensity, replacing entire forest structures over extensive areas. Young forests were initially dominated almost entirely by lodgepole pine because of its ability to regenerate after stand replacing fires. However, the structure of older forests varied. Because lodgepole is a thin-barked tree not likely to withstand fire, where periodic underburning did occur, large, sometimes widely spaced overstory trees with thick understory vegetation occurred. In areas that were not periodically burned, heavier fuels and sub-alpine fir developed on the site, and these areas were highly susceptible to stand-replacing fires. Both Communities The combination of logging at the turn of the century and fire-suppression has produced a more homogeneous landscape in the cool, moist forest habitat today than occurred historically (PIF 2000). In the past, stands often formed a complex and intricate mosaic on the landscape as a result of the highly variable fires that occurred. Because succession changes forest structure most rapidly in the early decades, it has only taken a few decades for fire suppression to allow large expanses of continuous forest to form across the landscape as most stands reach a closed-canopy stage (Tande 1979). Priority bird species historically associated with the more diverse structure characteristic of these communities include sharp-shinned hawk, Northern goshawk, Williamson’s sapsucker, pileated woodpeckers, Olive-sided flycatchers, Cassin’s vireo and Townsend’s warbler, although specialized habitat and structures such as snags, riparian areas, large woody debris or edge are necessary for some species. Species more commonly found in the more homogeneous mid-seral and late-seral closed-canopy forest that exists today include species such as the red-breasted nuthatch, mountain chickadee, ruby-crowned kinglet, gray jay, dark-eyed junco, pine siskin, red squirrel, deer mouse and mule deer. Upper Sub-alpine Forests (Whitebark Pine) While the following provides a brief discussion of whitebark pine, a more detailed assessment can be found in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Silvicultural Report (Amell 2012) Habitat Description Whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) is a subalpine conifer that is relatively slow-growing, intolerant of shade, but tolerant of poor soils, steep slopes, windy exposures, and cold environments (Arno and Weaver 1990). The major mechanisms for dispersing whitebark pine seed depends primarily upon the seed harvesting and caching behavior of Clark’s nutcracker (Nucifraga columbiana) (Tomback 1982, Hutchins and Lanner 1982), although a number of other birds and small mammals also utilize the seeds and store them as winter food. Whitebark pine can be found growing in a wide range of plant communities. It can be found growing in small stands at higher elevations or as a co-climax species on sites capable of supporting shade tolerant species such as subalpine fir. On moister subalpine fir habitat types, it can be present as a major seral species, whereas it is a minor component on dry sites. Whitebark pine’s presence as a seral species in subalpine fir habitat types is maintained by disturbances, mainly fires (USGS 2008). Prior to 1900, fires burned through whitebark pine forests at average intervals ranging from about 30 to 400 years, usually with mixed-severity (Barrett et al. 1991, Brown et al. 1994, Keane and Parsons 2007, Tomback et al. 2001), although the longest fire return intervals were associated with a stand-replacing fire regime (Keane 2008). Some whitebark pine stands have been maintained by low intensity fires that kill the sub-alpine fir. Mixed severity fires, which are necessary to create conditions that allow nutcrackers to cache seeds have been absent from the landscape. Consequently whitebark pine has been declining across its range (Kendall and Keane 2001). In addition to fire suppression, white pine blister rust has led to the most rapid decline in whitebark pine. Impacts from the disease have been highest in the more mesic parts of its range; although all stands can be considered to be at risk. Whitebark pine has also been affected by mountain pine beetle and increased competition, and collectively these factors have all contributed to the rangewide decline of this species. With large seeds high in fats, whitebark pine trees are an important source of food for many animal species. Wildlife species that eat whitebark pine seeds include woodpeckers, jays, ravens, chickadees, nuthatches, finches, chipmunks, ground squirrels, bears and probably mice (Hutchins and Lanner 1982, Tomback et al. 2001). Pine squirrels (Tamiasciurus spp.) harvest and cache whitebark pine cones in middens (Hutchins and Lanner 1982). Whitebark pine seeds serve as an important food source for grizzly bears (Ursus arctos) and black bears (U. americanus) which raid the seed middens (Kendall 1983). Because whitebark pine are long-lived and can grow large in diameter, they also provide valuable snag habitat. Project Area Upper Subalpine Forest Habitat The upper subalpine fir community exists on approximately 580 acres or 2 percent of the project area. Although this community occurs largely at elevations above 7,800 feet, it is commonly found at lower elevations down to approximately 6,900 feet. Project area whitebark pine is highly infected by white pine blister rust and is considered seral to subalpine fir. As a result, it depends on fire to maintain its dominance (Keane et al. 2001, Kendall and Keane 2001). In the absence of fire, subalpine fir has increased in presence and the combination of increases in subalpine fir and associated whitebark pine mortality, and lack of regeneration due to white pine blister rust and mountain pine beetle have resulted in a large decline in whitebark pine. The reference fire regime was one of infrequent high-intensity and mixed-severity fires. The current frequency and severity is not substantially different from the reference condition (Amell 2012). Riparian Habitats Habitat Description Riparian habitats typically support more species of breeding and migratory birds than any other terrestrial habitats in the West. They are diverse, dynamic and complex habitats and are sites of biological and physical interaction at the terrestrial/aquatic interface (Kaufman et al. 2000). Riparian zones have a high degree of biodiversity and the microclimate of riparian zones is also influenced by its position on the landscape, which is different than the surrounding forest (Thomas et al. 1979). While riparian habitats occur in a variety of communities (e.g., conifer and hardwood) they make up a relatively small amount of the landscape. However because of the proximity to water and associated habitats, they receive a disproportionate amount of wildlife use. For example riparian areas provide more breeding habitat for birds than any other vegetation type in North America (Kaufman et al. 2000). In the Rocky Mountain Region, they contain more listed and vulnerable bird species than any other habitat type. Also numerous landbird species are relatively restricted to the shrubs or deciduous trees associated with riparian environments (Hutto and Young 2002). Reptiles use riparian areas for foraging, overwintering, and migration. Most amphibians require riparian areas and aquatic habitat for all (e.g., spotted frogs, tailed frogs) or part (e.g., western toads) of their life cycle. Because of their limited mobility, continuous riparian zones are important for dispersal and migration to other unoccupied habitat. Mammals also disproportionately use riparian zones, because of the high structural diversity, proximity to water, and favorable microclimates that create high plant diversity that results in a varied and abundant forage supply. Consequently, riparian areas serve as migration routes between summer and winter range for big game and provide travel corridors between habitats for many terrestrial species such as carnivores, birds, and bats. Birds that are known to occur in the project area commonly associated with riparian habitat include ruffed grouse, cedar waxwings, yellow warblers, cordilleran flycatchers, McGillivray’s Warbler and song sparrows. Fire return intervals can be longer in riparian zones and mammals such as fisher and wolverine also prefer riparian habitat due to the increased cover and downed woody debris that often occurs there (Self and Kearns 1992 in Ruggerio et al. 1994). Project Area Riparian Habitats The Stonewall Vegetation Project area contains a small amount of the riparian biophysical setting (24 acres), 66 miles of stream and 26 acres of National Wetland Inventory (NWI) wetland. Because many wildlife species select habitat in close proximity to water, for the purpose of this analysis, riparian habitat is defined as lands within 100 feet of a stream or wetland. Stream riparian habitat exists on almost 1,700 acres or 7 percent of the project area, whereas wetland riparian habitat exists on approximately 300 acres. So collectively the project area contains approximately 2,000 acres of riparian habitat. Aspen Habitat Description Aspen occurs as isolated relatively pure stands commonly associated with conifers along water courses. It is often but not always associated with riparian or more mesic upland sites and is relatively rare in Montana when compared to other Rocky Mountain States (PIF 2000). Aspen reproduces primarily from sprouting following a disturbance, and fire is the primary factor that perpetuates aspen. In the absence of fire, remaining aspen trees eventually lose vigor, fail to sucker (reproduce), and are eliminated from the community. Consequently without wildfire, aspen will be replaced by coniferous forest (Stam et al. 2008). Fire suppression has resulted in a decrease in the abundance and distribution of aspen stands within the Stonewall project area. Aspen is an important component of the vegetation of Montana, and whether in pure stands or mixed with conifers, aspen provides habitat for a wide variety of wildlife and adds to habitat diversity. It is often the only broad-leafed tree within coniferous forests and therefore provides unique foraging substrates for a variety of insectivorous birds (PIF 2000, DeByle 1985, Shepperd et al. 2006). The suckers, twigs and bark are used by wintering ungulates, particularly deer, elk and moose. Snowshoe hares and cottontail rabbits feed on the twigs and buds, while ruffed grouse are highly dependent on the buds in winter. Aspen also provides cavities and snags for cavity-dependent species (PIF 2000), and Birds and Burns surveys conducted from 2002 through 2006 south of the project area found that hairy woodpeckers are strongly associated with aspen on the HNF (Bate 2003; Bate 2004; Bate 2005a and b; Bate 2007, Mosher and Saab 2009). Also many cavity excavators select aspen trees at remarkably high rates compared to their availability (Hutto 1995). Project Area Aspen Habitat Historically, aspen was widely scattered in the project area (based on remnant stands and range maps). Stands were generally associated with seeps and springs, riparian areas and other moist sites. Under naturally occurring wildfires, aspen stands provided a diversity of structure and size classes. Fires were frequent enough that it was maintained across the landscape. Due to conifer encroachment, age and fire suppression, existing aspen stands are largely decadent with little or no reproduction. Remaining aspen are widely scattered across the project area. Mountain Meadow and Shrub Big sagebrush is the dominant mountain shrub and often occurs as a sagebrush/fescue or sagebrush/wheatgrass community. Sagebrush plays an important role for several wildlife species. It is an important winter food as it may be the only source of green vegetation available. It provides cover for mule deer and breaks up snow pack, providing access to grasses. Throughout the rest of the year, it is an important habitat component as forage, protective cover, and nesting habitat (Ritter and Paige 2000). Sagebrush has always been a common habitat in drier, lower elevation valleys in the West, where distribution and patchiness was a result of natural moisture and fire regimes (Paige and Ritter 1999). Sagebrush and associated perennial grasses and forbs provide food and cover for many wildlife species (Cornell Lab of Ornithology 2012). Mountain meadows typically consist of native bunchgrasses and forbs, which are often interspersed among shrubs. The herbaceous and shrub structure provides habitat for a variety of species, including migratory birds, deer and elk. These areas can be particularly important for big game when they occur at lower elevations, because of the forage they provide on transition range. Sagebrush and open-land habitat are decreasing across the West (Grove et al. 2005). Without disturbance, conifers are able to out-compete herbaceous species for sunlight, nutrients and water. Large-scale changes in land use have altered the distribution and condition of these communities. Nonnative species invasions have also reduced habitat. Project Area Mountain Meadows and Shrub Habitat Mountain meadows and shrubs currently occur on approximately 700 acres or 3 percent of the project area, whereas shrub habitat exists on 138 acres. Approximately half of the existing habitat was created during the Keep Cool fire in 2006. The remainder is widely scattered at upper elevations in the headwaters of Keep Cool and Beaver Creeks. Due to conifer encroachment, this community has been declining. Dead Wood Habitat Description Dead wood, including both standing and downed woody debris is discussed because many species, including threatened, endangered and sensitive species rely on this important habitat component. Dead wood contributes to biological richness in many ways: as substrate, cavity sites, foraging sites, nesting or denning sites, food storage sites, runways and cover or shelter (Bull et al. 1997). It is estimated that about 0.33 percent of the bird and mammal species that live in the forests of the Rocky Mountains use snags for nesting or denning, foraging, roosting, cover, communication, or perching. Rose et al. (2001) lists 57 wildlife species plus 4 species groups associated with snags, and 20 wildlife species associated with hollow living trees. In addition, large snags and downed wood play central roles in diverse ecosystem processes and functions such as nutrient recycling, shelter for growing trees, and habitat for wildlife and fish (Rose et al. 2001). Snags are often examined in terms of cavity use by different wildlife species. There are two types of cavity users: primary and secondary. Primary cavity users excavate their own cavities; secondary cavity users occupy those cavities already created. Primary cavity excavators use snags differently. Some species can only excavate soft wood; others only excavate hard wood. Hence it is important to distinguish between types of snags (Thomas 1979). For example, pileated woodpeckers and black-backed woodpeckers excavate trees with hard exterior sapwood shell and decaying heartwood. Weaker excavators, e.g., red-breasted nuthatches and chickadees, select trees with softer exterior wood such as those created by armillaria root rot and other saprophytic fungi (Rose et al. 2001). Woodpeckers usually excavate a new cavity each year (Bull et al. 1997), therefore old cavities are continuously available for secondary cavity users. Reliance on dead wood habitat occurs at a variety of scales, from large landscapes, to small patches, to individual snags or downed logs. More mobile species that depend on dead wood habitat include black bears, Canada lynx, wolverines, marten, fisher, bats, woodpeckers, and owls. Less mobile species that depend on dead wood include snowshoe hares (the primary prey of Canada lynx), red-backed voles (the primary of prey of marten, fisher, boreal owl, northern goshawk), and shrews (Bull and Blumton 1999, Brown et al. 2003). The number, species, size, and distribution of snags also affect snag-dependent wildlife. Large-diameter snags are particularly important because they occur in fewer numbers and many species require large diameter snags for nesting. Large diameter snags also remain standing longer and are much more likely to develop suitable decay conditions for cavity-using species (McClelland et al. 1979, Bull et al. 1997). Ponderosa pine, western larch, Douglas-fir, and deciduous tree snags are the species predominately used by cavity-using birds and mammals in the Stonewall Project area. Most are relatively resistant to windthrow and are less likely to require felling for safety concerns. Smaller-diameter snags also get some use as nest habitat by some species, and can play an important role by helping to keep other snags standing (Russell et al. 2006). Downed trees and other woody material are critical for many species (Maser et al. 1979 in USDA Forest Service 2008a). In the Pacific Northwest, 47 vertebrate species respond positively to downed wood (Bunnell et al. 2002). Downed logs and stumps are required for denning and resting, are vital for hunting below the snow in winter (Buskirk and Ruggiero 1994 ), and are also used as travel cover, particularly when living plant cover is absent. American marten often den and forage in the under-snow cavities that occur under downed logs. Canada lynx, fisher, and wolverine dens are associated with abundant woody debris, usually large-diameter logs (Bull et al. 2001). Winter wrens do most of their feeding underneath suspended logs and several amphibians and reptiles make use of large woody debris for shelter and breeding sites (Bull et al. 1997). Many ant species that need large-diameter downed logs are major predators of defoliating insects such as western spruce budworm (Torgersen and Bull 1995). Longer large-diameter downed trees are generally most important because they can be used by a far greater range of species. In addition, they provide stable and persistent structures as well as better protection from weather extremes. However, a variety of sizes and decay classes are needed in downed wood “in order to conserve functional processes that foster sustainable forest ecosystems” (Torgersen and Bull 1995). Standing and downed dead trees have many ecological roles in a landscape recovering from wildfire (Beschta et al. 1995, Saab and Dudley 1998, Smith 2000, Brown et al. 2003, Beschta et al. 2004, Saab et al. 2004). The snags and down logs that result from fire serve a vital role in the structure and function of healthy forest ecosystems and play an important role in post-fire recovery and long-term site productivity. Also, Hutto (1995) found that 15 species of birds were more frequently found in post-fire habitats than in any other major cover type in the northern Rocky Mountains. Project Area Dead Wood Component Due to decades of overstocking and widespread MPB mortality, snags and coarse woody debris currently occur in a variety of size classes and are widespread and abundant across the Stonewall project area. In 2007 and 2008, the HNF measured FIA Intensification plots within the Stonedry analysis area, which includes the Stonewall project area. For that analysis, it was assumed that plots included tree mortality through 2008. Within the FIA Intensification plots, there were an average of about 40 snags per acre greater than or equal to 7 inches d.b.h., which is 20 times the Forest Plan requirement of providing 70 percent of optimum. Table 65 summarizes snags by size class within the Stonewall project area, whereas figure 67 displays general snag distribution. Table 65. Snag distribution data by size class from 2008 FIA plots Diameter (d.b.h.) Class Average Snags per Acre 7-11 26 12-19 13 >=20 1 Total 40   Stonewall Vegetation Project area snag distribution. Shows areas of dead trees per acre from 0-2 to 20+Figure 67. Project area snag distribution Connectivity Connectivity refers both to the abundance and spatial patterning of habitat and to the ability of animals to move from patch to patch of similar habitat (USDA Forest Service 1997). Corridors are a means by which connectivity is provided and are defined as strips or stepping stones of “hospitable territory traversing inhospitable territory providing access from one area to another” (USDA Forest Service 1997). The effectiveness of a corridor depends upon the species in question, the type of movement, and the type of corridor (WHCWG 2010). Animals need connectivity to forage within their home range, for dispersal to new home ranges, and for migration between locations. Connectivity as a concept is being increasingly explored in conservation and is also an area of controversy. While there is no empirical evidence to support the concept of corridors many conceptual models have been built to project connectivity across landscapes (WHCWG 2010). The Northern Region Connectivity Protocol (USDA Forest Service 1997) provides a framework for describing corridors and the effects of Forest projects and other human activities. Of the five types of corridors outlined in the protocol, four apply to the Stonewall Project area: season migration corridors, dispersal/emigration corridors, travel corridors, and invasive corridors. Season migration and cyclic corridors: While the project area occurs in well-established continental corridors such as the Central flyway, locally, the most obvious examples of seasonal migrations are spring and fall movements by native ungulates between winter and summer ranges. Historically these routes were dictated by topography, snow conditions, and the availability of resources (particularly forage, water, and cover). Over the past 150 years, these routes have shifted in response to human development. In part, they follow the old resource/topography-driven routes but divert as necessary to avoid roads and other centers of human activity and to take advantage of cover. Wildfire and insect and disease such as concentrated MPB mortality have also affected landscape and watershed level connectivity resulting in local shifts in migration corridors. These corridors are maintained by minimizing human access and fragmentation, and by ensuring contiguous forested upland and riparian areas are available across the landscape. Travel corridors are local routes established by individual animals or groups of animals to move within home ranges between foraging habitat, cover, breeding sites, and so on. As with local seasonal migration, these routes may shift in response to human activity or landscape-level changes from wildfire and insect and disease infestation. The Stonewall Project area provides connectivity between more remote lands to the north (e.g., Scapegoat Wilderness) and the Blackfoot River and lands to the south extending along the continental divide. The Blackfoot River is an important corridor for species moving up and down the river corridor as well as for movement between habitats to the north and south. Like seasonal and migration corridors, maintaining forested conditions while minimizing human access and development help to maintain existing travel corridors. Dispersal corridors promote movement into unoccupied habitats. Dispersal behavior is most common when density is too high within an area to support the population, resulting in natural colonization of suitable but unoccupied habitat elsewhere. Because the project area adjoins large blocks of more remote habitat to the north and the Blackfoot River to the south, it provides an important dispersal corridor for a wide variety of species. Invasive corridors may be continental (e.g., eastern blue jays moving across the Great Plains via wooded river corridors), or local (e.g., cowbirds following cattle trailing up onto National Forest System land). These corridors may affect biodiversity in local ecosystems that have inadequate resistance to invaders, particularly in the case of exotic weeds such as knapweed or leafy spurge. Maintaining landscape-level conditions and minimizing fragmentation is necessary to ensure that invasive corridors are not established. Fragmentation is generally considered a change in landscape structure that leads to smaller patch sizes, less interior habitat, and greater distances between patches which can lead to sub-population isolation (Reed et al. 1996, Tinker et al. 1998, Temple and Wilcox 2000). Fragmentation can affect animal populations by decreasing species diversity and densities due to the smaller patches of habitat created, as well as by increasing edge habitat and effects. Edge is the interface between forest and nonforest, whereas an ecotone is the zone on either side of the edge that is influenced by the transition between contrasting vegetation types (Thomas 1979). Edges and ecotones often support a more diverse array of wildlife species than either of the adjacent habitats alone. Elk, deer and black bears often frequent edges because the forested stands provide cover whereas the openings provide forage. Edges also provide habitat conditions conducive for nest parasites (e.g., cowbirds), invasive species and nest predators (e.g., great horned owls). Consequently increased fragmentation can adversely affect a variety of species including neo-tropical migratory birds as well as increase risks from invasive species. When evaluating effects of fragmentation, landscape conditions such as the amount of intact forest habitat and nonforest habitat need to be considered. Threatened and Endangered Species Canada Lynx Methodology The Helena National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan was amended in March 2007 by the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD) (USDA Forest Service 2007b). This amendment established management direction to conserve and promote the recovery of the Canada lynx, by reducing or eliminating adverse effects from land management activities on NFS lands, while preserving the overall multiple use direction in existing plans. This management direction incorporated new science on lynx and was based on recommendations in the Lynx Conservation Strategy Assessment (LCAS) (Ruediger et al. 2000). The NRLMD avoids or reduces the potential for projects proposed under Forest Plans to adversely affect lynx through a suite of standards and guidelines that promote and conserve the habitat conditions needed to produce adequate snowshoe hare (lynx primary prey) densities to sustain lynx home ranges, and thus sustain lynx populations. The project area is identified as occupied core lynx habitat, as well as lynx critical habitat. Therefore, all applicable standards and guidelines in the NRLMD that apply to treatments are addressed in the analysis for the two LAUs included in the project area. Modeling of lynx habitat components was done at the landscape scale and used the best information available. The process used for modeling the different lynx habitat components can be found in the project file and used categories for lynx habitat structure described in the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service Biological Opinion (BO) (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b) and NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). Mapped lynx habitat was updated for this project in 2012 and lynx habitat estimates and maps were derived from R1-VMAP and Pfister et al. (1977). Methodologies and assumptions associated with this data are described in; Pfister et al. 1977, R1 Multi-level Vegetation Classification System and its Relationship to Inventory Data, the Region 1 Existing Vegetation Map Products (2009) and the Eastside R1-VMAP Accuracy Assessment (2010). Because LAU habitat has been affected by recent wildfire and other landscape-level influences, direct and indirect effects are evaluated by LAU, whereas cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined LAU boundaries. Species Status and Biology The population, distribution, life history, habitat status and recovery objectives for Canada lynx in Region 1 are detailed in Ruggiero et al. (1999), Ruediger et al. (2000), USDI Fish and Wildlife Service (2006) and USDI Fish and Wildlife Service (2007b). The following is a brief summary of lynx habitat preferences and biology. Lynx are highly specialized predators of snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus) and habitat can generally be described as moist boreal forests that have cold, snowy winters and a snowshoe hare prey base (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2006). The predominant vegetation of boreal forests is conifer trees, primarily spruce (Picea spp.) and fir (Abis spp.), and in the contiguous United States, the boreal forest transitions to subalpine forest in the West (Agee 2000 in Ruggiero et al. 1999). Snow conditions also determine the distribution of lynx (Ruggiero et al. 1999) as lynx are adapted for hunting snowshoe hares and surviving in areas that have cold winters and deep, fluffy snow for extended periods. These adaptations provide lynx a competitive advantage over potential competitors such as bobcats (Lynx rufus) and coyotes (Canis latrans) (Ruediger et al. 2000, Ruggiero et al. 1999, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). Because of the patchiness and temporal nature of high quality snowshoe hare habitat, lynx populations require large boreal forest landscapes to ensure that sufficient high-quality snowshoe hare habitat is available at any point in time so that lynx may move freely among patches of suitable habitat and among subpopulations of lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2009). Lynx are highly mobile, and long-distance movement (greater than 60 miles) is characteristic (Aubry et al. 2000 in Ruggiero et al. 1999; USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2009). Lynx disperse primarily when snowshoe hare populations decline. Sub-adults also disperse when prey is abundant and lynx make exploratory movements outside their home range (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2009). Lynx den sites are located where coarse woody debris, such as downed logs and windfalls, provides security and thermal cover for lynx kittens and the amount of structure (e.g., downed, large woody debris) appears to be more important than the age of the forest stand for lynx habitat (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2006). Denning habitat may be located in older regenerating stands or in mature forest where downed woody debris is available. During the winter of 2011/2012 researchers from the rocky Mountain Research Station captured and collared a female lynx denning within the 1988 Canyon creek burn area (Squires 2012). Since no trees were removed and allowed to fall naturally this area supports a high degree of structure and stand regeneration supports a healthy snowshoe hare population. Denning habitat in or near foraging habitat is likely to be most functional and selected by females and multiple nursery sites are often used. Downed logs and overhead cover throughout the home range provides security habitat when kittens are old enough to travel (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). Lynx productivity is highly dependent on the quantity and quality of winter snowshoe hare habitat, which is a limiting factor for lynx persistence. As a result, the term foraging habitat used in this analysis refers to winter snowshoe hare habitat. Winter snowshoe hare habitat may be found in dense young regenerating forests where trees protrude above the snowline and in multi-storied forests where limbs of the overstory trees and understory trees provide horizontal cover. Based on research of the Rocky Mountain Research Station in Montana, in winter, lynx preferentially forage in spruce-fir forests with high horizontal cover, abundant snowshoe hares, deep snow conditions and large diameter trees (Squires et al. 2006). Regenerating lodgepole pine stands also provide good winter hare habitat, particularly when spruce is limited. Primary mortality factors include; predation by mountain lions primarily in the spring and fall (31 percent), starvation primarily in winter (29 percent), unknown factors (22 percent) and trapping/shooting (18 percent) (USDA Forest Service 2007b). Suitable lynx habitat varies greatly depending on the vegetation structure on a site and the amount of cover and forage (i.e., snowshoe hare habitat) provided. The following is a description of the five structural stages for lynx habitat considered in this analysis, which are displayed in Figure 68 and summarized in Table 67. These are collectively referred to as mapped or suitable habitat throughout the analysis. 1. Stand initiation unsuitable - Represents young (less than 15 years old) regenerating stands after stand replacing fire or regeneration harvest. Trees are all about the same age and size and generally do not protrude above the snow. This structural stage does not yet provide winter snowshoe hare habitat. 2. Stand initiation - Represents older (15-40 years old) stand initiation after stand replacing fire or regeneration harvest. Tree size becomes more variable with trees protruding above the snow providing winter forage for snowshoe hares. Sites have enough structure to provide den habitat. 3. Stem Exclusion - Represents relatively even-aged stands with high stem densities and closed canopies that have grown out of reach of snowshoe hares. Competition for sunlight and moisture precludes understory development. Stands generally do not have sufficient dead and down to support denning and do not provide hare habitat. 4. Mid-seral - Represents the successional stage of the stand at more of a midpoint as it moves from bare ground to climax. These stands have greater variability of stand conditions than stand initiation or stem exclusion. Stands may be single story or support more than one age class but understory regeneration is not dense enough to provide winter snowshoe hare habitat. Developmental stages included in this habitat classification range from young multistoried stands to single storied mature stands with little or no understory development. This habitat type may provide denning habitat if sufficient coarse woody debris is present. 5. Multi-storied -Represents stands of varying ages with three or more layers. Young multi-storied forest is generally not winter snowshoe hare habitat because only limited understory development is within reach of hares. Mature and old multistoried stands provide snowshoe hare habitat if the understory is dense enough to provide cover and forage, and is within reach of hares. These stands may provide denning habitat if sufficient large woody debris is present. Structural Stage/Habitat Description Contribution to Lynx Habitat Stand Initiation Unsuitable May provide den habitat if sufficient structure is present. Not winter snowshoe hare habitat. After a stand-replacing fire or regeneration harvest, new seedlings establish and develop. A single-story layer of shrubs, tree seedlings and saplings. Is considered unsuitable for the first 15 after a disturbance because the trees and shrubs are not tall enough to protrude above the snow. May provide denning habitat.   Stand initiation Winter Snowshoe Hare (foraging) and den habitat Becomes winter snowshoe hare habitat after about 15 years as young trees protrude above the snow and provide cover. Provides winter foraging and den habitat.   Stem Exclusion Limited understory because little light reaches the forest floor. Not winter hare or den habitat Single storied  Structural Stage/Habitat Description Contribution to Lynx Habitat stand. Little dead and down material.   Mid-seral Crowns too high to provide cover. Limited dead and down material. Generally not winter snowshoe hare habitat because only a limited understory developed within the reach of snowshoe hares. Denning habitat if there are piles of coarse woody debris.   Multi-storied Habitat Understory Re-initiation As the forest ages, some overstory trees begin to die or are removed, making openings where a new generation of understory trees can grow in a multi-storied condition. Winter snowshoe hare habitat if the understory is dense enough to provide cover and forage, and is within reach of hares. Denning habitat if there are piles of coarse woody material. Winter snowshoe hare (foraging) and den habitat.  Old Multi-storied Some old forests develop a multi-storied structure with an understory. Winter snowshoe hare habitat if understory is dense enough to provide cover and forage, and is within reach of hares. Denning habitat because it generally provides plenty of large coarse woody debris. Structural Stage/Habitat Description Contribution to Lynx Habitat Winter snowshoe hare (foraging) and den habitat  Description of different structural stages and their contribution to lynx forage and den habitat conditionsFigure 68. Description of different structural stages and their contribution to lynx forage and den habitat conditions21 21 Taken with some modification from figure 3-2, Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction, FEIS, volume 1, pages 146.147 Lynx Project Area Habitat The project area is within identified lynx core and occupied habitat as well as designated critical habitat. Core habitat was identified in September, 2005 when the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service issued the Recovery Plan Outline for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population Segment of Lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2005). The document identified critical habitat designation until a draft recovery plan is completed, and also served as an interim strategy and guide to recovery efforts. Core areas represent lands with the strongest long-term evidence of lynx persistence (NRLMD FEIS 2007). Identified core habitat includes all National Forest System lands on the Helena National Forest north of Highway 12. The Helena National Forest supports occupied and unoccupied lynx habitat (USDA Forest Service and USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2006). Occupied habitat was jointly identified by the USFWS and Forest Service in May 2006 as a component of the May 2005 Canada Lynx Conservation Agreement (USDA Forest Service and USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2006). Occupied habitat is identified as a subset of “mapped lynx habitat.” Criteria for identifying occupied habitat included: at least two verified lynx sightings since 1999 (unless verified as transients), or evidence of reproduction. For the HNF all mapped lynx habitat within the identified core habitat area north of Highway 12 was identified as “occupied.” Some HNF lands south of Highway 12 and outside identified core habitat were also mapped as occupied, while the remaining lands south of Highway 12 are identified as unoccupied. Lynx critical habitat was designated on March 25, 2009 when the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service published the Revised Designation of Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population Segment of the Canada Lynx: Final Rule (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2009). The project area includes two LAUs including Blackfoot (BL)-07 in the west and BL-08 in the east. The ownership, lynx habitat and road density of each LAU are displayed in table 66, whereas mapped lynx habitat is summarized by LAU in table 67 and displayed in Figure 69. Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management direction applies to “occupied” or mapped lynx habitat, whereas critical habitat applies to all NFS lands, mapped or not. Table 66. Lynx analysis unit ownership and habitat LAU Ownership Lynx Habitat Total Landscape Patterns PVT NFS Mapped Non-lynx Habitat Ac % Ac % Ac % Ac % Acres  BL-07 478 2 26,184 98 17,632 66 9,030 34 26,662 Large blocks of connected suitable hare habitat throughout the LAU. Road Density 2.8 mi/mi2. BL-08 197 1 27,352 99 21,421 78 6,128 22 27,549 Unsuitable winter hare habitat in the north and east due to recent wildfires. Large blocks of well-connected suitable hare habitat in the south and west. Road Density 1.9 mi/mi2.  Table 67. Mapped lynx habitat Lynx Habitat Lynx Analysis Units BL-7 BL-8 Acres Percent Acres Percent Stand Initiation Unsuitable 331 1 7,864 28 Stand Initiation 1,312 5 659 3 Mid-seral 7,431 28 9,014 33 Stem Exclusion 156 <1 373 1 Multi-storied 8,402 32 3,511 13 Total Mapped Lynx Habitat 17,632 66 21,421 78 While mapped lynx habitat is abundant within both LAUs, available winter foraging habitat varies. For example, while 78 percent of BL-08 provides lynx habitat, due to several recent (since 2003) wildfires, winter foraging habitat only occurs on 15 percent of the LAU. Available winter foraging habitat in BL-08 is widely scattered, with little interspersed with multi-storied habitat. Conversely, winter foraging habitat within BL-07 is better connected and interspersed throughout the LAU (figure 69). While BL-07 contains less total lynx habitat, due to past regeneration harvest, it contains a larger component of stand initiation hare habitat, as well as almost three times the amount of multi-stored forging habitat. Due to recent MPB mortality, levels of DWD and available denning habitat have increased within both LAUs. While more concentrated mortality generally occurs in the southern portion of the project area, DWD has increased across the landscape.  Title: Existing project area lynx habitat by LAUFigure 69. Existing project area lynx habitat by LAU  Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) The Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA 2003) defines “at risk” communities or Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) as (1) communities or lands that are in the vicinity of NFS lands that are at high risk from wildfire, or (2) lands in which conditions are conducive to a large-scale wildland fire event for which a significant threat to human life or property exists as a result of a wildland fire. The WUI as defined by HFRA is discussed here because treatments are proposed with the WUI to reduce potential for wildland fire to at risk communities and because the NRLMD provides specific direction related to treatment of snowshoe hare habitat within a WUI (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007a). In response to direction provided by HFRA (HFRA 2003), the tri-county fire working group, which is composed of representatives from Broadwater, Jefferson and Lewis & Clark counties developed the 2010 Regional Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP).This plan identified the WUI as the area within 4 miles of interface communities that possess a population density exceeding 250 people per square mile (USDA Forest Service 2012d). The plan also assigned the following wildfire risk categories for lands within the WUI; lands within 1 mile of an at risk community were assigned a very high wildfire risk, 2 miles were considered high risk, 3 miles moderate risk and 4 miles low risk. Lands beyond 4 miles are outside the WUI. Additionally, lands with a high or very high risk are sometimes referred to as the 2-mile zone. Due to decades of fires suppression, concentrated MPB mortality and elevated fuel conditions, approximately 68 percent of the Stonewall project area currently contains conditions that are likely to create flame lengths that cannot be effectively controlled through direct attack and 32 percent of the project area contains conditions conducive to creating a crown fire. Also local fire manager’s state that a significant fire spread on the HNF is generally due to spotting and wind-driven crown fires, as evidence by the 2003 Snow Talon Fire adjacent to the project area (USDA FS 2012d). Because of these conditions there are private lands within the tri-county WUI with residences and other structures within and immediately adjacent to the project area that are outside the 2-mile zone, but were considered to be at risk from wildland fire by the Stonewall Interdisciplinary Team. As a result, some treatment is proposed in winter snowshoe hare habitat that falls outside the 2-mile WUI, but meets the definition of an at risk community as defined by HFRA. Approximately 43 percent of BL-07 and 59 percent of BL-08 falls within the tri-county WUI displayed in Figure 70.  Title: Stonewall Lynx LAU – Tri-County WUIFigure 70. Stonewall Lynx LAU – Tri-County WUI One hundred percent of the timber harvest and over 60 percent of the burning proposed under both action alternatives occurs within the tri-county WUI. Also, there is no winter hare habitat proposed for treatment outside the WUI. Grizzly Bear Methodology and Process The Stonewall project area occurs within the Northern Continental Divide Grizzly Bear Ecosystem (NCDE) grizzly recovery area. The analysis presented is based on management direction provided for the recovery area, as well as Forest Plan direction for lands within and outside the NCDE, which is summarized below. Forest Plan Direction and Access Management The Forest Plan (1986) provides direction and guidelines for the management and conservation of grizzly bear habitat. This direction is described in the Forestwide Goals (FP-II/1), Forestwide Objectives (FP II/4), Forestwide Standards (FP II/17, 19), Individual Management Area direction (FP III/56, 59, 60), Forest Plan Monitoring Requirements (FP IV/8) Forest Plan, Resolution of Issues and Concerns and Guidelines for Management of Grizzly Bear Habitat. The moving windows analysis, which measures the exact density of roads is used to identify the amount of secure habitat within a Bear Management Unit (BMU) using three criteria including; 1) Total Motorized Road Density (TMRD), 2) Open Motorized Road Density (OMRD) and 3) Core habitat. Each BMU and subunit is evaluated against these three criteria to determine if they meet the standards or are in a degraded condition. The Forest identified all lands within the recovery zone as either Management Situation (MS) 1 or 2, which are adapted from the guidelines developed for the Yellowstone Ecosystem. Lands outside the recovery zone include MS 3, 4 and 5, although only MS 1 and 2 lands are formally designated in the Forest Plan. The following is a description of MS 1 and 2 lands: · Management Situation 1 – This area contains grizzly population centers and habitat components needed for survival and recovery of the species. Grizzly habitat maintenance and improvement, and grizzly and human conflict minimization will receive the highest priority and management decisions will favor the needs of the grizzly bear over other land uses (USDA Forest Service 1986). The probability is very great that major federal activities or programs may affect the grizzly. · Management Situation 2 – The area lacks distinct grizzly population centers. Highly suitable habitat does not generally occur, although some grizzly habitat components exist and grizzlies may be present occasionally. Habitat maintenance and improvement, and grizzly and human conflict minimization may be, in some cases, important but not the most important management considerations. The effects of major Federal activities or programs on the conservation and recovery of the species are not generally predictable. In addition to the above management situations descriptions, the Helena National Forest uses the following information for managing grizzly habitat. 6. Coordination dates for grizzly habitat use are: . Spring habitat (concentrated use areas ) – April 1 to June 30 . Breeding areas (May 1 to July 15). . Alpine feeding areas (July 1 to September 15. . Subalpine fir/whitebark pine habitats (August 1 to November 30). . Denning habitat – October 15 to March 31. 7. Maintain existing seasonal grizzly habitat use in constituent elements and habitat components. 8. Coordinate man’s activities using the measures listed or discussed in “Rocky Mountain Front Grizzly Bear Monitoring and Investigation” (Aune et al. 1984) as appropriate to the habitats and grizzly use on the Helena National Forest. Appendix E of the Forest Plan provides direction for grizzly bear management outside the recovery zone and includes guidance for identifying grizzly bear habitat that is not currently inventoried and to help determine levels of bear activity from which to base management (USDA Forest Service 1986, pp. E/1-E/2). Management guidelines apply to areas of known grizzly bear activity, including those within portions of the project area. However currently there are no known grizzly bear biological activity centers (BAC) in the distribution zone, as defined in appendix E of the Forest Plan. Species Status and Biology The grizzly bear was listed as threatened throughout its range in the lower 48 states on July 28, 1975. The Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan was approved in 1982, updated in 1990 and 1992, and revised in 1993 (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1993). Seven grizzly bear ecosystems were identified for recovery to be completed. Five of the seven ecosystems are currently occupied. One of these, the Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem (NCDE) occurs in part on the Helena National Forest. The Stonewall Project area is located in the southern most extension of the NCDE grizzly bear recovery zone. The overall goal of the Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan is to remove the grizzly bear from threatened status in each of the occupied or reintroduced ecosystems in the 48 contiguous United States. Grizzly bears are considered habitat generalists, using a broad spectrum of habitats. They are opportunistic feeders and will prey or scavenge on almost any available food; grizzly bear movements are determined largely by their search for food. For example, upon emergence from the den in the early spring, grizzlies move to lower elevations and drainage bottoms in search of plants that are greening up. Throughout the late spring and early summer they move towards higher elevations, often following the snow line as food becomes available. Spring habitat tends to be at lower elevations, therefore, increased potential exists for conflict between bears and humans in these areas. In addition to being utilized for feeding, riparian zones are also heavily used by grizzlies for travel corridors (Moss and LeFrance 1987 in USDA Forest Service 2005). Coniferous forest cover is very important to grizzly bears. Ninety percent of aerial radio relocations of 46 radio-collared grizzlies were in forest cover too dense to observe the bear. Dense forests are also important for thermal cover, hiding cover, and day beds; most beds are located within 6 feet of a tree. The importance of open grassy parks with coniferous forest cover has also been documented (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1993). Grizzly bear habitat is best described in terms of the availability of large tracts of relatively undisturbed land that provides some level of security from humans (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1993). Effective habitat is often described in terms of core habitat or areas free of motorized access during the non-denning period. Open and total road densities are also important measurements in determining core areas and understanding the extent of habitat security for bears (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1993). The Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1993) indicates the most important element in grizzly bear recovery is securing adequate effective habitat. This is a reflection of an area's ability to support grizzly bears based on the quality of the habitat and the type/amount of human disturbance in the area. Controlling and directing motorized access is one of the most important tools in achieving habitat effectiveness and managing grizzly bear recovery (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1993). Analysis Area Grizzly bears are the largest, most wide-ranging forest carnivore in western Montana. The needs of grizzly are met at the Forest level and through management and maintenance of Bear Management Units (BMUs), which help ensure the conservation of this species. The Stonewall Project area is included in the Landers Fork Bear Management Unit and includes portions of the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units. The analysis for grizzly involves a multi-scale assessment. Direct and indirect effects are evaluated across the 24,000 acre project area. This area was selected because it includes all treatment units as well as adjacent habitat that might affect use of the area by bear. Cumulative effects are evaluated across a larger area that includes: lands affected by recent wildfires within the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units, recovery lands between the project area and the Scapegoat Wilderness to the north, and lands outside the recovery area that are utilized by bear to access the Blackfoot River and lands to the south. The cumulative effect area totals approximately 89,200 acres. In addition, Total and Open Motorized Road Densities (TMRD and OMRD) and Security Core habitat are assessed across the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units as a whole. Grizzly Bear Habitat The Helena National Forest manages more than 76 percent of the land within the Arrastra Mountain and Red Mountain subunits. Table 68 summarizes the status of these lands within the project and cumulative effect areas. The recovery zone occupies 91 percent of the cumulative effects area and 97 percent of the project area. Lands outside the recovery zone include those that connect the project area with the Blackfoot River to the south, as well as private lands within each sub-unit. Management Situation 1 lands include high quality habitat that adjoins the Scapegoat Wilderness, which occurs on approximately 10 percent of the project area recovery zone, whereas over 85 percent of the project area occurs as Management Situation 2 lands. Modeled den and core habitat within the project area are discussed below and summarized in table 69. Modeled den habitat is not available for the entire cumulative effects area. Table 68. Project area bear management units Grizzly Bear Habitat Status Project Area (24,005 ac) Cumulative Effect Area (89, 216 ac) Acres % Acres % Arrastra Mountain Sub-unit 17,616 732 36,931 41 · Management Situation 1 2,264 9 3,187 4 · Management Situation 2 15,101 63 29,361 33 · Lands not Designated (private) 251 1 4,383 4 Red Mountain Sub-unit 5,833 242 44,571 50 · Management Situation 1 14 <1 6,854 8 · Management Situation 2 5,819 24 25,618 28 · Lands not Designated (private) 0 0 12,099 14 Occupied Lands Outside Recovery Zone1 506 2 7,714 9 1 - % of project and cumulative effect area 2 - % of project area BMU Stonewall Vegetation Management Project – Chapter 3 – Wildlife 273 Table 69. Grizzly core and den habitat within the project area Den/Core Habitat Arrastra Mountain sub-unit Red Mountain sub-unit Ac %1 Ac %1 Den Habitat 2,814 16 1,234 21 · Potential 2,635 15 1,232 21 · High Potential 179 1 2 <1 Core Habitat 7,727 44 2,625 45 Den Habitat The Forest Travel Management Biological Assessment (USDA Forest Service 2008c) summarizes the process used to identify modeled grizzly bear habitat identified in table 69. The parameters used identified habitat most commonly used by denning bears including higher elevation slopes sufficiently steep and shaded to retain snow throughout the denning season, which also contain soil types conducive to den excavation and maintaining den structural integrity. These parameters are consistent with denning habitat mapping efforts and finding of grizzly denning studies within the NCDE. Modeled potential denning habitat includes lands greater than 6,200 feet in elevation with slopes between 35 and 100 percent. High potential habitat includes areas with north, northeast or northwest aspects that are greater than 6,200 feet and have slopes between 35 and 100 percent. Grizzly bear denning habitat occurs at upper elevations scattered across the project area. While there is little high potential habitat, potential den habitat occurs on 15 and 21 percent of Arrastra and Red Mountain, respectively. This includes scattered parcels in the head of Lincoln Gulch and larger blocks in the vicinity of Stonewall Mountain and lands to the west. Potential denning habitat also occurs on over 40,000 acres north of the proposed action area in the Scapegoat Wilderness. Of this, approximately 14,000 acres occur as high potential den habitat. Core Habitat and Access Management Within the Landers Fork BMU, road densities are managed in accordance with the Flathead National Forest Amendment 19, which considers parameters of open route density (OMRD), total route density (TMRD) and security core habitat. These measures are collectively used to conserve grizzly bears within the NCDE using established guidelines. Existing OMRD outside the recovery zone are managed to provide secure areas for big game and grizzly bear. Table 70 summarizes existing TMRD, OMRD and security core habitat for the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units. Table 70. Arrastra and Red Mountain bear subunit road density and core Subunit OMRD TMRD Core1 Percent of Area Meeting Guideline Arrastra Mountain 17 21 73 Red Mountain 25 24 56 Guidelines TMRD <= 19 percent of each subunit with >2.0 miles/mi2 OMRD <=19 percent of each subunit with >1.0 miles/mi2 Core >=68 percent of the subunit considered core 1 –Greater than 2500 contiguous acres, >=0.3 mi. from motorized route, no roads or trails receive high intensity use. While total road density within the Arrastra Mountain subunit currently falls below the recommended guideline of 19 percent, it exceeds guidelines for open road density and core habitat. The Red Mountain subunit does not meet any of the IGBC guidelines and is currently considered to be in a “degraded condition.” Approximately 45 percent of project area habitat within each sub-unit occurs as core habitat and includes a 3,800-acre block in the east, a 2,700-acre block in the west and a 3,800-acre block in the north-central portion of the project area. The north-central block of core within the Arrastra Mountain unit connects to a larger block of core habitat in the Scapegoat Wilderness (>100,000 acres). Project area core habitat in the Red Mountain sub-unit and the southwestern block in the Arrastra Mountain unit are also part of a 6,000- to 7,000-acre block that extends outside the project area within the cumulative effect boundary. Also approximately 64 percent of the modeled den habitat within the project area occurs within core habitat. North American Wolverine Methodology and Process Data for wolverines are derived from the Montana Natural Heritage Program (Montana NHP 2011) and from snow-tracking surveys (Wild Things Unlimited 2011). Wolverine natal denning habitat was modeled on Hillis and Kennedy (2003) and focused on areas of late season snow persistence. Special habitat requirements for wolverine include large areas of unroaded security habitat, secure denning habitat and available ungulate carrion in winter. Also more than any other factor, wolverines are susceptible to mortality through hunting and trapping and human caused disturbances near den sites (Hornocker and Hash 1981; Copeland 1996). Habitat and potential effects to wolverine are evaluated by looking at the availability of remote habitat, potential effects to suitable den habitat, and changes in human access and ungulate availability. Wolverines range widely across the landscape in search of suitable habitat and prey. Given their propensity to travel long distances, direct, indirect and cumulative effects are analyzed across the combined boundary, which totals 101,977 acres. This area was selected because it is large enough to assess home range considerations, and evaluate landscape-level effects. It includes preferred remote habitat conditions and lands affected by recent wildfires. Species Status and Biology The wolverine is now a proposed threatened species, per findings of the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 50 CFR Part 17, 78 FR 7864, Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants: Threatened Status for the Distinct Population Segment of the North American Wolverine Occurring in the Contiguous United States, dated February 4, 2013, found at http://federalregister.gov/a/2013-0148. It has a global rank of G4, and a state rank of S3. Wolverine is a solitary and highly mobile species that tends to inhabit remote areas and occurs at relatively low densities (Banci 1994). Wolverines range widely from subalpine talus slopes to big game winter ranges, occupying higher ranges in the summer and riparian habitats in the spring. Ruggiero et al (1999) found that wolverines used higher elevations in the snow-free season to avoid high temperatures and human activity. In the northern Rocky Mountains, wolverines make extensive use of coniferous forest (Hornocker and Hash 1981). While wolverines are generally regarded as wilderness animals, they may include clear-cut areas in their home ranges (Hornocker and Hash, 1981) and are reported to scavenge around northern Canadian communities (Banci 1994). Wolverines exhibit some fidelity to particular areas for months or years, however, the species is thought to have a flexible behavioral system when changing environmental conditions (e.g., food supply), that supersedes boundary considerations (Hatler 1989). Wolverine habitat is best defined in terms of adequate year-round food supplies in large sparsely inhabited areas, rather than in terms of particular types of topography or plant associations. No particular habitat components or habitat management techniques can presently be singled out for wolverine and success of wolverine may relate to the availability of large areas of remote, rugged uplands that are difficult to access by humans (Hatler 1989). Wolverines occur in low densities in all places they have been studied (Ruggiero et al. 1994). This is generally attributed to naturally low reproductive rates and delayed sexual maturity of the species. Wolverines are opportunistic feeders and consume a variety of foods depending on availability. They primarily scavenge carrion, but also prey on small mammals and birds, and eat fruits, berries and insects (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2010). In both Montana and Idaho, big game carrion appears to be the major food source with snowshoe hare, squirrels, and small mammals making up the rest of their diet (Hornocker and Hash 1981). Large mammal carrion is an important dietary component, particularly in winter when other prey is scarce (Banci 1994, Pasitschniak and Lariviere 1995) and they rely heavily on the presence of other predators. Wolverines will also search for caches made by itself, other wolverines, or other carnivores during the winter. Female wolverines use two kinds of dens for reproduction. They use natal (birthing) dens to give birth and raise kits early postpartum, prior to weaning. These are excavated in snow and persistent, stable snow greater than 5 feet in depth appears to be a requirement because it provides security for offspring and buffers cold winter temperatures (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). In Montana, natal dens occur above 7,874 feet and are located on north aspects in avalanche debris typically in alpine habitats near timberline (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). Prior to weaning, females may move kits to one or multiple alternate den sites, referred to as maternal dens. The movement of kits from natal to maternal dens may be a response by the female to den disturbance, better food availability in the new location, predation risk, or deteriorating den conditions in the natal den (Magoun and Copeland 1998). Post-weaning dens are called rendezvous sites. These dens may be used through early July. Females leave their kits at rendezvous sites while foraging, and return periodically to provide food for the kits. These sites are characterized by natural (unexcavated) cavities formed by large boulders, downed logs (avalanche debris), and snow (Inman et al. 2007). They may also occur in talus or coniferous riparian zones. Wolverine home ranges are generally extremely large and the availability and distribution of food is likely the primary factor in determining wolverine movements and home range. Home ranges of adult wolverines range from less than 38.5 square miles to 348 square miles (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2010). Home ranges of adult males and females overlap extensively with the range of one male covering the ranges of two to six females, which is considered one reproductive unit. Wittmer et al. (1998) suggested long-term conservation of wolverine can be achieved through maintenance of large, remote areas of habitat and engaging in management activities that do not decrease ungulate prey density. Threats Wolverines have few natural predators although both interspecific and intraspecific mortalities have been documented. Wolverines are susceptible to mortality through hunting and trapping and human caused disturbances near den sites (Banci 1994, Hornocker and Hash 1981, Copeland 1996). Montana is the only state where wolverine trapping is still legal. However the State of Montana contains most of the habitat and wolverines that exist in the current range of the DPS, and regulates trapping to reduce the impact of harvest on wolverine populations. Based on the best scientific and commercial information available, the USFWS concluded that that level of trapping and incidental mortality in Idaho and Montana by itself would not be a threat to the wolverine DPS. However harvest, when combined with the likely effects of climate change (described below) may contribute to the likelihood that the wolverine would become extirpated in the future (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). Wolverine naturally occur at low densities (Hornocker and Hash 1981, Copeland 1996) and within the area known to currently have wolverine populations, relatively few wolverines can coexist due to their naturally low population densities. Given their natural limitations on population density, it is likely historical wolverine populations were low (Inman et al 2007) and that the northern Rocky Mountains where populations currently exist may not be substantially lower than densities prior to European settlement (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). It is estimated that wolverine habitat in the contiguous United States supports approximately 250 to 300 wolverines. However habitat is shrinking and it is likely to continue to shrink with increasing climate change (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). In their proposed rule to list the wolverine as threatened (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013), it was determined that the impacts of climate change constitute a threat to the contiguous U.S. DPS of the wolverine. Wolverine populations in the remaining U.S. range appear to be at numbers so low that their continued existence could be at risk. These risks come from three main factors: (1) small total population size, 2) effective population below that needed to maintain genetic diversity and demographic stability, and 3) fragmented nature of wolverine habitat in the contiguous United States that results in smaller, isolated island patches separated by unsuitable habitats. Other threats are secondary and only rise to the level of threats to the DPS as they may work in concert with climate changes to affect the third risk factor; habitat. In their finding on the wolverine DPS, the USFWS discussed a variety of impacts to wolverine habitat including: (1) climate change, (2) human use and disturbance, (3) dispersed recreational activities, (4) infrastructure development, (5) transportation corridors, and (6) land management. The primary impact of climate change on wolverines is expected to be changes to the availability and distribution of wolverine habitat. North American Wolverine Project Area Habitat and Documentation The Stonewall combined boundary is near the eastern extent of this species range in Montana (MNHP 2011). While foraging habitat is widespread, natal denning habitat is restricted to more remote upper elevation lands in the northern half of the analysis area, which contains approximately 12,500 acres of modeled habitat. This den habitat is the southern extension of a 35,000-acre block of natal denning habitat that largely occurs in the Scapegoat Wilderness to the north. Over 23,000 acres of wildfire have burned approximately 3,000 acres of natal denning habitat within the analysis area since 2003. Generally, much of the southern half of the analysis area is at lower elevations, contains less persistent snow cover, is more heavily roaded and characterized by year-round human presence. As a result these lands provides primarily foraging habitat. The analysis area contains historical documentation of wolverine and wolverine have been documented periodically adjacent to the area (Montana NHP 2011). More recently a tracking survey was conducted and a baited camera station established in the Cooper Creek drainage during the winter of 2010/2011. While no carnivore visits were recorded by the camera, wolverine tracks were documented during the track survey on January 11, 2011) (Wild Things Unlimited 2011). This documentation occurred at approximately 6,200 feet near the eastern edge of the combined boundary, within lands affected by the Snow Talon fire. Sensitive and Federal Candidate Species Gray Wolf Methodologies and Process Wolves are considered highly productive habitat generalists (MFWP 2011a), therefore, risks include primarily a reduction in prey (deer and elk), or mortality associated with increased human interaction and tolerance. There are no known den or rendezvous sites within the Stonewall project area, therefore, wolf habitat for this analysis is evaluated by looking at changes in primary prey species and foraging, the availability of remote and dispersal habitat and the amount of and changes in human access. Elk are considered a primary prey species for wolves, as a result, the analysis of wolf habitat parallels that of elk. Direct and indirect effects are evaluated across the project area, whereas cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary. Species Status and Biology The population distribution, life history, habitat status and recovery objectives for the gray wolf are summarized in the recovery plan (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1987). The legal status of a wolf under the ESA is tied to its location rather than its point of origin. In Montana, wolves are part of the Northern Rocky Mountain Gray Wolf Distinct population Segment (DPS) and have achieved biological recovery under ESA. Consequently on May 5, 2011, wolves that are part of the DPS segment encompassing Idaho, Montana and parts of Oregon, Washington and Utah were delisted under ESA. As a result, the gray wolf is evaluated as a Regionally Sensitive Species. Gray wolves are the largest wild members of the dog family (Canidae), and typically prey on medium and large mammals. Prey species in the Rockies include white-tailed and mule deer, moose, elk, woodland caribou, bighorn sheep, mountain goat, beaver, and snowshoe hare, with small mammals, birds, and large invertebrates sometimes being taken (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2003). Opportunistic feeders, they will also prey on carrion when it is available. Habitat can include forests of all types, rangelands, brush land, steppes, agricultural lands, wetlands, deserts, tundra, and barren ground areas. The gray wolf is territorial in most areas. Territories are defended by howling, scent-marking, and physical defense against wolf interlopers. Territories typically range from 20 mi2 to 214 mi2 (Mech 1970 in Tucker 1988, Peterson 1977 in Tucker 1988). Daily pack movements vary and distances traveled are greater in winter than in summer. Lone wolves cover larger areas than packs and their use areas may overlap two or three pack territories (Mech 1973 in Tucker 1988, Fritts and Mech 1981 in Tucker 1988). Wolves tend to be most active in the early or late evening and travel within their territories at night. Patterns of activity are influenced by weather and season of year. While wolves are generally not considered migratory, they may wander great distances daily, within their home range, predominantly influenced by searching for prey. When reproduction increases population numbers within an area, young adult wolves may disperse to new areas. Wolves may establish “runways” by following the same routes within territories. Vegetative cover affects wolf survival by providing shelter for prey species such as deer and elk, and in general, healthy wolves need little cover (Mech 1970 as cited in Tucker 1988). Wolf dens are used for bearing and protecting pups, and are often abandoned when pups reach 2 months of age. The same den may be used year after year, or different dens may be selected. Pups are sometimes moved from one den to another. Dens may be holes dug in the ground, rock caves and crevices, old beaver lodges, and hollow logs or other ground debris. Den sites are typically located near water, dug in sandy and well-drained soils, and located in a variety of landforms (Mech 1970 as cited in Tucker 1988 and Fritts 1982 in Tucker 1988). Wolves are highly social animals requiring large areas to roam and feed. Key components of wolf habitat include; (1) sufficient, year-round prey base of big game and alternate prey, (2) suitable and somewhat secluded denning and rendezvous sites, and (3) sufficient space with minimal exposure to humans (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1987). Gray Wolf Project Area Habitat and Documentation Wolf habitat within the project area is variable, with more marginal denning habitat occurring in much of the southern portion of the project area due to the density of roads and proximity to human activity. More remote habitat conditions preferred for denning occur in the headwaters of the Lincoln Gulch, Klondike, Yukon and Park Creek drainages. Wolf occurrences have consistently been documented in and around the project area for several years. Most of the occurrences were believed to be those of transient individuals. In the winter of 2008/2009 a pack was verified in the Marcum Mountain area less than 10 miles from the project area. This pack was known to use the Arrastra Creek area, and suspected in the Patterson Prairie area adjacent to the project area. There have not been recent accounts of the pack however; so it is currently not known if they are still established in the area. Although there are no known wolf dens or rendezvous sites, two packs have been documented within the cumulative effects boundary including use by the Arrastra pack in the Beaver Creek drainage and use by the Landers pack on private lands southwest of the project area in the Landers fork drainage. In general, management for wolves is best achieved by maintaining adequate habitat for big game species to provide sufficient prey for wolves and by minimizing wolf/human interactions. Predation of ungulates (i.e., deer and elk) by wolves as well as other predators has been high and MFWP is proposing actions to moderate both wolf and mountain lion densities in the vicinity of the project area (Kolbe 2012). Fisher Methodology and Process Fisher were initially evaluated using the habitat estimates for maintaining viable populations of the Northern Goshawk, Black-backed woodpecker, Flammulated Owl, Pileated Woodpecker, American Marten and Fisher (Samson 2006b), as described in the criteria for wildlife models, Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 2009a). Initially habitat was based on data that estimated anticipated MBP mortality and was identified as summer and winter habitat, based on canopy closure and tree size class. Region 1 revised the fisher model in 2012 (USDA Forest Service 2012f). This effort was based on information from published scientific literature on fishers, especially studies from the Northern Rockies, and on previous habitat modeling efforts by Samson (2006a) and Hills and Lockman (2003). This model identifies two types of habitat including, (1) resting/denning/foraging habitat that includes moist, mesic forests with dense canopies in mid- to late-successional stages, providing the full suite of fisher life history needs, and (2) other foraging habitat or moist, mesic forests with dense canopies including younger successional stages providing foraging opportunities (USDA Forest Service 2012f). Specific parameters in the revised model include; (1) potential climax vegetation preferred by fishers, (2) a minimum canopy closure of 40 percent, (3) tree size class including trees greater than 10 inches d.b.h. for resting/denning/foraging habitat and trees up to 9.9 inches d.b.h. for other foraging habitat and (4) a maximum elevation of 6,500 feet. Small isolated habitat less than 160 acres in size or greater than 600 feet from the nearest existing habitat was eliminated. Habitat estimates from the updated model identified a total of approximately 4,400 acres of widely scattered habitat across mid- to low elevations within the project area. Both models used R1VMAP data and considered changes in habitat due to recent wildfires, The models differed somewhat in that the revised model identified some large blocks of low elevation den/rest/forging habitat in areas where there has been concentrated MPB mortality. So while the revised model (USDA Forest Service 2012d) is used to identify fisher habitat, based on field observation in the project area and estimates of future mortality, it is expected that some lands currently identified as suitable fisher habitat would fall below 40 percent canopy closure in the next 5 to 10 years, making these areas marginally suitable or unsuitable. Fisher tend to select habitat based on structural conditions, therefore, fisher habitat is also evaluated by looking at availability and changes to horizontal (landscape) and vertical (site level) structure, including downed woody debris and large snag availability. Changes to suitable riparian habitat are also assessed because of strong support in the literature for the association of fishers within riparian habitat (USDA Forest Service 2012f). Direct and indirect effects to fisher are evaluated across the project area (24,000 acres), which is large enough to evaluate landscape-level effects at the home range scale. However, in order to evaluate landscape-level influences across all ownerships and assess impacts from recent wildfire, cumulative effects are evaluated on the combined boundary, which exceeds 100,000 acres. Species Status and Biology The State rank for the fisher is S3 (MFWP 2011a), and although they are a Montana State species of concern, they are also classified as a furbearer. As a result it is legally trapped under a limited quota system, allowing for take of seven individuals statewide. Presumed extirpated by the 1920s, until recently fisher populations in Region 1 were thought to be derived from re-introductions that occurred from populations in B.C., Canada, and Minnesota in the 1960s and late 1980s (Vinkey 2003). Genetic testing of fisher in western Montana indicates that Statewide individuals are part of the original population that existed prior to any reintroductions (Vinkey 2003). The home range of fishers varies in size from 4 to 32 square miles; optimum habitat is thought to include mature, moist coniferous forest with a woody debris component, particularly in riparian/forest ecozones in low- to mid-elevation areas that do not accumulate large amounts of snow (Heinemeyer 1993; Ruggiero et al. 1994). A review of fisher research suggests the species uses a diversity of tree age and size class distributions at the patch or stand level that provide sufficient overhead cover (either tree or shrub). Banci (1989) believes the best fisher habitats are multi-aged stands interspersed with small openings containing riparian habitats. Fisher feed on snowshoe hares, porcupines, carrion, squirrels, small mammals and birds (Banci 1989; Powell and Zielinski 1994 in Ruggiero et al. 1994). This diverse diet makes them less vulnerable to shifts in prey abundance than lynx and other predators that rely heavily on one or two prey species. Like marten, fishers avoid large openings (parks, meadows, early seral clearcuts, and burns). Also like other forest carnivores, fishers maintain relatively low population densities and range widely in search of prey and key habitat sites (structurally complex forest) (Banci 1994). Because of their aversion to openings, they seek out forested connections between the key habitats in which they focus activity (Banci 1994). These connecting habitats may consist of a variety of forest formations and seral stages and do not necessarily exhibit the complex structure and prey density of their preferred habitat sites (Heinemeyer and Jones 1994). Forest stands containing or immediately adjacent to riparian areas are important to fishers. The importance of riparian and wetland associated areas was documented by investigators in several areas of North America, including Idaho (Jones 1991) and Montana (Heinemeyer and Jones 1994). In Montana, fishers prefer areas within 600 feet of water (Heinemeyer and Jones 1994). Many have documented that riparian corridors are used extensively as travel corridors (Heinemeyer and Jones 1994), and Jones (1991) suggests that preferred resting habitat and prey are likely more available within forested riparian areas. Fishers appear to select structure rather than forest type—vertical and horizontal complexity, down woody debris, light gaps, and overhead cover. Fishers need structure that leads to high diversity of dense prey populations, as well as desired structure at dense and resting sites (Ruggiero et al. 1994). They also appear to be associated with areas of low snow accumulation—flat areas and bottoms—and avoid mid slopes (Ruggiero et al. 1994). Dense coniferous and mixed coniferous/deciduous forests are preferred and this species is always found in or near forests with continuous overhead cover. Fisher prefers forests with high canopy closure (greater than 80 percent) and avoid areas with low canopy closure (less than 50 percent). Forest stands with low canopy closure were used only if they were adjacent to areas with dense cover (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1983). Documented den sites have occurred in cavities of live and dead trees in forested areas with some structural diversity (i.e., forb/shrub cover, down wood and multiple canopy layers) that maintain a diversity of prey species (Ruggiero et al. 1994). Young are born in early March to mid-April (NatureServe 2011). Region 1 forests contain a total of 4,239,280 acres and 1,882,031 acres of rest/den/foraging and other foraging habitat respectively. As a result regionwide, available fisher habitat is well above any of the minimum threshold amounts reported by Smallwood (1999) or Samson (2006a) and fisher habitat is abundant to support a viable population of fishers. Of the available habitat regionwide, the Helena National Forest contains approximately 4 percent or 230,381 acres of habitat (USDA Forest Service 2012f). Fisher Project Area Habitat and Documentation The Stonewall Project area is near the southeastern extent of this species range in Montana. Although not documented within the project area, fisher have been documented to the south, north and west of the project area (MNHP 2011), including recent documentation within the Arrastra drainage adjacent to the cumulative effects boundary. As a result, it is likely the project area is utilized by fisher. Alteration of forest structure due to natural or human-caused disturbances can adversely affect habitat for fisher. Much of the project area has been affected by MPB mortality, and considering that open-canopy conditions now predominate in these areas, suitable closed canopy fisher habitat has been reduced across the landscape. Conversely, this mortality has increased the amount of standing dead and DWD available across much of the landscape, including preferred large diameter snags. Using the revised Region 1 model parameters described in the methodology section, suitable fisher habitat currently occurs on approximately 4,400 acres within the project area. Of this, approximately 3,050 acres occur as rest/den/foraging habitat and approximately 1,350 acres occur as foraging only habitat. This existing habitat has been greatly reduced in the last 5-10 years due to MPB mortality and is therefore scattered across the project area. It is expected that existing habitat would be further reduced due to ongoing and anticipated future mortality. So while levels of DWD have been increasing, canopy cover and suitable fisher habitat has been reduced across the landscape. As a result, it is expected that the project area is less likely to be utilized for denning and would likely be utilized primarily for foraging or dispersal. Townsend’s Big-Eared Bat Methodology and Process Data presented on Townsend’s big-eared bat are based on available research and surveys from Montana (Hendricks and Maxell 2005; MNHP 2011; USDA Forest Service 2011c). The project area lacks suitable hibernacula, so effects to this species are evaluated by looking at the availability of, and changes to, foraging habitat. Since this species would be most affected by the structural changes from proposed treatment (i.e., understory and overstory conditions), direct, indirect and cumulative effects are evaluated across the project area. This area is also large enough to evaluate landscape-level changes in habitat. Species Status and Biology A year-round resident, the State rank for the Townsend’s big-eared bat is S2 (MNHP 2011). It is considered at risk because of very limited and potentially declining population numbers, range or habitat, making it vulnerable to extirpation in the state. The Townsend’s big-eared bat has been documented throughout most of Montana, with the exception of the far northeastern corner of the state. They are found at elevations between 1,968 and 7,820 feet. Townsend’s big-eared bats are generally found at low densities across occupied habitats, and Montana is no exception. Only five maternity colonies have been located, ranging in size from less than 20 adult females to an estimated 50-75. The best-known colony is at Lewis and Clark Caverns State Park (approximately 125 miles from the project area), although less than 30 hibernacula have been located, most with just a few hibernating bats (MFWP 2006). Townsend’s big-eared bats are found in mesic to dry conifer forests, ponderosa pine and limber pine woodlands, juniper, mountain mahogany, riparian, and shrub-steppe habitats where suitable roost sites are present. Studies in other states indicate that Townsend’s big-eared bats also forage over wetlands and agricultural areas. Caves and abandoned mines are the primary roost sites through most of the range, although buildings have been used by maternity colonies in the northern, cooler portions of the range. In Montana, four maternity colonies are in natural caves and one is in an abandoned mine (MFWP 2011a). The Townsend’s big-eared bat is a moth specialist with over 90 percent of its diet composed of moths. They forage in edge habitats along streams and woodlands, and within a variety of woodland types. They can travel long distances while foraging, including movements of over 90 miles during a single evening (WBWG 2005). Townsend’s big-eared bats feed on various nocturnal flying insects near the foliage of trees and shrubs, but appear to specialize primarily on small moths. There are reports of gleaning insects from foliage, but most are captured in the air. Townsend’s Big-Eared Bat Project Area Habitat and Documentation While the project area does not contain caves suitable for hibernacula or maternity colonies, Townsend’s big eared bats have been documented from Powell County approximately 30 miles southeast of the project area (USDA Forest Service 2011c). Also suitable foraging habitat occurs at lower elevations. So while the project area lacks hibernacula and roost sites, considering the long distances this species can travels in a single night (WBWG 2005), it is possible that portions of the project area could be utilized for foraging. Bald Eagle Methodology and Analysis Area Because an eagle nest was recently documented south of the project area, the analysis addresses the availability of and changes to eagle nest, roost and foraging habitat. Information used includes forest and district-wide nest observations, state monitoring data and information provided in the Montana Natural Heritage website (MNHP 2011). Potential effects and identification of PDFs were based largely on the 2007 National Bald Eagle Management Guidelines (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007a). Because the combined boundary includes the Beaver Creek eagle nest, as well as foraging habitat along the Blackfoot River, this area was used to evaluate direct, indirect and cumulative effects. Species Status and Biology Until recently the bald eagle was listed as Federally Threatened under the Endangered Species Act. However effective August 8th, 2007, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officially delisted the bald eagle and this species has been added to the Northern Region (R1) sensitive species list. The Forest Service would continue to follow management direction outlined in the Montana Bald Eagle Recovery Plan (USDI-BOC 1994) and this species is also protected under the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. The State rank for the bald eagle is S3, and although it may be abundant in some areas, it is potentially at risk because of limited or decline in numbers, range or habitat. Bald eagles are associated with large bodies of water and major river drainages, which provide most of their foraging opportunities. Wintering habitat may include upland sites, and nesting areas are generally located within larger forested areas near lakes and rivers. In Montana, bald eagles nest in stands containing large trees (greater than 30 inches d.b.h.) with uneven canopy structure, and in direct line of sight of a river or lake generally less than 1-mile away (MFWP 2011a). Nest site selection is dependent upon maximum food availability and minimum disturbance from human activity. Eagles are opportunistic feeders, preying on fish, waterfowl, small mammals and carrion (MNHP 2011). During migration and at wintering sites, eagles tend to concentrate on locally abundant food and often roost communally. General objectives of habitat management for bald eagles in Montana include; maintaining prey bases; maintaining forest stands currently used for nesting, roosting, and foraging; maintaining potential nest habitat; and minimizing disturbances in nesting territories, communal roosts and at feeding sites (MFWP 2011a). Bald Eagle Project Area Habitat and Documentation A new eagle nest was documented in 2011 on private land, approximately 1.5 miles south of the project area in lower Beaver Creek drainage. Also, suitable eagle nest habitat occurs on private and NFS lands within approximately 1 mile of the Blackfoot River. The combined boundary contains approximately 14 miles of suitable foraging/roost habitat along the Blackfoot River, as well as foraging habitat along approximately 25 miles of lower elevation streams in the Beaver Creek, Keep Cool, Lincoln Gulch and Landers Fork drainages. Black-Backed Woodpecker Methodology and Analysis Area The analysis for the black-backed woodpecker (BBW) is based on the northern region model developed by Samson (2006a, 2006b), and the BBW northern region overview (USDA Forest Service 2007c), whereas information from R1-VMAP was used to identify potentially suitable habitat. Also habitat quality is based on work by Russell et al. (2007) and Dudley and Saab (2007), who define “high quality post fire BBW habitat as having the following attributes: a large pre-fire patch size (approximately 200 acres), moderate to high pre-fire canopy cover (40 to 100 percent) and moderate to high burn severity. Data used to evaluate effects to habitat are based on the Black-backed Woodpecker Northern Region Overview – Key Findings and Project Considerations (USDA Forest Service 2007c). Because BBWs appear to be strongly dependent upon 1- to 6-year-old burns (Hutto 1995; Caton 1996; Hitchcock 1996; Saab et al. 2004), and considering that the combined boundary contains over 20,000 acres of recently burned forest, this area was used to evaluate existing habitat, as well as assess direct, indirect and cumulative effects. Species Status and Biology Although the BBW is considered secure with a Global Rank of G5, in Montana it is a species of special concern with a rank of S3 (MNHP 2011). Black-backed woodpeckers are a resident species of Montana, and observations in the state indicate that this species normally does not move outside of its breeding range in the winter (Montana Natural Heritage 2011). The BBW is considered opportunistic and responds to outbreaks of wood-boring beetles (Cerambycidae and Buprestidae) and bark beetles (mountain pine bark beetles, Dendroctus spp.) in conifer forests following windfall, disease, or fire (Samson 2006a). In the Northern Region the BBW is known to use three types of forest habitat including; (1) post-fire areas, (2) areas with extensive bark beetle outbreaks causing widespread tree mortality, and (3) landscapes with a natural range of disturbances resulting from fire and insect use (Samson 2006a). Research has shown that use of post-fire habitat is temporary and that beetle foraging woodpeckers like the BBW rapidly colonize stand-replacing burns within 1 to 2 years after the fire (Saab et al. 2007). However the favorable effects of fire are not long-lasting, and population levels of both the bark beetle and wood-boring beetle drop within 4 to 8 years after a fire depending on location (Werner and Post 1985 in Samson 2006a). This decline results in reduced densities within 5 years post-fire, after which beetle foraging woodpeckers such as the BBW are considered rare (Saab et al. 2007). Even though many studies have shown BBWs to primarily use post fire habitat (Hitchcox 1996; Caton 1996, Hejl and McFadzen 2000, Powell 2000, Kotliar et al. 2002 in USDA Forest Service 2007c), some studies have found these woodpeckers in areas without recent fire. For example, both Bonnot (2006 in USDA Forest Service 2007c) and Goggans et al. (1988 in USDA Forest Service 2007c) found BBWs within extensive mountain pine beetle outbreaks that occurred in the absence of fires. In an effort to document the use of BBW in beetle-killed areas, in 2006 the Avian Science Center and Region 1 (2006c) focused survey efforts for BBWs in beetle outbreak areas (Cilimburg et al. 2006). Survey areas were located on the Lolo, Bitterroot, Helena, Beaverhead-Deerlodge and Nez Perce NFs, and 428 point counts were conducted. No BBW were found in beetle outbreak areas during these point counts in Montana. There were two detections of BBW on the Nez Perce NF in Idaho, which gave a detection rate of BBW at 0.46 percent of the points in beetle outbreak areas. A concurrent survey of post-fire areas had a detection rate of BBW at 7.1 percent of the points. Even though few BBW were located in bark beetle-infested stands in Region 1, these stands may still provide some secondary habitat. Samson (2006b) estimated that 29,405 acres of habitat are needed to maintain a viable population of BBWs across Region 1. Dead and dying trees resulting primarily from MPB are widespread across the Helena National Forest. Even though these dead trees do not provide the abundant food source that post-fire stands produce, this bark beetle habitat alone greatly exceeds the amount of habitat that Samson (2006b) estimated was needed to maintain BBW viability across the entire region. Suitable post-fire BBW habitat currently occurs on over 200,000 acres of the Helena National Forest. Of this, almost 23,000 acres occur within or immediately adjacent to the Stonewall project area. While some of these lands have been salvaged, considering the availability of burned habitat regionwide, adequate habitat exists across the landscape to maintain viable BBW populations (Samson 2006a). Black-Backed Woodpecker Project Area Habitat and Documentation Black-backed woodpeckers have been observed in the Snow Talon Fire area that contains approximately 22,800 acres of post-fire high-quality BBW habitat, as defined by Russell et al. (2007). In addition, lower quality foraging habitat exists in concentrated areas of MPB mortality, including over 2,000 acres that have experienced tree mortality of 40 or greater trees per acre (USDA Forest Service 2012a). As a result, and considering that BBWs have been documented adjacent Snow Talon Fire area, the Stonewall Project area is considered occupied BBW habitat. Flammulated Owl Methodology and Analysis Area Flammulated owl documentation is based on data derived from the Montana Natural Heritage Database (2011), and the USDA Forest Service Natural Resource Management Wildlife Database (2011c). Habitat is based on information provided in “A Conservation Assessment of the Northern Goshawk, Black-backed woodpecker, Flammulated Owl and Pileated Woodpecker in the Northern Region, USDA Forest Service” (Samson 2006a), “Habitat Estimates for Maintaining Viable Populations of the Northern Goshawk, Black-backed Woodpecker, Flammulated Owl, Pileated Woodpecker, American Marten and Fisher” (Samson 2006b), and “Criteria for Wildlife Models Helena National Forest” (USDA Forest Service 2009a). Habitat estimates and maps are derived from R1-VMAP, R1-Summary Database and Helena National Forest Summary Database. Methodologies and assumptions associated with this data are described in “Region One Vegetation Council Classification Algorithms” (USDA Forest Service 2006a) , “R1 Grid Intensification using CSE Protocols – Field Procedures” (USDA Forest Service 2007d), “R1 Multi-level Vegetation Classification, Mapping, Inventory, and Analysis System” (USDA Forest Service 2007e), and “FIA Field Guides, Methods, and Procedures” (available at http://fia.fs.fed.us/library/field-guides-methods-proc/). This species relies heavily on site-specific structural conditions that may be affected by treatment or lack of treatment. As a result, and considering that this area is large enough to evaluate landscape-level conditions that may affect use, direct and indirect effects are evaluated across the project area. However, because the combined area also contains available habitat and is closer to recent documentation, cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary. Species Status and Biology The flammulated owl has a conservation status rank of G4 (NatureServe 2011) and this species is considered uncommon, but usually widespread. The Montana Partner in Flight (PIF) Plan (2000) considers the flammulated owl a Priority Level 1 species; or a species in which Montana has a clear obligation to implement conservation action (PIF 2000). The flammulated owl is poorly monitored in Montana, but known to have a preference for open dry forest conditions. It is considered a species potentially at risk because of limited and potentially declining numbers, extent and/or habitat, even though it may be abundant in some areas. It has a state rank of S3 (breeding) (MNHP 2011). Flammulated owls are a common raptor of the montane forests of the western United States. They primarily forage on insects, especially moths and beetles (McCallum 1994). They forage by “hawking” which consists of the bird perching on a branch at the lower portion of the forest canopy and waiting for a moth to fly by, or a grasshopper to walk by (Wright 1996). Such foraging behavior is presumably facilitated by the open, park-like conditions typical of ponderosa pine forests. Home range size varies on average from approximately 35 acres in Colorado (Linkhart et al.1998) to 40 acres in Oregon (Goggans 1985). Flammulated owls are seasonal migrants that occupy home ranges in the northern Rocky Mountains during spring, summer, and early fall. They are strongly associated with ponderosa pine forests during breeding and prefer open, single-storied stand structures for foraging (PIF 2000). The Montana PIF Plan (PIF 2000) considers this species to be associated with dry ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir with open understories, largely covered with grasses and a few shrubs or small clumps of regenerating trees. The flammulated owl subsists nearly exclusively on insects, especially moths and beetles, and forages in the tree canopy and on the ground (Samson 2006a). Linkhart et al. 1998 in Samson 2006a) reported a mean territory size of between 27 and 45 acres. A study by Wright (1992) in the Bitterroot Valley concluded that this species selects for microhabitat features such as large trees and snags, but only within an appropriate landscape context. Flammulated owls were not present unless the larger landscape consisted of open understory ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests, and then only where grassland or xeric shrubland openings were present at a home-range scale. Flammulated owls appear to avoid clear cuts and intensively cutover areas, but they would use thinned or selectively logged stands. Samson (2006a) estimated flammulated owl breeding habitat available in each national forest in R1. These models were then used to query the FIA database, resulting in statistically reliable habitat estimates by national forest. Results indicate that breeding habitat is well distributed regionwide. Although a modest decline in ponderosa pine from 1942 to present has been reported in 9 of 12 national forests, Douglas-fir has increased in abundance more substantially, suggesting an overall increase in habitat for the owl. Although dry, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir habitat are naturally limited on the HNF (Samson 2006b); FIA estimates prior to the MPB epidemic show flammulated owl habitat exists on approximately 8,000 acres of the HNF, which is 1.7 times the amount needed to maintain a minimum viable population regionwide. Loss of large-diameter ponderosa pine and increasing stand densities from long-term fire exclusion, are major threats to flammulated owls (Hayward and Verner 1994). Wherever possible, management of dry forest sites should address the needs of flammulated owls by incorporating structural and component complexity at the microhabitat and home range scale in the form of suitable nest snags and trees, open, mature vegetation around the nest site, small clearings, and roost sites in close proximity to each other (PIF 2000). Flammulated Owl Project Area Habitat and Documentation The presence of large diameter snags and open understory conditions make it likely that ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands that characterized the project area historically met the needs of flammulated owls. Over time preferred habitat conditions have declined due to decades of fire suppression and increased stand density resulting in closed-canopy conditions and smaller- diameter trees. The recent MPB epidemic has increased the availability of large-diameter ponderosa pine snags and opened the forest canopy, improving flammulated owl habitat; however, many of these stands are regenerating conifers, which may make these areas largely unsuitable in the next 20 to 30 years. Potential habitat has been modeled based on methods described above, and currently approximately 1,500 acres of suitable flammulated owl habitat are within the project area. While widely scattered, virtually all of this occurs as low-elevation bottomland and lower-slope ponderosa pine habitat. No recent surveys have been conducted; the flammulated owl has not been documented within the project area. Flammulated owls were documented in 2005 and 2008 at two locations within 5 miles of the project area, including one within 0.2 miles (USDA Forest Service 2011c). It is likely lower elevations within the project area that contain suitable habitat are used for foraging, if not nesting. Boreal (Western) Toad Methodology and Analysis Area Information presented on boreal toads is based on Werner et al. (2004), Maxwell et al. (2003), the heritage database (MNHP 2011) and USDA Forest Service (2011c). Due to the small home range for this species, direct, indirect and cumulative effects are evaluated across the project area. Species Status and Biology This species has a global ranking of G4 and is apparently secure, although it may be quite rare in parts of its range. The State of Montana lists the boreal toad as a special concern species with a S2 ranking. As a result, statewide, the boreal toad is an at risk species because of very limited and/or potentially declining population numbers, range and/or habitat. This toad is a subspecies of the western toad, Bufo boreas, which historically was widely distributed across the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountains. Adult boreal toads are largely terrestrial and are considered habitat generalists that use a variety of habitats. They generally breed in lakes, ponds and slow streams and roadside ditches, where they prefer shallow areas with mud bottoms (MNHP 2011). Egg laying usually takes place 1 to 3 months after the snow melts (Reichel and Flath 1995, Werner et al. 2004 in NatureServe 2011). These toads may wander miles from their breeding sites through coniferous forests and subalpine meadows, lakes, ponds and marshes (Werner et al. 2004). Generally boreal toads are active during the day and night, with the active period generally running from April or May through October in Montana (MNHP 2011). In Montana, this toad occurs in mountainous terrain on both sides of the continental divide. These toads were once common and widespread in western Montana, but they are now uncommon and few breeding populations were found in recent surveys on six national forests in the state (Werner et al. 2004). Declines have also been noted in adjacent states (Reichel and Flath 1995). There are no clear reasons for these declines, and possible causes range from acid rain, pesticides, parasites, ozone depletion, and habitat loss and climate change. Declines have even been noted in remote locations such as wilderness areas and national parks. Primary risk factors include those that affect breeding and riparian habitat; including activities that result in the elimination of key riparian vegetation or that adversely affect water quality. Boreal (Western) Toad Project Area Habitat and Documentation Potentially suitable breeding habitat is widespread and the project area contains approximately 30 acres of wetlands and open water habitat, and 66 miles of streams and numerous roadside ditches. There have been no surveys for this species and it has not been documented within the project area (MNHP 2011, USDA Forest Service 2011c). Within the past 5 years, this species was documented in several locations in both Powell and Lewis and Clark counties (MNHP 2011). As a result, and due to the presence of suitable breeding and dispersal habitat, it is possible this species occupies the Stonewall Project area. Management Indicator Species Management indicator species (MIS) are used in concert with other indicators to gauge the effects of management on wildlife habitat. MIS represent groups of wildlife associated with similar vegetative communities or key habitat components. In general, the MIS approach is used to reduce the complexity of discussing all the wildlife species on the Forest. Evaluating the effects of management practices on selected MIS and their habitat also displays the effects of alternatives on the ecological communities they represent and helps to ensure that biodiversity is maintained. Forest MIS include the northern goshawk, pileated woodpecker, hairy woodpecker, and American marten. The following is a summary of habitat conditions for Helena National Forest MIS that have been documented and either occur or are likely to occur within the project area. Methodology and Analysis Area The HNF Forest Plan provides specific direction related to providing for and managing old-growth habitat, which is described below. Old growth definitions are based on Green et al. (2005). More detailed information can be found in the Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986). The National Forest Management Act (1976) and Forest Service direction prescribe an ecological approach to old growth that considers it important to biological diversity (Green et al. 2005). The Helena National Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) also recognizes old growth as an important forest component and 5 percent of each 3rd-order drainage is to be managed for old growth. All stands meeting old growth definitions (as defined by Greene et. al. 2005) are designated old growth. If this amount does not constitute at least 5 percent of each 3rd-order drainage than additional stands would be designated. The Stonewall Old Growth and Snag Report (Amell 2012) summarizes the Forest process related to old growth, and identifies the steps used in designating old growth within 3rd-order drainages, as well as identification of lands outside drainages that are managed as old growth. The analysis boundaries used to evaluate old-growth habitat and effects to old-growth-dependent species vary and are described under the specific species sections. Existing Old Growth Following the process identified in the project old growth report, 5 percent of each 3rd-order drainage was designated as old growth. Additionally, because over half of the project area occurs outside of the 3rd-order drainages, and to better identify old growth across the landscape, lands to be managed as old growth outside of 3rd-order drainages were also identified. Therefore, the project area contains 592 acres of designated old growth within 3rd-order drainages, as well as 175 acres of verified old growth and 436 acres of potential old growth on NFS lands outside of the 3rd-order drainages. These lands are summarized by analysis area in table 71 and displayed in figure 71. Table 71. Existing project area old growth Old Growth by Analysis Area Acres Project Area Designated old growth 592 Potential/field validated old growth1 611 Total old growth 1,203 Cumulative Effect Boundary Designated old growth 1,415 Potential/field validated old growth 611 Total old growth 2,026 1 – meets the old growth definition identified by Green et.al. 2005 Designated old growth is widely scattered across the cumulative effects analysis area and includes one block greater than 100 acres (112 acres), 8 blocks between 50 and 100 acres and 28 blocks less than 50 acres. Also all of the project area old growth occurs in the western half of the area in the headwaters of Beaver Creek and Lincoln Gulch. Old growth MIS include northern goshawk and pileated woodpecker. The following is a discussion of the status, biology and project area habitat for each species.  Title: Project and Combined Boundary Old GrowthFigure 71. Project and Combined Boundary Old Growth Northern Goshawk Methodology and Analysis Area Documented use is based on Forest and District observation and monitoring data, the Heritage Database (MNHP 2011) and the USDA Forest Service NRM Database (USDA Forest Service 2011c). Habitat information is based largely on the Northern Region Model (Samson 2006a) and Conservation Assessment (Samson 2006b) for this species, as well as information provided in USDA Forest Service 2006b, USDA Forest Service 2007e, USDA Forest Service 2009c and “Criteria of Wildlife Models on the Helena National Forest” (USDA Forest Service 2009a). Effects are evaluated by looking at changes in nesting, foraging and post-fledgling habitat (Samson 2006a, b) and the “Northern Region Overview: Key Findings and Project Considerations” (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Recent MPB mortality has reduced canopy closure in much of the project area, so goshawk habitat in the project and cumulative effects areas are based on R1-Vmap values using MPB post-kill data. Modeled habitat includes nest habitat, dominant tree types include Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, aspen, and mixed stands with tree sizes greater than 10 inches in diameter and canopy cover greater or equal to 25 percent, and foraging habitat, dominant tree types include Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, aspen and mixed stands with greater than or equal to 40 percent canopy closure. Diversity matrices are also used to describe foraging habitat and the post-fledgling area (PFA) (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Samson (2006a) and (USDA Forest Service 2009c) provide a detailed rationale on the basis for these structural characteristics used to describe goshawk habitat. All recent goshawk nesting occurs within the project area, which provides adequate habitat for the home range of existing nests, therefore, direct and indirect effects are evaluated across the project area. The combined boundary was used to assess cumulative effects because historical use occurred within the combined boundary, and this area includes impacts from recent wildfire as well as private land influences. Species and Population Status The northern goshawk has a conservation status rank of G5 (NatureServe 2011) and this species is considered globally secure (common; widespread and abundant). In Montana it is identified as a species of special concern with an S3 ranking (MNHP 2011). The Montana PIF Conservation Plan identifies the northern goshawk as a priority II species or a species that the State is responsible for monitoring regarding status and conservation actions (PIF 2000). The North American Breeding Bird Survey (BBS) indicates that northern goshawk trends have been increasing since 1966 (Available at: http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/bbs.html). However Anderson et al. (2005 p. 7) concludes that BBS data are inadequate to estimate population trends for goshawks because the number of routes where goshawks are detected and the encounter rate of goshawks are too low. Some authors have hypothesized that goshawk populations may be declining (Bloom et al. 1986 in Anderson et al. 2005; Zinn and Tibbits 1990 in Squires and Kennedy 2006). Hoffman and Smith (2003) analyzed migration data and concluded that uncertainty exists as to the status of western goshawk populations, and Kennedy (1997) and Anderson et al. (2005) concluded that current sampling techniques may be inadequate to determine if goshawk populations are declining, increasing or stable. Finally Squires and Kennedy (2006) conclude that this difficulty is due to several factors, including that goshawks are secretive and difficult to survey and that many studies have small sample sizes. The most recent petition for listing the goshawk under ESA occurred in 1997. After a formal 12-month review by a scientific committee, the USFWS determined that listing under ESA was not warranted. Analysis of data from 17 states comprising 222 million acres indicated “that the goshawk population is well distributed and stable at the broadest scale”. Until June 2007, the northern goshawk was listed as an R1 sensitive species. However, regional studies demonstrated that (1) habitat exists to support reproductive individuals on each forest, (2) habitat is well distributed, and (3) individual goshawks can interact with one another across the region; hence, the goshawk did not meet the sensitive species criteria in FSM 2670.5 and was removed from the R1 sensitive species list. Although the goshawk is no longer a sensitive species, on the HNF the goshawk is considered an MIS and analysis of goshawks and their habitat are assessed at the project and forest levels. Species Biology Goshawks are the only large diurnal raptor adapted to interior forest environments in the northern Rockies. Key elements of goshawk habitat are extensive blocks of mature forest with groups of large nesting trees, abundant prey (squirrels, grouse, hares, larger songbirds), and mid-level flyways. Goshawks are most commonly associated with mature and old-growth Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine forest. However, surveys over the past 15 years on the Helena, Beaverhead-Deerlodge, Lewis and Clark, and Medicine Bow National Forests have found that goshawks make extensive use of lodgepole pine stands as long as the basic structural attributes that they require are in place and prey is adequate (Lemke 1994; Squires and Ruggiero 1996). In the more fragmented forest environments east of the Continental Divide where mountains and plains intermingle, goshawks often occupy mosaics of forest and grassland or a mixture of different forest seral stages. They are capable of foraging through open parks and woodlands and along forest edges, and in certain circumstances do so on a regular basis. Competition from red-tailed hawks and great-horned owls confines goshawks to dense forest, but this applies primarily to nest sites and potential predation on young rather than to foraging by adults (Reynolds et al. 1992). In Montana the northern goshawk is a year-round resident (MFWP 2011a) and breeding season habitat includes three areas including the nest area, post-fledgling area (PFA) and foraging habitat. The following is a discussion of each. Nest Habitat Although the goshawk is considered a habitat generalist and uses a wide variety of forest types, it tends to nest in a relative narrow range of structural conditions (Reynolds et al. 1992; Squires and Reynolds 1997; Kennedy 2003). Goshawks prefer mature forests with large trees, relatively closed canopies and open understories (Reynolds et al. 1992; Hayward and Escano 1989; Squires and Reynolds 1997). Despite differences in some habitat characteristics, high canopy closure and tree basal area at nest areas were the most uniform habitat characteristic between study areas in northern Idaho and western Montana (Hayward and Escano 1989; Kennedy 2003; Clough 2000). Goshawk nest sites include the nest tree and approximately 40 acres around the nest (USDA Forest Service 2009c) and breeding areas often contain several alternate nests that are used over several years and are usually located within 0.25 mile of each other (Roberson et al. 2003). Key findings in the literature that characterize nest areas include; (1) goshawks nest in a variety of forest types throughout their range, (2) in general, the nest area vegetation is described by a comparatively narrower range of structural characteristics than the post-fledgling area (PFA) or foraging area, and includes mature forests with larger trees and relatively closed canopies, (3) average size of the nest area varies, and (4) in west central Montana, goshawks selected nest stands of mature and older forest approximately 40 acres in size and surrounded by a mix of younger and nonforested habitat (USDA Forest Service 2009c). More than habitat composition or any other factor (i.e., prey abundance), territoriality determines nest distribution and spring weather determines nest success (Joy 2002; Reich et al. 2004). Post-fledgling Area Habitat The post-fledgling area (PFA) habitat surrounds the nest area and is defined as the area used by the family group from the time the young fledge, until they are no longer dependent on the adults for food (Roberson et al. 2003). During the fledgling-dependency period (4 to 6 weeks) the activities of young are centered near their nests, with the distance they move from the nest increasing over time (ibid). These areas may be of importance to fledglings by providing prey items to develop hunting skills, as well as cover from predators and prey. The Northern Region recommends that each pair of nesting goshawks should be provided with a 420 acre PFA within their home range (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Based on habitat and occupancy data collected in northern Idaho, the region recommends maintaining at least 40 percent of the PFA in trees greater than 5 inches d.b.h., with greater than 50 percent canopy cover, and some structural diversity in the understory (USDA Forest Service 2007c). Unlike foraging habitat, post-fledgling habitat is actively defended (USDA Forest Service 2007c). Foraging Habitat Goshawks are opportunistic predators that kill a wide assortment of prey that varies by region, season, vulnerability, and availability. Main foods include small mammals, ground and tree squirrels, rabbits and hares, large passerines, woodpeckers, game birds, and corvids (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Goshawks are classified as prey generalists (ibid) and typically forage on a suite of 8–15 species (Reynolds et al. 1992). Preferred goshawk foraging habitat varies in the literature (USDA Forest Service 2009c), however key findings or conclusions that characterize goshawk foraging include: 9. Size of the typical home range or foraging area for the goshawk (1,409 to 8,649 acres) may vary depending on prey abundance and availability, age and sex of the bird and local habitat conditions. 10. Goshawk foraging areas are heterogeneous and may include mature forest, as well as a mix of other forest and nonforest components. 11. Emphasis should be placed on creating or maintaining vegetation diversity and that a juxtaposition of seral stages including mature timber should be provided (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Goshawk foraging areas are approximately 5,000 acres and comprised of a diversity of vegetative types. The composition of vegetative types characterized by higher canopy closures, mature trees, and open understory conditions located outside the nest area blend into the surrounding landscape beyond the PFA scale, to the degree that differences in habitat composition in occupied versus random foraging areas cannot be detected (McGrath et al. 2003 in Samson 2006a). As such, management efforts are generally concentrated at the PFA and nest area scales. Home Range and Landscape Considerations Goshawks use large landscapes, integrating a diversity of vegetation types over several spatial scales to meet their life-cycle needs (Squires and Kennedy 2006). In The Northern Goshawk Status Review (2009c), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service found that the goshawk typically uses mature forests or larger trees for nesting habitat, however, it is considered a forest habitat generalist at large spatial scales (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1998). The Service found no evidence in its finding that the goshawk is dependent on large, unbroken tracts of “old growth” or mature forest (63 FR 35183 June 29, 1998) (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Nonetheless, the pattern of goshawk nest site selection in coniferous forests, especially mature forests with closed canopy and open understory conditions, has emerged repeatedly in numerous studies throughout western North America (Squires and Ruggiero 1996; Clough 2000). The issue of goshawks selecting for some level of mature forest in the home range was the subject of recent debate in the literature. Greenwald et al. (2005) prepared a literature review of a few selected studies and concluded that goshawks select mature to older forests in their home range. Greenwald et al. (2005) criticized Reynolds et al. (1992) on their recommendation to maintain a mix of seral stages and vegetation types that reflect historical landscape patterns. Reynolds et al. (2007) provided a rebuttal to Greenwald et al. (2005) finding that Greenwald’s criticisms were based on an incomplete review of the literature; misunderstandings of the desired goshawk habitats described in the “Management Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United States” (Reynolds et al. 1992); an under-appreciation of the extent of variation in vegetation structure among forest types and seral stages used by goshawks; a limited understanding of the ecological factors limiting goshawks; and a failure to understand the dynamic nature of forest habitats. Reynolds et al. (2007) findings were consistent with the Service’s 1998 status review of the species (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1998). The breeding season home range for the northern goshawk varies depending on sex and habitat characteristics (Squires and Reynolds 1997) and can range from 1,250 acres to over 6,000 acres (Squires and Reynolds 1997; Reynolds et al. 1992; Kennedy 2003). Also several authors have suggested that forested habitat for the northern goshawk should be managed at both the landscape and stand levels to provide adequate foraging and nesting habitat (Reynolds et al. 1992). In order to meet all the nesting requirements of this species, the Northern Region goshawk guidelines recommend that at least 240 acres of nesting habitat should be maintained in patches of at least 40 acres per home range. Recommendations related to providing desired home range and PFA habitat also include maintaining a variety of habitat conditions and a mosaic of vegetation structural stages (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Finally sustaining goshawks across the landscape requires maintaining habitat at the home range scale (Reynolds et al. 1992). Viability The four criteria used to evaluate goshawk viability are (1) habitat availability, (2) human disturbance, (3) biotic interactions, and 4) managing for ecological processes. The following is a brief discussion of each, from which effects of proposed actions are evaluated. Habitat Availability Currently habitat is abundant for the northern goshawk in the Northern Region, as well as by national forest and ecological region. Samson (2006b) identified critical thresholds for the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl, pileated woodpecker and American marten. Also based on FIA data, current habitat estimates were made for all forests in Region 1. For the Helena NF, a minimum of 315,306 acres of goshawk habitat needs to be maintained to ensure viability is maintained. Currently, using intensified grid data, the HNF contains 371, 944 acres of habitat, which is above the minimum viability threshold. Human Disturbance Northern goshawks in the Northwest United States are reported to select areas to nest near human activities (McGraath et al. 2003 in Samson 2006a). Human disturbance is not a factor for northern goshawks as long as 70 percent of the nest stand structure is maintained and timber management operations are restricted. Biotic Interactions Inter-specific competition for habitat and prey is not well understood. Other raptors may exclude goshawks from nest areas, although goshawks and other raptors are known to nest in close proximity to one another (Squires and Kennedy 2006). Numerous raptors and mammalian predators prey on many of the same species as goshawks. These predators include red-tailed hawk, Coopers hawk, great horned owl, barred owl, fox, coyote, Canada lynx, weasel, and American marten (Squires and Kennedy 2006, Samson 2006a). The extent to which species co-exist with goshawks may depend on the openness of habitat (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1998). Natural and man-made changes that result in reduced forest canopy may favor the habitat needs of more open-forested competitors, such as red-tailed hawks, and reduce goshawk habitat; although to date no scientific studies have conclusively documented such a replacement. Reynolds et al. (1992) recommend vegetation management treatments that maintain habitat at a home-range scale to sustain goshawks across the landscape. Ecological Processes While suppression of natural fire processes in the Northern Region has benefitted the northern goshawk by increasing the distribution and abundance of forested habitats, it has also resulted in increased fuel loading and creation of ladder fuels that puts existing goshawk habitat at risk. Additionally, fire and other ecological processes are important to maintain a continuing supply of mature trees, and either an understory or open understory depending on need (e.g., PFA vs. foraging and heterogeneity required in foraging habitat) (Samson 2006a). Consequently, re-introduction of fire needs to be implemented in order to maintain preferred goshawk habitat conditions, while reducing the risk of long-term loss of habitat from catastrophic wildfire. Northern Goshawk Project Area Habitat and Documentation Goshawk use within the project area includes both historical (1995) documentation, as well as recent activity, including two active goshawk nests in 2010. Both active nests (Stonewall East and West) are located in the southern portion of the project area on lower slopes within 0.25 mile of drainages (see Figure 72). Nesting and Forging Habitat R1-VMAP Analysis R1-VMAP is used to describe nesting and foraging habitat in the project area and within the combined boundary or cumulative effect area, according to models developed by Samson (2006a, b) as described in the Criteria for Wildlife Models Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 2009a). Of the project area acres, approximately 758 acres and 1,051 acres of nesting and foraging habitat respectively are also designated as old growth. Existing nesting and foraging habitat for both the project and cumulative effect areas is summarized in table 72 and displayed in Figure 72. Due to MPB mortality, goshawk nesting habitat has declined from 13,205 acres (48 percent reduction), and foraging habitat has declined from 18,841 acres (57 percent reduction). Table 72. Existing goshawk nesting and foraging habitat (Samson 2006a) Analysis Area Size Nesting Habitat Foraging Habitat Acres Acres Percent Acres Percent Project Area 24,005 6,342 26 4,445 19 Cumulative Effect Area 101,977 17,258 17 9,437 9  Title: Project area goshawk habitat and nest sitesFigure 72. Project area goshawk habitat and nest sites Home Range Analysis Foraging Habitat Goshawk nesting and foraging habitat characteristics in the project area and PFA are based on diversity matrices described in the guidelines identified for the Northern Goshawk Northern Region Overview: Key Findings and Project Considerations (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Table 73 summarizes the vegetation composition of suitable habitat from Reynolds et al. (1992) and Clough (2000) and compares it with habitat conditions within the project area. Table 73. Percent of goshawk nesting and foraging habitat recommendations3 Landscape Habitat Clough (Montana) Reynolds1 (SW U.S.) Project Area Habitat Seedling/Sapling (0-4.9 inch d.b.h.) 9.3% 10% 16% Young Forest (5-9.9 inch d.b.h.) 65.7%1 20%1 44% Mature Forest (10 inch+ d.b.h.) 11.3% 60% 35% Mature (>40% CC and > 5 inches d.b.h.)2 69.0%2 60%2 18% Grass/Forb/Shrub 7.3% 10% 4% 1 – recommended size class in Reynolds for young and mature forest is 5-12 inches d.b.h. 2 – includes stands with >50 percent canopy cover 3 – based on Reynolds et al.(1992) and Clough (2000) Clough’s (2000) and Reynolds et al. (1992) findings for grass/forb stands or natural openings and young seedling stands are similar to each other despite vegetative differences between the two regions, although grass/forb/shrub habitat within the project area falls below both authors findings. Conversely the project area contains a larger amount of seedling/sapling stage forest. The two authors differ in that in Montana a high percentage of young forest was used, whereas mature forest predominated in the Southwest. Existing project area habitat falls between the two, whereas it falls well below the amount of closed canopy forest that characterizes goshawk home ranges in both Montana and the Southwest U.S. So in summary, while the project area deviates somewhat from conditions found by Clough (2000) and Reynolds et al. (1992), it has a diversity of habitat conditions and provides habitat conditions consistent with goshawk use. Nest Habitat Reynolds et al. (1992) recommends that 5,000 acres of habitat (home range) are needed to support a nesting pair of goshawks. Recommendations are that 40 acres of habitat be provided at each nest site, and a total of 240 acres of nest habitat should be available for each home range (USDA Forest Service 2007f). The project area contains over 6,300 acres of nest habitat, most of which occurs in blocks greater than 40 acres and is widely distributed. Considering that the Stonewall Project area is approximately 24,000 acres in size, it could support three to four nesting pairs of goshawk. Post-Fledgling Area Habitat The PFA area includes 420 acres immediately around the nest site that are used by young-of-the-year. Table 74 displays PFA habitat for the Stonewall east and west nests, and compares it with PFA conditions documented by Clough (2000) and Reynolds et al. (1992). Table 74. Post-fledgling habitat Summary Structural Condition Clough Reynolds Project Area PFAs Stonewall East Stonewall West Forest 92.7% 90% 100% 99% Shrub/herb 7.3% 10% <1% 0% Trees (<4.9 inches d.b.h.) 9.3% 10% 19% 12% Trees (5.0-9.9 inches d.b.h.)2 65.7% 20% 53% 37% Trees (>10 inches d.b.h.) 11.3% 60% 28% 51% Canopy Cover (>40% and >5.0 inches d.b.h.) 68.9%1 60%1 23%1 31%1 1 – use 50 percent canopy closure 2 – recommended size classes in Reynolds for young forest is 5-12 inches d.b.h. Both PFAs are similar to landscape-level habitat in terms of the amount of seedling/sapling and young forest. While the amount of closed-canopy, mature forest falls short of that characteristic of other PFAs studied, the Stonewall West PFA contain 3 times the amount of closed-canopy forest than the project area as a whole. Similarly, the amount of closed-canopy mature forest in the Stonewall East PFA is well above that found across the landscape. So while the composition of the existing PFA habitat is similar to that found across the landscape for most structural attributes, the data indicates that areas that contain more closed-canopy conditions are being selected as nest sites. Both PFAs lack the grass/forb/shrub component that is commonly associated with goshawk PFAs (Clough 2000; Reynolds et al. 1992), and both nests are approximately 0.50 mile from an open road. Pileated Woodpecker Methodology and Analysis Area Potential effects to this species are evaluated by looking at changes in the availability of large-diameter snags and suitable nesting and foraging habitat. Suitable habitat for this species is based on the Northern Region Model (Samson 2006a) and Conservation Assessment (Samson 2006b). Suitable habitat is identified using R1-VMAP post-kill data and is based on models developed by Samson (2005, 2006a) and described in HNF Model Criteria (USDA Forest Service 2009a). Analysis area documentation is based on the Heritage and Forest Service NRM Databases (MNHP 2011; USDA Forest Service 2011c), landbird survey data and field observations. Minimum habitat model values (USDA Forest Service 2009c) are based on R1-VMap values and include Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, aspen and mixed forest types that contain tree sizes greater than 10 inches d.b.h. to include forage and nest trees. Landscape-level old-growth estimates are nonspatial and are based on FIA and intensified grid data. Old-growth polygons at the 3rd order drainage scale are mapped using stand exam data. Habitat estimates and maps are derived from the HNF Intensified Grid Summary Database. Methodologies and assumptions associated with these data are described in the following documents: Region One Vegetation Council Classification Algorithms (updated 2006a), R1 Grid Intensification using CSE Protocols – Field Procedures, R1 Multi-level Vegetation Classification, Mapping, Inventory, and Analysis System (USDA Forest Service 2007e), and FIA Field Guides, Methods, and Procedures at http://fia.fs.fed.us/library/field-guides-methods-proc/. Methods related to snag and coarse woody debris are described under dead wood in section 3.18. Species Status and Biology Although common in parts of its range, the pileated woodpecker has a global ranking of G5 which is defined as common, widespread and abundant, although may be rare in parts of its range. It is not vulnerable in most if its range. It has a state ranking of S3 (potentially at risk) and is a species of concern that is potentially at risk (MNHP 2011). The North American Breeding Bird Survey indicates that pileated woodpecker trends have been increasing since 1966 (http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/bbs.html). The pileated woodpecker’s range extends from central British Columbia south into Northern California, east from Idaho across North Dakota and west from a general line descending south from Minnesota to eastern Texas (Bull and Jackson 1995). This species is not considered to be migratory and is most often associated with mature forests across its range. The presence of large trees for nesting is considered more important than forest age, and the species appears to do well in young and fragmented forests with abundant remnant older structure (Kirk and Naylor 1996). This species nests in snags and each year excavates a new cavity, usually in a dead tree at least 21inches in diameter and at least 30 feet high (Bull et al. 2005). Due to their longevity and large size, western larch and ponderosa pine were found to be preferred in old-growth habitat (McCelland and McClelland 1999), although selection of the nest tree also depends on the availability of suitable snags (Kirk and Naylor 1996). Bull and Holthausen (1993) found that the presence of snags greater than 20 inches d.b.h. was found to be the best predictor of occupied habitat. The Helena National Forest model (USDA Forest Service 2009c) for the pileated woodpecker uses a minimum size of 15 inches d.b.h. for suitable nest trees. The pileated woodpecker relies heavily on snags and downed woody debris for foraging, and 12 to 30 tons of DWD is typical for stands that are utilized. They forage primarily for carpenter ants and other wood boring beetles in both live and dead wood, and often forage on or near the ground in logs, snags, live trees and stumps (Bull and Holthausen 1993). Winter roosts are important, and appear to be in habitats similar to those used during the breeding season. As a result, the foraging model for the pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region is based on winter foraging requirements, which includes sites containing trees greater than or equal to 10 inches d.b.h. (Samson 2006a). In general, there is a positive correlation between forest age and the amount of wood decay (McClelland and McClelland 1999). So, while this species prefers late-successional and old- growth habitat, foraging within younger stands is documented and territories are not confined just to old-growth habitat (McClelland et al. 1979 in USDA Forest Service 2008a). Also, Bonar (2001 in Samson 2006a) found that the pileated woodpeckers used all available habitats at all scales to select suitable nest cavity trees and foraging habitat. This species has a large home range, and although home range size varies (700 acres to 1,500 acres), in the Northern Region it is considered to be approximately 1,000 acres (Samson 2006a). Suitable nest habitat in the northern Rocky Mountains is generally characterized as areas with greater than 30 percent canopy cover and tree size greater than 20 inches d.b.h. for nesting (McClelland and McClelland 1999), although elsewhere it may use trees as small as 11 inches for nesting (Birds of North America 2012). Smaller home ranges tended to have a high percentage of the area in grand fir, old growth, unlogged stands and stand with greater than or equal to 60 percent canopy closure (Bull and Holthausen 1993). Pileated Woodpecker Project Area Habitat and Documentation The project area is near the southern end of this species range in Montana (MNHP 2011). While uncommon, most occurrences have been around the Stonewall Mountain area and foraging activity was observed in several stands. As a result the project area is occupied pileated woodpecker habitat. Due to MPB, mortality of ponderosa pine habitat within the project area has been high, and understories in much of the project area contain dense Douglas-fir seedlings. With the large amount of recent ponderosa pine mortality, there is currently an abundance of large-diameter snags. However, within the next 10-20 years most of these would likely fall to the ground and available nest trees may be scarce. Existing pileated woodpecker habitat within the project area and CE area are summarized in table 75 and displayed in figure 73. The large amount of unsuitable habitat in the northeast portion of the CE area is due to recent wildfires. While there are currently an abundance of large-diameter snags, habitat suitability has been reduced due to the reduction in canopy cover. As a result, and assuming that a nesting pair of pileated woodpeckers requires 1,000 acres per home range, the project area can currently support approximately seven to eight nesting pairs. Table 75. Existing pileated woodpecker habitat Analysis Area Acres Percent Project Area 7,824 33 CE Area 27,178 27   Title: Existing pileated woodpecker habitat - Description: A map showing distribution of pileated woodpecker habitat in the project area and cumulative effects boundary.Figure 73. Existing pileated woodpecker habitat Snag Availability Due to decades of overstocking and widespread MPB mortality, snags and coarse woody debris currently occur in a variety of size classes and are widespread and abundant across the Stonewall project area. In 2007 and 2008, the HNF measured FIA Intensification plots within the Stonedry analysis area, which includes the Stonewall project area. For that analysis, it was assumed that plots included tree mortality through 2008. Within the FIA Intensification plots, there were an average of about 40 snags per acre greater than or equal to 7 inches d.b.h., which is 20 times the Forest Plan requirement of providing 70 percent of optimum. Table 76 summarizes snags by size class within the Stonewall project area, whereas snag distribution is displayed in figure 67. It should also be noted that due to ongoing mortality, particularly in larger diameter ponderosa pine, the availability of 20-inch snags today would be greater than indicated in table 76, which is based on 2008 data. Table 76. Snag distribution data by size class from 2008 FIA plots Diameter (d.b.h.) Class Average Snags per Acre 7-11 26 12-19 13 >=20 1 Total 40 Hairy Woodpecker Methodology and Analysis Area Documentation of this species is based on field observation, landbird data and data provided in the Heritage Database (MNHP 2011). Hairy Woodpecker habitat models are derived from the R1 Draft Model Set All Species (USDA Forest Service 1998) as described in the Criteria for Wildlife Models Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 2009a), based on R1-VMap values and include: dominant tree types Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, Engelmann spruce, and aspen as well as mixed stands that include these types (with the exception of Engelmann spruce), tree sizes greater than 10 inches diameter, and canopy cover greater than 10 percent. Habitat estimate maps are derived from R1-VMAP. Methodologies and assumptions associated with these data are described in the Region One Vegetation Council Classification Algorithms (updated USDA Forest Service 2006a), and R1 Multi-level Vegetation Classification, Mapping, Inventory, and Analysis System (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Because of this species’ small home range and the widespread availability of suitable habitat, direct, indirect and cumulative effects are evaluated across the project area. Species Status and Biology The hairy woodpecker has a state ranking of S5 and although it may be uncommon, in parts of its range it is considered common, widespread and abundant (MNHP 2011). The North American Breeding Bird survey indicates that hairy woodpecker trends have been increasing since 1966 (BBS 2011). The hairy woodpecker represents species dependent on snags and is a mid-sized bird found from low to high elevation forest cover types. They nest and forage in mid- to large-sized snags and have been documented within the project area. The only species of woodpecker that is perhaps more common is the northern flicker. Nests can occur within short, small diameter snags, although like pileated woodpeckers, they often locate cavities near the tops of snags (Bull 1987; Thomas 1979). The landbird survey (Hutto and Young 2002) found hairy woodpeckers widely distributed across most forest community types. Hairy woodpeckers are year-round resident primary cavity nesters, which subsequently provide nest cavities for myriad small birds and mammals. They reside in many forest communities and use a variety of tree sizes. They feed on insects, primarily ants, wood borers, and grubs as well as fruits and berries (Birds of North America 2011). Hairy woodpeckers forage on a variety of substrates, including snags and down woody debris (DWD) They may concentrate in areas of insect outbreaks in response to the increased food source (Sousa 1987). Territory size ranges from about 2.5 acres to 37 acres (Sousa 1987). Because of ongoing MPB epidemic, small to medium diameter snags are not limited in the project area. Hairy Woodpecker Project Area Habitat and Documentation Hairy woodpeckers have been documented, and the project area is considered occupied habitat. Also, because of the ongoing MPB epidemic, suitable small-to medium-diameter snags are widespread and abundant (see table 76 under pileated woodpecker and figure 67). Currently suitable habitat occurs on over 7,800 acres or 32 percent of the project area. Assuming an average home range of 10 acres, the project area can potentially support a large number of nesting pairs. American Marten Methodology and Analysis Analysis area documentation is based on the MHNP Database (2011) and the USDA Forest Service NRM Database (2011c). Habitat estimates are based on information provided in Habitat Estimates For Maintaining Viable Populations of the Northern Goshawk, Black-backed Woodpecker, Flammulated Owl, Pileated Woodpecker, American Marten and Fisher (Samson 2006b). Throughout most its distribution, American marten are reported to be closely associated with relatively closed canopies (greater than 30-50 percent) (Bushkirk and Ruggiero 1994) and in some areas may utilize areas with canopy cover greater than or equal to 25 percent (Chapin et al. 1997). For the purpose of this analysis, canopy cover greater than or equal to 25 percent is used to predict marten habitat. Habitat models used in Samson (2006b) are described in the Criteria for Wildlife Models Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 2009b). Model values are based on R1-VMap values and include: dominant tree types Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, lodgepole pine, and aspen as well as mixed stands that include these types, tree sizes greater than 10 inches diameter, and canopy cover greater than 25 percent. The average territory ranges from 160 to 1,800 acres, so the project area is large enough to evaluate direct and indirect effects. However, because use of an area is largely determined by landscape-level influences (Powell et al. 2003), and considering the widespread MPB mortality and recent wildfires, the combined boundary is used to assess cumulative effects. Species Status and Biology Marten have a global rank of G5 and are considered common, widespread and abundant, although they may be rare in parts of their range. They are not vulnerable in most of their range (MNHP 2011). In Montana the marten has a status of S4, and although apparently secure, it may be declining and rare in parts of its range (MNHP 2011). The American marten is an indicator used to monitor the quality of large continuous blocks of mature cover. They prefer mid- to late-seral forests with moderate to high crown closure (Ruggiero et al. 1994). Preference for mature forests is strongest during the winter. This may be related to snow depths and increased success of encountering and capturing prey (Thompson and Colgan 1994). The American marten is associated with late-seral coniferous forest characterized by closed canopies, large trees, and abundant standing and downed woody material. Of particular importance is the quantity of downed debris on the forest floor as it provides protection from predators, access to the under snow environment for hunting and resting, and thermal protection from heat and cold (Ruggiero et al. 1994). Chapin et al. (1997) found that vertical and horizontal structure was more important than age or species composition, and Thompson and Colgan (1994) found higher densities of marten in unlogged forests versus logged forests possibly due to reduced predation. Thomson and Colgan (1994) hypothesized that martens do not necessarily avoid openings but are more vulnerable to larger predators when crossing openings. Thus, landscapes containing large, well-connected patches of mid- and late-seral forest are more likely to sustain higher numbers of martens than more fragmented or naturally-patchy lands. Research indicates that martens abandon, or fail to colonize home-range size landscapes with less than 60 percent mature forest (Powell et al. 2003), reinforcing other studies that indicate that martens avoid regenerating clearcuts for several decades. Managers should provide adequate densities of snags, large trees, and logs and provide large blocks of interconnected mature forest (Powell et al. 2003). While marten and fisher have similar habitat requirements, marten are largely restricted to higher elevations, engage in more arboreal and subnivean activity (i.e., tunnels under snow), eat smaller prey, can forage in deep snow and are more strongly related with coniferous stands (Ruggiero et al. 1994). American Martin Project Area Habitat and Documentation Marten have been consistently observed to the west and north (MNHP 2011, USDA Forest Service 2011c) and a DNA hair sample was obtained from Stonewall face in 2011. Although data from this sample is not yet available, the project area is considered occupied marten habitat. Approximately 35 percent of the project area contains mature forest conditions preferred by marten (greater than10 inches d.b.h.). Prior to the MPB epidemic, using the model developed by Samson (2006b), approximately 13,500 acres or 56 percent of the project area provided suitable habitat. Habitat has declined due to increased tree mortality and currently the project area provides approximately 6,800 acres of suitable marten habitat (28 percent of the project area). Also, when viewed across the larger landscape (cumulative effect boundary), there is little marten habitat to the northwest of the project area, and generally the project area does not contain the landscape-level mature forest conditions preferred (Powell et al. 2003). As a result, the project area does not provide habitat conditions characteristic of den sites. It is likely that foraging or dispersal at upper elevations would constitute the primary use of the project area if used by marten. The average territory size for marten varies from 160 acres (Kirk and Zielinski 2009) to 1,804 acres for transient males (Slough 1989). In addition, home range size varies by habitat quality and food availability, and in the northern Rockies, it is estimated that 1,920 acres are necessary to provide adequate habitat in years when food is scarce. So while it is unlikely that the project area would be utilized for denning, and habitat conditions have been reduced, snag and CWD habitat are abundant and the project area contains adequate habitat to support marten. Snowmobile use occurs throughout much of the lower elevations, primarily along groomed trails and roads, although some cross country use in larger openings off-trails does occur. Use at higher elevations where marten would likely exist is primarily along designated trails. Commonly Hunted Species Elk Methodology and Analysis Area The methodologies used to assess elk habitat were developed largely to measure elk vulnerability, which is the relationship between elk and land management practices, combined with the demand for elk hunting and non-hunting experiences. Elk are evaluated in part by looking at three variables including summer range hiding cover, road densities and winter range thermal cover. The following is a summary of how Forest Plan standards relevant to elk management focus on these variables: · Summer Range Hiding Cover - Forest Plan standard 3 addresses both summer and winter range. For the purpose of this analysis, the Montana FWP definition of hiding cover (a stand of coniferous trees having a crown closure of greater than 40 percent) is used. Also hiding cover must have a minimum patch size of 40 acres. Using this definition, the requirement for Forest Plan standard 3is to maintain a minimum of 50 percent hiding cover within each herd unit (USDA FS 1986 p. II/18). · Winter Range Thermal Cover – Forest Plan standard 3 also requires that 25 percent of each herd unit winter range provide elk thermal cover. The Forest Plan defines thermal cover as a stand of coniferous trees 40 feet or more tall with an average crown closure of 70 percent or more, and a minimum size of 15 acres. · Big Game Security – Forest Plan standard 4a addresses big game security during the hunting season. This standard uses a hiding cover to open road density within a herd unit to address elk vulnerability during the hunting season. An objective of this standard is not to exceed 40 percent of the total bull harvest during the first week of the general big game hunting season. In addition to analyzing these parameters for compliance with Forest Plan standards 3 and 4a, two additional analysis tools are used to assess potential effects at the elk herd unit level: Habitat effectiveness and elk security. The following is a summary of each: · Habitat Effectiveness – Habitat Effectiveness evaluates open road densities with respect to habitat use of summer range outside the big game season. This tiers to the Montana Elk Logging Study Recommendations in appendix C of the Helena Forest Plan. Although Plan direction is to follow recommendations in appendix C, the Plan does not establish specific habitat thresholds to be met. Habitat effectiveness is based on summer open road densities. · Elk Security – An elk security analysis is completed to address elk vulnerability during the hunting season. It is based on Hillis et al. (1991) and includes large areas greater than or equal to 250 acres in size that are equal to or greater than 0.50 mile from an open road. While the security area analysis is not a Plan requirement and specific Plan thresholds to be met are not established, it does consider distance from open roads and patch size, along with a recommended goal for the amount of security area within a herd unit. The Stonewall project area is located in two elk herd units including Beaver Creek and Keep Cool. Because elk have a strong fidelity to specific areas, the existing condition and direct and indirect effects are evaluated by herd unit, whereas cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined herd unit boundary. Assumptions and Information Used Elk documentation is based on field surveys and herd unit information provided by the Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks (MFWP 2004) elk management plan, as well as by more recent assessment of herd conditions (Kolbe 2012). The Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks Elk Distribution GIS layer was used to identify summer and winter range within both project area herd units across all ownerships. Elk security areas, hiding cover and thermal cover are derived from R1-VMAP, and are based in part on the “R1 Vegetation Council Classification Algorithms” (USDA Forest Service 2006a), and the “R1 Multi-level Vegetation Classification, Mapping, Inventory and Analysis System” (USDA Forest Service 2007e). Forest Plan hiding and thermal cover calculations are based on R1-VMAP data and HNF wildlife models for this species (USDA Forest Service 2009a). While canopy cover has recently been reduced due to MPB mortality, mortality is ongoing. As a result, and because standing dead trees continue to provide screening and some snow intercept properties, pre-kill canopy closure is used to identify Forest Plan thermal and hiding cover. Road density information is derived from the HNF INFRA database and Montana’s roads database. Private roads are assumed to have less impact on elk than public roads. Rowland et al. (2000) examined the relationship between open, closed and administrative roads on elk habitat use. He found that administrative roads (restricted vehicle use, not open to the public) are similar to private roads as far as vehicle use, and open roads have the greatest impact on elk habitat use. Based on this and other research (Lyon 1979; Witmer and deCalesta 1985) this analysis assigns a weight of 0.25 to private and administrative roads. A value of 1.0 is assigned to open roads, which include all roads and motorized trails open to public use between May 16th and October 14th. Elk Population and Montana FWP Herd Unit Summary Montana is broken down into 35 Elk Management Units (EMUs) that were established based on similar ecological characteristics, with each generally encompassing the yearlong range of a major elk population. The Stonewall project area is included in the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex EMU and includes Hunting District (HD) 281, as defined in the Montana Elk Plan (MFWP 2004). The Blackfoot River, which adjoins the project area to the south, forms the southern boundary of HD 281. Because it provides upper-elevation habitat, all of the project area is considered elk summer range. The lower elevation winter range occurs on approximately 31,500 acres or 41 percent of the combined herd units. More than 80 percent of the elk observed in this EMU use wilderness habitats during at least a portion of the year, and 88 percent of the elk that utilize wilderness areas migrate to non-wilderness winter range (MFWP 2004). In addition to providing important summer range, the southern portion of the EMUs also provide transition range, or range between high elevation summer and low-elevation winter habitat. At the time the State elk management plan was produced, elk populations wintering in HD 281 were near modern day highs, although winter cow calf ratios were approximately half of what occurred in the EMU in the 1980s (MFWP 2004). More recently elk populations have been affected by increased predation and calf recruitment has been reduced by approximately 40 percent from the long-term averages (Kolbe 2012). In response to the increased predation, MFWP has virtually eliminated antlerless harvest to keep recruitment from falling below objectives in the short term, while proposing actions to moderate wolf and mountain lion densities and reduce predation over the long term. Additionally, due to the large amount of wilderness and roadless area that has limited habitat management, combined with decades of fire suppression, elk populations within much of this EMU have been affected by reduced forage availability and extensive habitat-altering events, such as forest fires that must occur before increased elk populations could be realized (MFWP 2004). However the increased fuel loadings also increase the risk of high intensity fire. So while forage within project herd units has been created on much of the acreage (17,800 acres) affected by recent (since 2003) wildfires, due to the high fire intensity that occurred, cover has been greatly reduced, particularly in the Keep Cool unit (figure 74). As a result, utilization of the increased forage is reduced in many areas until cover develops. Consequently low to moderate levels of wildfire are necessary to create forage, while continuing to provide adequate cover to encourage elk use. The overall objective for this EMU is to manage elk populations in a healthy condition at levels commensurate with available habitat in order to provide a variety of recreational experiences, including hunting and general enjoyment by the public. Specific habitat management strategies include; 1) use of natural and prescribed fire on wilderness and roadless public lands to improve elk habitat, 2) maintain elk habitat security and associated walk-in hunting opportunities, and 3) cooperate with other land managers in the development of integrated strategies to improve the prevention and control of nonnative invasive plants (NNIS). Population objectives by subunit include maintaining 150 to 200 elk in the Beaver-Keep Cool drainages (MFWP 2004), which includes the project area. A number of variables are considered when evaluating elk habitat including; available summer and winter range, elk security and hiding cover, thermal cover, and forage availability. Table 77 through table 82 displays the existing condition of the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units related to these variables. Species Status and Project Area Habitat Elk in Montana have a status of S5, and although rare in parts of its range, statewide they are considered common, widespread and abundant (MFWP 2011a). Elk are also considered habitat generalists that are mobile, adaptive and wide ranging. They occur in a variety of habitats ranging from high mountainous areas to highly managed forests to cold deserts (Skovlin et al. 2002). Elk serve as a management indicator for hunted species and management for elk requires meeting basic elk habitat requirements, including understanding the socioeconomic value of elk. Lonner (1991) identified the following primary considerations in elk management, (1) maintaining habitat security to protect elk during the hunting season, (2) preserving/recovering desired elk population characteristics as determined by elk managers and distribution relative to land management, and (3) satisfying the growing demand for quality hunting and non-hunting experiences. Several methodologies have been developed that measure elk vulnerability, or the relationship between elk, land management practices and the demand for elk hunting and non-hunting experiences. These methodologies are the focus of much of the analysis presented and include an assessment of summer range, security habitat and winter range. The following is a summary of key elk habitat components as they pertain to the Stonewall Project area. Summer Range Summer range includes upper-elevation lands where elk typically migrate following snowmelt. During the summer elk use much of the Stonewall Project area, although as summer progresses, high elevation cool/moist areas are frequently used. New grasses and forbs within forested communities provide the necessary summer food and cover requirements for elk. In addition, some research indicates that the quality of summer range is one of the more important variables when determining annual variation in herd growth. The quality of summer range is measured in terms of percent of hiding cover on summer range and habitat effectiveness, which is a measurement of open road densities during the summer. Hiding Cover As described above, hiding cover is based on the MFWP definition and includes forested stands that have 40 percent of more canopy closure and are at least 40 acres in size. Forest Plan standard 3 requires that hiding cover be maintained on a minimum of 50 percent of each EHU. The amount of hiding provided on each project area EHU and whether they comply with Plan standard 3 is displayed in table 77. Table 77. Forest Plan hiding cover on elk summer range Elk Herd Unit Summer Range Acres Forest Plan Hiding Cover Percent Plan Hiding Cover Meets Plan Standard #3 Beaver Creek 32,406 17,701 55 Yes Keep Cool Creek 44,325 15,725 35 No Habitat Effectiveness Elk generally avoid human disturbance and/or exhibit physiological stress when exposed to human activity (Cassirer et al. 1992). In forested landscapes, open road density is used as a variable to assess levels of human disturbance upon elk. This is calculated as elk habitat effectiveness (Christensen et al. 1993; Lyon 1983), which analyzes how well summer range meets the needs of elk for growth and for welfare during the non-hunting season. Habitat effectiveness is determined by a curve generated by the Montana Elk- Logging study which recommends a minimum of 50 percent habitat effectiveness on elk summer range (Figure 74). Table 78displays the existing open road density for the project area EHUs and whether they comply with the recommended 50 percent.  Percent Habitat Effectiveness Curve (Lyon 1983)Figure 74. Percent Elk habitat effectiveness curve (Lyon 1983) Table 78. Elk herd unit summer open road density Elk Herd Unit Open Road Density1 Percent Elk Use Potential2 Meets MFWP 50 Percent Threshold Beaver Creek 1.69 51 Yes Keep Cool Creek 1.74 57 Yes 1 – includes roads that are open to the public and Forest Service administration roads that receive periodic use. 2 – taken from figure 9  Existing Condition Map showing the distribution of existing elk hiding cover for the Beaver Creek Herd Unit and the Keep Cool Herd Unit in the Stonewall Project area.Summer range, which occurs on upper-elevation lands consisting primarily of Douglas-fir or mixed conifer communities, encompasses both units in their entirety. The reduced amount of hiding cover in the Keep Cool unit is due to recent wildfires (since 2003) in the northern half which have affected over 17,000 acres. However, it should be noted that the Stonewall project area contains a disproportionate amount of existing elk hiding cover, when compared to the herd unit as a whole. Figure 75. Existing hiding cover in Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd unit For example, while the project area makes up approximately 55 percent of the Beaver Creek herd unit, it contains 80 percent of the existing hiding cover. Similarly, although the project area only includes 13 percent of the Keep Cool herd unit, it contains 30 percent of the existing hiding cover. Consequently, summer range hiding cover within the project area is widely available as shown in figure 75. Winter Range Winter range includes lower-elevation forest that provides forage and cover. Densely wooded lowlands and north/northeast-facing slopes provide valuable hiding cover, whereas drier, more open south/southwest-facing slopes that remain relatively free from snow provide available forage. Since human disturbance causes elk to expend more energy, lack of disturbance is also an important factor associated with good winter habitat (NRCS 1999). As described above, the Forest Plan requires that winter thermal cover be provided on 25 percent or more of each elk herd unit. Existing winter range thermal cover, as well as compliance with Forest Plan Standard 3 is displayed in table 79. Table 79. Forest Plan thermal cover on elk winter ranges1 Elk Herd Unit Total EHU Acres Winter Range Acres Plan Thermal Cover Acres Percent Plan Thermal Cover Meets Plan Standard #3 Beaver Creek 32,406 17,787 938 5.3 No Keep Cool Creek 44,325 13,754 527 3.8 No 1 Winter range thermal cover Elk winter range occurs on 55 and 31 percent of the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool units respectively. Because lower elevation winter range lands contain more open ponderosa pine habitat and/or shrub and nonforest communities, currently thermal cover only exists on approximately 1 to 3 percent of the winter range within each herd unit. As a result neither herd unit meets Forest Plan standard 3, which requires that thermal cover be maintained on 25 percent of the winter range within each herd unit. However, research indicates that classic thermal cover (conifer stands more than 40 ft. tall with canopy closure of at least 70 percent) is probably of little value to elk except in extreme conditions (Cook et al. 1998, pp. 41-48). This is due to the fact that elk are better able to maintain body conditions by taking advantage of solar radiation in open habitats. In addition, more recent studies in Montana winter range indicate that, when in forested habitats, elk prefer stands with more open or patchy canopies capable of supporting forested forage (Thompson et. al. 2005). Forage in dense thermal cover stands is usually too sparse to sustain elk during severe winter conditions. Definitions for elk thermal cover (Thomas 1979) are based upon what elk were assumed to prefer in the mid-1970s in northeast Oregon. Unfortunately, in droughty, interior forests, the Forest Plan definition of thermal cover generally exceeds what the sites are capable of growing or what can be sustained over time given inevitable, natural disturbances. As a result, while the project area falls below the Forest Plan standard for thermal cover, existing winter range conditions, which include more open stands with increased solar radiation and forage are considered adequate to sustain wintering elk. During the winter, snow and cold temperatures often push elk onto low-elevation, south-facing winter ranges outside the project area on private land. Also, elk have a strong fidelity to a given winter range and most cows return year after year to the same general area. Winter range within the project area herd units is displayed in figure 76.  Title: Elk winter range, thermal cover and security habitatFigure 76. Elk winter range, thermal cover and security habitat Elk Security during Hunting Season Hiding Cover/Open Road Densities During the hunting season, management of elk includes balancing the need to provide for and protect certain sex and age classes of elk and to provide hunting opportunities. While these parameters are a management function of the Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks, the Helena National Forest strives to Stonewall Vegetation Management Project – Chapter 3 – Wildlife 309 compliment these objectives through management of open road densities relative to the amount of hiding cover in elk herd units. Table 80 summarizes the Forest Plan standards based on the MFWP definitions and thresholds discussed above which are used in this analysis. Table 81 summarizes the amount of Forest Plan hiding cover by EHU, associated road densities during the hunting season, and whether the current conditions meet the Forest Plan standards for hiding cover/open road densities. Currently neither EHU meets Plan Standard 4a. Table 80. Forest thresholds for hunting season elk security Existing Percent Hiding cover1(according to MFWP definition of hiding cover)2 Max Open Road Density 80 2.4 mi/mi2 70 1.9 mi/mi2 60 1.2 mi/mi2 50 0.1 mi/mi2 1-Existing hiding cover to open road density ratio should be determined over a large geographic area, such as a timber sale analysis area, third order drainage or elk herd unit. 2- A coniferous stand having crown closure of greater than 40 percent (USDA Forest Service 1986 p. II/18). Table 81. Elk herd unit data comparing hiding cover and open road density Elk Herd Unit Total Square Miles Forest Service Plan Hiding Cover Acres Percent Plan Hiding Cover Open Road Miles1 Open Road Density1 Meets Plan Standard 4a Beaver Creek 51 17,701 55 70.4 1.4 No Keep Cool Creek 69 15,725 35 88.5 1.3 No 1 – Open roads during the hunting season Hunting Season Elk Security The relationship between open road densities and hiding cover serves as the basis for the Forest Plan standard and while this relationship is important, it does not take into account the spatial arrangement and size of unroaded patches, weather driven road access, or foraging condition during any given autumn. Additionally it is not necessarily an accurate predictor of elk security during the hunting season. Conversely, stands that may not meet the definition of hiding cover may well prove to be secure areas for elk, given local conditions of topography, remoteness and vegetation structure (i.e. a heavy downfall) that make hunter access more difficult. Therefore hiding cover alone is not synonymous with security (Lyon and Canfield 1991, Unsworth and Kuck 1991, Lyon and Christenson 1992 and Christenson et. al. 1993). Elk vulnerability to hunting results from an extremely complex relationship involving access, cover, topography, hunter density and weather (Christensen 1993). Security is the result of a combination of factors that allow elk to remain in the specific area while under stress from hunting. More specifically these are areas of coniferous cover large enough and far enough away from open roads to provide security. The “Hillis (1991) paradigm” provides these and can be used as a general guide (Christensen 1993). Hillis et al. (1991) concluded that maintaining greater than 30 percent of each herd unit as security areas with a minimum patch size of 250 acres and at least 0.5 miles from open roads (areas where elk can evade hunters), would slow the elk harvest rate and increase the probability that some bulls would be available for harvest even late in the season. Hillis et al. (1991) acknowledged that their model was most applicable on densely forested areas with steep topography and might be less applicable on more open forests. Christensen et al. (1993) suggests that roads more than any other factor affect hunting opportunity, suggesting the Hillis et al. (1991) model might be conservative. Also Burcham et al. (1999) concluded that where posted private lands occur within a herd unit, many elk may move to private land during the hunting season in spite of there being large blocks of security on public lands. Elk vulnerability during the hunting season is in part based on Hillis et al. (1991) (described above), and table 82 displays security habitat on lands greater than 250 acres that are further than 0.50 mile from an open road for the two project area herd units. Existing security habitat is displayed in figure 76. Security habitat is provided in relatively dense stands that are not particularly susceptible to MPB (mostly Douglas fir or sapling lodgepole pine). As a result while some stands that currently provide security habitat may become more open after MPB has killed susceptible trees, most stands would still provide security following mortality. Even in stands that due suffer concentrated mortality, within 10 years most dead ponderosa and lodgepole pine would have fallen, resulting in a jackstraw layer of downed woody debris. This may actually improve security simply because these stands would be extremely difficult to walk through by hunters, although no research exists to model or test this hypothesis. Table 82 displays acres and percent of existing elk security by herd unit. Table 82. Existing elk security by herd unit Elk Herd Unit Total Acres Security Habitat Beaver Creek 32,406 8,463 acres 26% Keep Cool 44,325 11,828 acres 27%  Transition Range Transition range is used by elk when migrating between summer and winter range, and is commonly made up of habitats such as Douglas-fir, aspen/pine, and other communities intermixed with grassland or shrub communities. These transitional range habitats provide forage needed by elk to build fat reserves in the fall and to support calving in the spring. Since winter range forage quality is typically poor, transitional range can be extremely important in sustaining elk populations (NRCS 1999). Project area transition range occurs largely on mid-elevations habitats or generally mid- to upper-elevation elk winter range. Water and Riparian Habitat Elk require water on a daily basis and consume it from open sources such as springs, lakes, wetland ponds, rivers and streams. Riparian areas can also be important and studies in Montana (Marcum 1975, 1976 in Thomas 1979) indicate that elk make disproportionate use of areas within 1,050 feet of open water. Summary Cover Decades of fire suppression have resulted in closed-canopy conditions that have increased elk cover across the project area, although this has been reduced somewhat due to recent MPB mortality. Hiding cover has been further reduced on over 18,000 acres due to wildfires in the last 10 years. While elk hiding cover has been reduced in both herd units (currently 35-55 percent), hiding cover within the project area is more widespread (80 percent). Future hiding cover is expected to decline as standing dead trees (due to MPB mortality) fall to the ground. Forage As described in the habitat section (section 3.1), decades of fire suppression and conifer encroachment has reduced shrub and herbaceous vegetation, as well as mountain meadow habitat and aspen. Collectively this has resulted in a reduction in elk forage within both herd units. While lands burned in the Snow Talon and more recent wildfires have increased available forage, elk use in these areas is reduced due to the large reduction in cover. While available forage in these areas would continue to increase, very little transition habitat and winter range has been affected by recent fires. As a result, forage availability in these areas remains low and is expected to continue to decline. Forest Plan Consistency Forest Plan Standard 3 (Summer Range Hiding Cover) – Because this analysis uses canopy cover to identify hiding cover, Forest Plan standard 3 states that elk summer range will be maintained at 50 percent or more of each elk herd unit. Hiding cover within the Beaver Creek unit (55 percent) currently meets Plan standard 3 guidelines, whereas the Keep Cool herd unit (35 percent) does not meet Plan standard 3. Forest Plan Standard 3 (Winter Range Thermal Cover) - Forest Plan Standard 3 requires 25 percent thermal cover within each EHU. Forest Plan thermal cover currently occurs on 1 to 3 percent of the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool elk her units and neither herd unit meets Plan standard 3. This is due largely to the dry cover types that result in more open stand conditions that characterize winter range on NFS lands. Forest Plan Standard 4a (Hiding Cover and Open Road Density) – Forest Plan standard 4a limits the hunting season open road density based upon the existing percentage of hiding cover. The existing hunting season open road densities are 1.4 miles per square mile and 1.3 miles per square mile for the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool units respectively. Consequently neither unit complies with Plan standard 4a. Habitat Effectiveness and Security Habitat Effectiveness – Habitat effectiveness is used to measure human disturbance to elk and is determined by a curve generated in the Montana elk logging study which recommends a minimum of 50 percent habitat effectiveness on elk summer range. The Beaver Creek unit is currently at 51 percent habitat effectiveness and the Keep Cool unit is at 57 percent. Consequently both units currently meet the 50 percent threshold. Security – Elk security is based on Hillis et al. (1991) who recommend maintaining greater than 30 percent of each herd unit as security areas with a minimum patch size of 250 acres and at least 0.5 miles from an open road. Using this definition elk security habitat currently occurs on 26 percent and 27 percent of the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units respectively, and neither unit meets the 30 percent recommendation. Mule Deer Methodology and Analysis Area Due to the variety of forest and nonforest communities utilized, virtually all of the Stonewall Project area provides suitable deer habitat. Like elk, effects are analyzed by looking at changes in cover and forage conditions on summer, winter and transition range and available mule deer cover is expected to be similar to that described for elk. Mule deer winter range and season-long use areas is based on MFWP range maps. Hiding and thermal cover models are based on R1-VMap data, whereas hiding and thermal cover models are described in the Criteria for Wildlife Models Helena National Forest Version June 2009 (USDA Forest Service 2009b). Suitable habitat and use by deer is widespread. In Montana the average deer home range is less than 500 acres (Riley and Dodd 1984). As a result, and considering the project area contains year-round, winter and transition range, direct, indirect and cumulative effects are evaluated across the project area. Species Status and Biology Mule deer have a global ranking of G5 and a Statewide ranking of S5, indicating they are common, widespread and abundant. Although they may be rare in parts of their range, mule deer are not considered vulnerable (MNHP 2011). Mule deer are habitat generalists, mobile, adaptive and wide ranging. As a result they use a wide variety of habitats from open to dense montane and subalpine coniferous forests, aspen, shrub communities and brushy areas. In summer they are widely distributed in forest and subalpine habitats, and in winter use lower-elevation, open, shrub-dominated areas (MNHP 2011). Within woody vegetation types, mule deer use all seral stages and do best in areas where there is a mix of seral communities. Food habitats vary seasonally and by year. Preferred forage species include bitterbrush, mountain mahogany, chokecherry, serviceberry, grasses and forbs. Forbs are most important in summer, whereas shrubs are used year-round but are important in fall, winter and spring (MNHP 2011). Competition with elk can be significant because elk have a more varied diet and on shared range, mule deer are most often negatively impacted (MNHP 2011; Frisina et al. 2006). Optimum deer habitat contain a mixture of forage and cover habitat that is well interspersed and generally, a mixture of 40 percent cover and 60 percent forage is considered optimum (Thomas 1979; Knight 2011). Available cover should include a combination of hiding, thermal and fawn rearing cover. Because deer cover and forage requirements are very similar to elk, the discussion of preferred hiding cover and forage for elk, would also apply to mule deer. Since deer are smaller, the height and density of vegetation suitable for cover (hiding and thermal) would be less than that required by elk (Thomas 1979). Also like elk, deer require water (particularly on summer range) (Julander 1966 in Thomas 1979) and optimum habitat occurs within approximately 0.5 mile of water (Mackie 1970 in Thomas 1979). Consequently riparian areas can be particularly important. Fawning habitat for mule deer consists of foraging areas with hiding and thermal cover, and is typically on spring transition range with gentle slopes with abundant succulent vegetation within 600 feet of water. While many habitats are used for fawning and rearing fawns, those providing relatively large quantities of herbaceous vegetation are most important. While deer numbers and herd health are affected by a number of factors, forage is often most limiting on carrying capacity (Knight 2011), particularly on winter range. Equally important to forage quantity is forage quality and reproduction and animal condition is best maintained if high quality (i.e., nutritious and palatable) forage is available. As a result, a combination of herbaceous and woody vegetation needs to be available. Mule deer occupy nearly all habitats of the Lincoln Ranger District at nearly all elevations during summer and fall, although they are most abundant where large quantities of nutritious forage is available. Transition range is found at the lower elevations of the summer range and contains abundant grass and forbs, intermixed with the shrub and aspen communities. Major impacts to mule deer habitat in northern forests include: (1) modification of vegetative structure, (2) decrease in nutritional quality of woody shrubs as they age, (3) modification of vegetation species composition, and (4) loss of usable habitat due to human encroachment and associated activities (Hayden et al. 2008). Mule deer in Montana have a history of population fluctuations (see figure 77). These fluctuations vary among populations in response to environmental conditions and may reflect general, long-term changes in distribution and demographics, periodic fluctuations, year to year fluctuations, and season to season changes within years (Mackie et. al. 1998 p. 110).  Mule Deer Fluctuations in Montana from 1970 to 2011 (Montana Field Guide)Figure 77. Mule Deer Fluctuations in Montana from 1970 to 2011 (Montana Field Guide) Mule Deer Project Area Habitat Because the project area includes a mixture of mature and regenerating forest interspersed with nonforest (on NFS and adjacent private lands), all of the project area provides deer habitat. Spring, summer and fall range occur on approximately 85 percent of the project area, although some of this is also utilized in the winter, whereas winter/yearlong range occurs on approximately 15 percent (See figure 76) (MDFWP 2005-GIS distribution layer). While canopy cover has been reduced due to recent MPB mortality, like elk, standing dead trees continue to provide hiding cover. As a result cover is widespread and approximately 80 percent of the project area contains hiding cover (See figure 78). Of this over 99 percent is on NFS lands. The availability of thermal cover is reduced due to the more open ponderosa pine stands occurring at lower elevations. Also, while pre-kill data is used to identify existing thermal cover, cover in areas with concentrated mortality would be expected to decline in the next 10 years as mortality continues and trees fall to the ground. Currently, thermal cover exists on 492 acres or 14 percent of the project area mule deer winter range (See figure 78).  Title: Mule deer range and cover within the project areaFigure 78. Mule deer range and cover within the project area While there has been very little regeneration harvest in the last 15 years, some regenerated stands, particularly at lower elevations still contain higher quantities of deer forage, although early successional forage would continue to decline. Overall, due to fire suppression increasing stand density and conifer encroachment, aspen as well as understory diversity (grasses, forbs and shrubs) have been declining within forested stands. Conifer encroachment has also reduced shrub and herbaceous diversity in nonforest habitats. Finally in the absence of fire, there is little shrub regeneration and many existing shrubs, particularly on transition and winter ranges are becoming decadent. Collectively these conditions have contributed to a reduction in forage across much of the project area. Conversely, forage has increased on approximately 365 acres that recently (since 2003) burned by wildfire, although all of this occurs on upper elevation habitat. Also, forage would increase over time in areas where MPB have opened up the forest canopy, although conifer encroachment and elevated levels of downed woody debris may reduce the availability of forage for deer (Hayden et al. 2008). In summary, while deer hiding cover is widespread due to the more open stand conditions that exist and MPB mortality, thermal cover within deer winter ranges is presently low and would continue to decline. While forage availability has been improved on summer range affected by wildfire, forage on winter and transition range, as well as most of the summer range has been reduced due to increased conifer encroachment and the absence of fire. Migratory Birds Methodology and Analysis Area Migratory birds use diverse habitat conditions; therefore, existing habitat and environmental effects are primarily addressed in the assessment of the habitat conditions under the biophysical settings discussed in section 3.1. Additionally the bald eagle, black-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl, northern goshawk, and pileated woodpecker are priority I and II species in Montana; and the needs of migratory birds are also addressed in the analysis provided for these species. As a result, migratory birds are collectively addressed through the habitat and species-specific sections of this document. While the analysis areas vary somewhat by species, generally, because bird use is determined by both site-specific and landscape considerations, direct and indirect effects to migratory birds are evaluated across the project area, whereas cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary. Migratory Bird Treaty Act In December 2008, the Forest Service entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the United States Department of Interior (USDI) Fish and Wildlife Service on the Migratory Bird Treaty Act to further clarify agency responsibilities (USDA Forest Service and USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2008). Four key principles embodied in the MOU direct the Forest Service to (1) focus on bird populations; (2) focus on habitat restoration and enhancement where actions can benefit specific ecosystems and migratory birds dependent on them; (3) recognize that actions taken to benefit some migratory bird populations may adversely affect other migratory bird populations; and (4) recognize that actions that may provide long-term benefits to migratory birds may have short-term impacts on individual birds. The parties agreed that through the NEPA process, the Forest Service would evaluate the effects of agency actions on migratory birds, focusing first on species of management concern along with their priority habitats and key risk factors. Migratory birds are included under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) and incorporate most species of birds present in the project area. Executive Order 13186 directs departments and agencies to take certain actions to further implement the MBTA. Specifically, the Order directs federal agencies, whose direct activities will likely result in the “take” of migratory birds, to develop and implement a memorandum of understanding with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service that shall promote the conservation of bird populations. Under Executive Order 13186, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is responsible to ensure that environmental analyses of federal actions evaluate the effects of actions and agency plans on migratory birds, with emphasis on species of concern. In general, most birds migrate to some degree, including seasonal movements from higher to lower elevations within the same geographic region. The three most referenced groups of migratory birds are waterfowl, raptors, and neo-tropical migrants. Birds protected under the act include all common songbirds, waterfowl, shorebirds, hawks, owls, eagles, ravens, crows, native doves and pigeons, swifts, Wildlife – Chapter 3 – Stonewall Vegetation Management Project 316 martins, swallows and others, including their body parts (feathers, plumes etc.), nests, and eggs. A complete list of protected species is found at 50 CFR 10.13. Project Level Migratory Birds The Helena National Forest has participated in the Region One Landbird Monitoring Program in partnership with the Avian Science Center (ASC) at the University of Montana. Habitat and distribution surveys have been conducted for landbirds from 1994- 2008. The USFS Northern Region Songbird Monitoring Program (Hutto and Young 2002) has provided data on population trends, habitat relationships, and effects from past management activities for birds breeding in western Montana. According to Hutto, “There are not nearly enough years of data to make meaningful use of our population trend data yet, but the preliminary data suggest that most populations have remained fairly stable during the 12-year period from 1994-2006” (See http://avianscience.dbs.umt.edu/projects/trends.php). The project area contains three bird point count transects that were monitored from 1994-2004. Over 1,000 bird observations were made during this period. Table 83 identifies those birds identified as part of the Landbird Monitoring Program, the number of observations and preferred habitat. As described previously, migratory birds are also addressed through the habitat analysis presented. Table 83. Project area migratory birds Bird Species1 Habitat Bird Species1 Habitat American Crow (4) Open Lands Mountain Bluebird (3) Grassland/Shrub American Dipper(4) Riparian Mountain Chickadee (56) Dry Forest American Goldfinch (1) Grassland/Shrub Northern Flicker (22) Snags American Robin (54) Generalist Olive-sided Flycatcher (1) Cool Moist Forest Bank Swallow (1) Riparian Orange crowned Warbler (1) Riparian Barred Owl (1) Cool Moist Forest Osprey (1) Riparian/Open Water Black-capped Chickadee (1) Dry Forest Pileated Woodpecker (3) Snags Brown headed cowbird (12) Forest Edge Pine Siskin (94) Dry Forest Brown Creeper (1) Dry Forest Red-breasted Nuthatch (49) Snags/Forest Canada Goose (1) Riparian/Open Water Red-winged Blackbird (9) Riparian Cassin’s Vireo (5) Dry Forest Red-naped Sapsucker (3) Snags/Riparian Forest Chipping Sparrow (27) Dry Forest Ruby Crowned Kinglet (130) Dry Forest Clark’s Nutcracker (7) Dry Forest Ruffed Grouse (14) Young Forest Common Nighthawk (1) Dry Forest Song Sparrow (17) Riparian Common Raven (42) Generalist Swainson’s Thrush (24) Dry and Cool Forest Common Yellowthroat (22) Riparian Towensend’s Warbler (52) Dry and Cool Forest Dark-eyed Junco (103) Generalist Tree Swallow (7) Grassland/Edge Dusky Flycatcher (15) Dry Forest Varied Thrush (18) Dry and Cool Forest Fox Sparrow (4) Forest Edges Warbling Vireo (25) Riparian Golden-crowned Kinglet (10) Spruce Fir Forest Western Tanager (9) Dry Forest Gray Jay (3) Cool moist/subalpine Forest Williamson’s Sapsucker (3) Snags, Dry Forest Great Blue Heron (3) Riparian/Open Water Willow Flycatcher (5) Riparian Hairy Woodpecker (5) Snags/Aspen Wilson’s Snipe (8) Riparian Hammond’s Flycatcher (3) Cool moist forest Wilson’s Warbler (5) Riparian/Shrub Bird Species1 Habitat Bird Species1 Habitat Hermit Thrush (8) Cool Moist Forest Winter Wren (2) Forest Riparian Lincoln’s Sparrow (6) Grassland/Shrub Yellow-rumped Warbler (46) Forest Generalist MacGillivray’s Warbler (13) Shrubland Yellow Warbler (64) Riparian Forest Mallard (1) Riparian/Open Water   1 – number in parenthesis is the number of observations for that species. The project area provides diverse, well distributed habitats for a variety of bird species. Some species are positively affected by land management while others are negatively affected. Hejl and others (1995) recommend a bird conservation strategy composed of three parts: (1) maintain, mimic, and restore natural vegetation patterns and processes; (2) ensure that the specific habitat components required by focus species are created and/or maintained; and (3) monitor the habitats and individual species. The U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service is responsible for identifying migratory non-game birds that, without conservation actions, are likely to become candidates for listing under ESA. To that end, the Service identifies birds of conservation concern by region (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2008). The Stonewall Project area falls within Bird Conservation Region (BCR) 10, which includes 22 species. Of these, nine species have been documented in or near the project area or the project area provides suitable habitat. Table 84 identifies these species, their preferred habitat conditions and where environmental effects are assessed. Table 84. Project area birds of conservation concern Species General Habitat Summary1 Environmental Consequences Assessed Bald Eagle Prefer late successional forests and shorelines adjacent to open water lakes and rivers. Sensitive Species – Bald Eagle Flammulated Owl Mature forest with open canopy. Avoids dense young stands. Usually open conifer forests containing pine, with some brush or saplings. Shows strong preference for ponderosa pine. Sensitive Species – Flammulated owl Calliope Hummingbird Seral shrublands and forest openings to moderate elevation in the mountains. Use re-growth from 8 to 15 years after logging or fire. Habitats – Meadows and Shrubland Williamson’s Sapsucker Middle to high elevations in montane spruce-fir, Douglas fir, lodgepole and ponderosa pine forests. Also in mixed deciduous/coniferous forest with aspen. Favors nest sites adjacent to open ponderosa pine forests. Restricted to large diameter trees and snags for nesting, except in aspen. Habitats – Snag and downed wood; MIS-Pileated Woodpecker Lewis’s Woodpecker Primarily breeds in open ponderosa pine forest, burned coniferous forest and open riparian woodlands. Occupy burned habitats after a shrub understory is established Habitats – Dry Forest Olive-sided Flycatcher While they may occur in forested openings (e.g., disturbed areas), or open forests with low canopy cover. They are adapted to fire dependent landscapes and most often associated with post-fire habitat. Common in spruce and aspen but uncommon in mixed conifer or ponderosa pine. Habitats – Cool, Moist Forest and Aspen Willow Flycatcher Breed in riparian habitat that has a mid-story of willows or alders and an intact shrub layer. Shrubs are often Habitat - Riparian Wildlife – Chapter 3 – Stonewall Vegetation Management Project 318 Species General Habitat Summary1 Environmental Consequences Assessed interspersed with openings. Brewer’s Sparrow Associated with shrublands, primarily sagebrush. Prefer unburned to burned habitat. Habitats – Meadows and Shrubland Cassin’s Finch Prefers open dry coniferous forests with mature lodgepole and ponderosa pine but will utilize Douglas fir or mixed coniferous forest. Post-fire and heavily logged sites used extensively. Habitats – Dry and Cool, Moist Forest 1 – Habitat information taken from Montana Partners in Flight (2000) Environmental Consequences Methodology Information used in the effects analysis includes aerial photographs, stand exam data, Northern Region Vegetation Mapping Project (R1-VMAP) data, field surveys and photos, data collected from project field visits and research literature including species and regional conservation assessments. Because this assessment involves a multi-scale analysis, Geographical Information System (GIS) coverages and data sets for vegetation stand and landscape structural characteristics, past management activities, stream, riparian and aquatic data, wildfire activity, national and state wildlife documentation databases and district and Forestwide observation data and surveys were collectively used to assess wildlife habitat conditions and effects. Potential direct, indirect and cumulative effects are evaluated by looking at the issue indictors identified in section 2.4. This section discusses effects of individual treatments, alternative effects and effects to species and habitats evaluated in detail (table 85). Because anticipated effects are based upon implementation of project design features (PDFs), design features specific to wildlife are also presented. Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to wildlife and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The design features in table 9 pertaining to wildlife are WL-1, through WL-27. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to both action alternatives. Specific design features listed above applicable to wildlife are designed to protect other resources such as water and soil. Alternative Effect Summary The following table displays a summary of effects to habitat and species in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area by alternative. Information presented is based on alternative, treatment and species/habitat specific effects discussed throughout section 4. Stonewall Vegetation Management Project – Chapter 3 – Wildlife 319 Table 85. Wildlife effects summary by alternative BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Dry Forest Due to the absence of low severity fire, open-canopy dry forest habitat would likely continue to decline. There may also be a long-term reduction in species diversity (ponderosa pine) and large diameter trees and snags. A total of 13,322 acres of closed-canopy habitat and scattered open-canopy habitat exists. Habitat for species that prefer or require open-canopy habitat would continue to decline. This alternative would result in the greatest increase in open-canopy habitat (4,681 acres), whereas the forest canopy would be reduced to 8,640 acres. Species diversity, ponderosa pine and large diameter trees and snags would be maintained or increase on sites treated. Habitat for species that prefer or require dry forest open-canopy mature forest and large ponderosa pine would increase by 35 percent of this BPS. The long-term sustainability of the dry forest BPS would be maintained on sites treated. Similar to alternative 2 except that open-canopy habitat would be reduced by 23 percent from Alt. 2. 9,907 acres of closed-canopy and 3,414 acres of open-canopy habitat would occur. Species diversity, ponderosa pine and large diameter trees and snags would be maintained or increase on sites treated. Habitat for species that prefer or require open-canopy mature forest and large ponderosa pine would increase by 26 percent or this BPS. The long-term sustainability of the dry forest BPS would be maintained on sites treated. Cool-moist Forest In the short and long term stands would continue to progress to climax, with a decrease in seral species (ponderosa pine, aspen, whitebark pine,, aspen Douglas-fir and Engelmann spruce. Stands would become more homogeneous with closed-canopy conditions predominating on approximately 9,600 acres and continued decline in early seral and open-canopy habitats. Habitat for species that prefer or require open-canopy habitat would continue to decline. Proposed timber harvest would result in a small increase in early seral habitats (50 acres), whereas early seral habitat would occur on approximately 600 acres due to high intensity burning. More open stand conditions would occur on approximately 2,000 acres due to low severity fire. So while closed-canopy conditions would predominate (6,600 acres), early seral and open-canopy habitat would increase on 28 percent of the project area cool-moist forest habitat. Landscape and stand level diversity within the BPS would increase. Proposed timber harvest would result in a small increase in early seral habitats (50 acres), whereas early seral habitat would occur on approximately 500 acres due to high intensity burning. Open stand conditions would occur on approximately 1,500 acres. So while closedcanopy conditions would predominate (7,200 acres), early seral and open-canopy habitat would increase on 22 percent of the project area cool-moist forest habitat. Landscape and stand level diversity within the BPS would increase. Upper Sub-alpine Fir Due the continued absence of fire and insect and disease concerns, both stand and landscape level whitebark pine would likely continue to decline. If high intensity fire does occur it is likely that existing pine regeneration would be reduced. Habitat for species such as grizzly, red squirrel and Clark’s nutcracker, as well as many mammals and birds that utilize its seeds may also decline. Approximately 900 acres of stands containing a predominance of whitebark pine would be burned with mixed severity fire. Of this, 125 acres or 21 percent of the upper sub-alpine fire BPS would be treated. Over the long term this is expected to maintain whitebark pine across the landscape and provide habitat for grizzly and other species that prefer or require this declining habitat. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Riparian Riparian habitats would be largely unchanged and continue to be available. Over the long term, hardwood and shrub diversity would likely continue to decline due to conifer encroachment and habitat for species that prefer these components may be reduced. With implementation of INFISH buffers, much of the riparian habitat would not be treated, although scattered low-intensity burning would occur. Where burning occurs, herbaceous vegetation and shrubs/hardwoods would increase and riparian habitat would be maintained or improved. Riparian habitats would remain intact and would continue to be available across the landscape. Mountain Meadow/Shrub Shrub and meadow habitat may expand somewhat where MPB mortality is high. Due to continued conifer encroachment, over the long term mountain meadow & shrub habitat would continue to decline. Little shrub regeneration would occur and mature and decadent shrubs would increase. This habitat would largely be maintained, although herbaceous vegetation and shrub diversity may continue to be low or decline. Prescribed fire is proposed in 11 percent and 13 percent of the mountain meadow and shrub habitat respectively. Over the short term herbaceous and shrubs would be reduced on the acreage treated, although grass/forb abundance and diversity would increase within 1-2 years of treatment and with implementation of project design features a shrub component would be maintained on all sites. Over the long term, herbaceous vegetation and shrubs would increase due to stimulation of new growth by burning and reduced conifer encroachment. Forage and cover associated with these communities would be improved on the acreage treated. Aspen Due to the absence of fire existing aspen would continue to decline and over the long term the distribution and abundance would be reduced or eliminated (in the absence of future disturbance). Habitat for wildlife species that prefer or require aspen would continue to decline. Lands containing an aspen component would be treated on approximately 6,000 acres. In addition to improving the amount of aspen, prescribed fire is also expected to improve the nutritionally quality of forage. Habitat for wildlife species that prefer or require aspen would be maintained or improved on sites treated. Lands containing an aspen component would be treated on approximately 5,000 acres. In addition to improving the amount of aspen, prescribed fire is also expected to improve the nutritionally quality of forage. Habitat for wildlife species that prefer or require aspen would be maintained or improved on sites treated. Dead Wood Snag availability in all size classes would remain high for the next few years. While the availability of small to medium diameter snags would remain high, as existing large snags fall down and due to a reduction in ponderosa pine regeneration, recruitment of future large diameter snags would be reduced. Habitat for species that utilize downed woody debris would remain high both in the short and long term. Snag availability would remain high in treated and untreated areas. Downed woody debris would be reduced on approximately 35 percent of the project area, although Forest Plan and Regional levels of dead wood would be retained on all sites. Therefore, while dead wood would be reduced within treatment sites, with implementation of PDFs and considering 25 percent of prescribed fire units would be left unburned and that dead wood would be relatively unchanged within riparian buffers, adequate snags and downed wood would be maintained across the landscape to meet wildlife needs. Snag availability would remain high in treated and untreated areas. Downed woody debris would be reduced on approximately 27 percent of the project area, although Forest Plan and Regional levels of dead wood would be retained on all sites. With implementation of PDFs and considering 25 percent of prescribed fire units would be left unburned and that dead wood would be relatively unchanged within riparian buffers, adequate snags and downed wood would be maintained across the landscape to meet wildlife needs. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 All Biophysical Settings Due to elevated fuels across the project area the risk of wildfire would remain high. The likelihood of high intensity stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. Risk of wildfire would be reduced on approximately 35 percent of the project area proposed for treatment. Due to the landscape level burning proposed, wildfire risk would also be reduced on lands interspersed with treated areas and this alternative would result in the lowest risk of stand replacing wildfire. Risk of wildfire would be reduced on approximately 27 percent of the project area proposed for treatment. Due to the landscape level burning proposed, wildfire risk would also be reduced on lands interspersed with treated areas. Wildfire risk would be reduced, but at a reduced level from that of alternative 2. Lynx Over the short term there would be little change in lynx habitat. As stands open up due to MPB mortality, conifer regeneration and foraging habitat would increase. Cover would remain high due to elevated levels of downed wood and continued development of the understory. Stands with little MBP mortality would remain closed and cover and forage would be slow to develop. Den and foraging habitat have been reduced on 28 percent of BL-08 as a result of recent fires. Due to wildfire risk, the likelihood of a further reduction in cover/foraging habitat would remain high. Stand initiation occurs on 1,971 acres, although it would continue to decline. Multi-storied foraging habitat would occur on 11,913 acres, and mid-seral habitat would occur on 16,445 acres. Winter use and snow compaction would be largely unchanged. Localized, short-term increases in disturbance would occur. There would be a 22 percent reduction in stand initiation habitat, a 1 percent reduction in multi-storied habitat and an 8 percent reduction in mid-seral habitat. All winter foraging habitat proposed for treatment occurs in the CWPP WUI. While some foraging habitat would be retained on sites treated (unburned areas and riparian buffers), it would take 15 to 20 years before foraging habitat is restored on these sites. There would be some increase in over snow activity at lower elevations in harvest sites, but use would largely stay on designated trails. Proposed actions would promote aspen and increase shrub and conifer diversity on 5,824 acres of mapped lynx habitat, and increase long-term winter foraging habitat on 8 percent of both BL-07 and 08. Connectivity and landscape-level habitat would be maintained. Risk of high intensity wildfire would be reduced. Proposed actions and anticipated effects are consistent with the NRMLD and BO. Multi-storied critical habitat would be reduced by 117 acres. Localized, short-term increases in disturbance would occur. There would be an 11 percent, 1 percent and 6 percent reduction in stand initiation, multi-storied and mid-seral habitat respectively. All winter foraging habitat proposed for treatment occurs in the CWPP WUI. While some foraging habitat would be retained on sites treated (unburned areas and riparian buffers), it would take 15 to 20 years before foraging habitat is restored. There would be some increase in over snow activity at lower elevations in harvest sites, but use would largely stay on designated trails. Proposed actions would promote aspen and increase shrub and conifer diversity on 4,244 acres of mapped lynx habitat, and improve long-term winter foraging habitat on 6 percent and 7 percent of BL-07 and BL-08 respectively. Connectivity and landscape level habitat would be maintained. Risk of high intensity wildfire would be reduced. Proposed actions and effects are consistent with the NRMLD and BO. Multi-storied critical habitat would be reduced by 94 acres. Wolf No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Human access and potential impacts to wolves would be largely unchanged. Prey availability (deer and elk) and suitable den, rendezvous and foraging habitat would also be largely unchanged. While big game cover would increase, available forage would continue to decline. Risks of stand replacing wildfire are highest under this alternative. No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Disturbance to foraging wolves during implementation could occur, but would involve short-term disturbance during implementation. Big game populations and wolf foraging opportunities would be maintained in the short term and increased in the long term. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. No known den or rendezvous sites would be affected. Disturbance to foraging wolves during implementation could occur, but would involve short-term disturbance during implementation. Big game populations and wolf foraging opportunities would be maintained in the short term and increased in the long term. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced across the landscape, but at a reduced level from that of alternative 2. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Grizzly Core, security habitat, TMRD and OMRD would be unchanged. Human access and potential impacts to bear would be largely unchanged. Over the short term habitat would be unchanged, although it is expected that whitebark pine would continue to decline and there would be a long-term reduction across the landscape. Risks of high intensity wildfire and a large reduction in cover are highest under this alternative. Localized and short-term increases in human disturbance would occur during implementation. Human access would be largely unchanged. While no mortality is anticipated, short-term disturbance and displacement is possible during treatment. A total of 5,526 acres and 2,691 acres of the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units would be affected. Cover would be reduced on most of this acreage, although un-treated areas would be maintained and interspersed within and adjacent to treatment units. Within modeled den habitat, 250acres would be reduced and 980 acres would be burned, although 94 percent of the existing den habitat would be retained and no high quality den habitat affected. Whitebark pine would be maintained in the short and long term on sites treated, and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Core and security habitat would be unchanged in both sub-units. Within Arrastra Mountain there would be a short-term increase (2.6 miles for up to 5 years) in total and open road density. There would be no change in TMRD or OMRD within the Red Mountain sub-unit. Localized and short-term increases in human disturbance would occur during implementation. Human access would be largely unchanged. While no mortality is anticipated, short-term disturbance and displacement is possible during treatment. A total of 4,179 acres and 2,039 acres of the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units would be affected. Cover would be reduced on this acreage, although un-treated areas would be maintained and interspersed within and adjacent to treatment units. Within modeled den habitat, 232 acres would be reduced and 937 acres would be burned, although 94 percent of the existing den habitat would be retained and no high quality den habitat would be affected. Whitebark pine would be maintained in the short and long term on sites treated, and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced. Core and security habitat would be unchanged in both sub-units. Within Arrastra Mountain there would be a short-term increase (0.4 miles for up to 5 years) in total and open road density. There would be no change in TMRD or OMRD within the Red Mountain sub-unit. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Wolverine Human access, prey availability including big game (carrion) would be largely unchanged. Den habitat would be maintained or possibly improved due to increased levels of downed woody debris. Landscape level connectivity and travel/dispersal corridors would be maintained. Risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. Seven percent of the analysis area natal den habitat would be affected by burning. Because most sites are at lower elevations with reduced snow cover and due to the timing of burning, there are no anticipated impacts to denning animals. Suitable den habitat would be widely available within and adjacent to the analysis area. Short-term disturbance to foraging individuals could occur during treatment. Due to reductions in canopy cover and downed wood, suitable foraging habitat would be reduced on approximately 2,000 acres proposed for regeneration harvest and openings associated with mixed severity fire. Foraging habitat quality would be affected on another 6,500 acres that maintain a mature canopy but have reduced canopy and DWD. Landscape connectivity, travel corridors and prey/carrion availability would be maintained and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative Seven percent of the analysis area natal den habitat would be affected by burning. Because most sites are at lower elevations with reduced snow cover and due to the timing of burning, there are no anticipated impacts to denning animals. Suitable den habitat would be widely available within and adjacent to the analysis area. Short-term disturbance to foraging individuals could occur during treatment. Due to reductions in canopy cover and downed wood, suitable foraging habitat would be reduced on approximately 1,765 acres proposed for regeneration harvest and openings associated with mixed severity fire. Foraging habitat quality would be affected on another 4,800 acres that maintain a mature canopy but have reduced canopy and DWD. Landscape connectivity, travel corridors and prey/carrion availability would be maintained and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced. Fisher While there would likely be some future reduction in canopy cover, with increased levels of downed woody debris, suitable habitat would be largely maintained. Similarly, prey availability would not be expected to change, although risk of stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Human access would be largely unchanged. While no mortality is anticipated short-term disturbance to foraging individuals could occur and up to 2,171 acres of suitable habitat. Of this, suitable habitat would be reduced on approximately 367 acres of den/rest habitat and 502 acres of foraging habitat. Approximately 88 percent of the existing suitable habitat would be maintained. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors as well as prey availability would be maintained and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Human access would be largely unchanged. While no mortality is anticipated short-term disturbance to foraging individuals could occur and up to 1,459 acres of suitable habitat. Of this, suitable habitat would be reduced on approximately 290 acres of den/rest habitat and 389 acres of foraging habitat. Approximately 91 percent of the existing suitable habitat would be maintained. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors as well as prey availability would be maintained and the risk of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced under this alternative Townsend’s big-eared bat Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected and foraging habitat would be largely unchanged. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected A total of 8,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat would be affected by treatment. No mortality is anticipated although short-term disturbance from smoke to foraging bats could occur. Available foraging habitat would be widespread and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Hibernacula, swarming and roost habitat would not be affected. A total of 6,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat would be affected by treatment. No mortality is anticipated although short-term disturbance from smoke to foraging bats could occur. Available foraging habitat would be widespread and the risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Bald Eagle Nest, foraging and roost habitat would be largely unaffected. There are no anticipated impacts to the existing eagle nest, although the risk of wildfire is highest under this alternative. With implementation of project design features, there are no direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Approximately 100 acres of potentially suitable nest habitat would be reduced. Foraging habitat would not be treated, although short-term disturbance to foraging birds could occur. Untreated nest and foraging habitat would continue to be widely available. Risks of wildfire are lowest under this alternative. With implementation of project design features, there are no direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Approximately 100 acres of potentially suitable nest habitat would be reduced. Foraging habitat would not be treated, although short-term disturbance to foraging birds could occur. Untreated nest and foraging habitat would continue to be widely available. Risks of wildfire would be reduced. Black-backed Woodpecker Existing low quality habitat would be unchanged, although existing high quality habitat would continue to decline. Because the risk of wildfire is highest under this alternative, it is likely that suitable high quality burned habitat would continue to be available. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. Because no high quality habitat would be affected, there is no mortality anticipated and the likelihood of disturbance is low. Low quality habitat affected by MPB mortality would be reduced on approximately 3,100 acres, whereas future high quality habitat would be created on approximately 1,200 acres due to high intensity burning. Existing high quality burned habitat would continue to decline and the likelihood that future high quality habitat would be created through wildfire would be reduced. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. Because no high quality habitat would be affected, there is no mortality anticipated and the likelihood of disturbance is low. Low quality habitat affected by MPB mortality would be reduced on approximately 1,895 acres, whereas high quality habitat would be created on approximately 800 acres due to high intensity burning. Existing high quality burned habitat would continue to decline and the likelihood that future high quality habitat would be created through wildfire would be reduced. Suitable BBW habitat would continue to be widely available across the Forest. Flammulated Owl Because this species is strongly associated with open-canopy habitats, particularly in the dry forest BPS, suitable flammulated owl habitat would continue to decline under this alternative. While large diameter nest trees would increase in the short term, availability would decline over the long term. The likelihood of high intensity wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Due to this species infrequent occurrence and small amount of preferred habitat, the likelihood of mortality and disturbance is low. Suitable nest habitat would be reduced by approximately 1 percent due to proposed regeneration harvest, whereas burning would provide preferred open-canopy foraging habitat on 45 percent of the existing habitat. Additionally, owl habitat would be restored or created on almost 4,200 acres or 31 percent of the dry forest community. Treatments would promote ponderosa pine and potential nest trees across the landscape and the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. Due to this species infrequent occurrence and small amount of preferred habitat, the likelihood of mortality and disturbance is low. Suitable nest habitat would be reduced by approximately 1 percent due to proposed regeneration harvest, whereas burning would provide preferred open-canopy foraging habitat on 29 percent of the existing habitat. Additionally, owl habitat would be restored or created on almost 2,800 acres or 21 percent of the dry forest community. Treatments would promote ponderosa pine and potential nest trees across the landscape and reduce the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Western Boreal Toad Western boreal toads and their habitat would not be affected. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a long-term reduction in breeding and upland habitat is highest under this alternative. Because breeding habitat would not be treated, and with implementation of project design features (SMZ zones), the likelihood of mortality is low and direct effects would involve largely short-term disturbance. Over 8,500 acres of upland habitat would be affected, although suitable habitat would continue to occur on sites treated and long-term foraging habitat would be improved. The likelihood of impacts to breeding and upland habitat from high severity wildfire are lowest under this alternative. Because breeding habitat would not be treated, and with implementation of project design features (SMZ zones), the likelihood of mortality is low and direct effects would involve largely short-term disturbance. Over 6,500 acres of upland habitat would be affected, although suitable habitat would continue to occur on sites treated and long-term foraging habitat would be improved. The likelihood of impacts to breeding and upland habitat from high severity wildfire would be reduced. Northern Goshawk Human access and disturbance to nesting and foraging birds would be largely unchanged. Existing old growth habitat would remain unchanged. Suitable nest habitat would increase, although landscape diversity associated with foraging and post-fledging habitat would be largely unchanged. Risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable nest habitat is highest under this alternative. With implementation of project design features, no direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction are anticipated. Short-term disturbance to foraging birds and fledged young during implementation is likely. Regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed severity fire would reduce nesting and foraging habitat by 444 acres and 348 acres respectively. Over 92 percent of the suitable nest and foraging habitat would be retained. Suitable nest, forage and PFA habitat would occur in all affected drainages and landscape conditions resulting from treatment are consistent with goshawk use. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat is lowest under this alternative. With implementation of project design features, no direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction are anticipated. Short-term disturbance to foraging birds and fledged young during implementation is likely. Regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed severity fire would reduce nesting and foraging habitat by 275 acres and 180 acres respectively. Over 95 percent of the suitable nest and foraging habitat would be retained. Suitable nest, forage and PFA habitat would occur in all affected drainages and landscape conditions resulting from treatment are consistent with goshawk use. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat would be reduced. Pileated Woodpecker Old growth habitat would not be treated. Suitable large diameter snags for nesting would remain common for the next 10-20 years. Due to reduced ponderosa pine regeneration and concentrated mortality of existing trees, f large diameter snags would be reduced in the future, although they would continue to be available. Foraging habitat would increase due to continued insect and disease related mortality. The risk of stand replacing wildfire and a reduction in suitable habitat is highest under this alternative. Approximately 36 percent of the suitable habitat would be affected by treatment and disturbance/mortality is possible, although risk of mortality is reduced with implementation of project design features. A long-term reduction in habitat would occur on 540 acres, whereas the quality of suitable habitat would be reduced for 10 to 20 years on 2,666 acres. Over the long term restoration of open grown ponderosa pine and western larch may improve habitat on 5,700 acres and the risk of stand replacing wildfire Is lowest under this alternative. Approximately 28 percent of the suitable habitat would be affected by treatment and disturbance/mortality is possible, although risk of mortality is reduced with implementation of project design features. A long-term reduction in habitat would occur on 200 acres, whereas the quality of suitable habitat would be reduced for 10 to 20 years on 1,920 acres. Over the long term restoration of open grown ponderosa pine and western larch may improve habitat on 4,500 acres and the risk of stand replacing wildfire Is reduced under this alternative. BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Hairy Woodpecker Suitable snags and nesting and foraging habitat would be maintained and continue to be widely available. Effects are expected to be similar to those described under pileated woodpecker. Effects are expected to be similar to those described under pileated woodpecker American Marten Suitable closed-canopy habitat has been greatly reduced due to MPB mortality and existing habitat would be maintained. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. While mortality or disturbance are possible, because marten are largely restricted to upper elevations and deep snow (i.e. lands not proposed for treatment) and because widespread canopy reduction has reduced habitat suitability and likely use of the area, the likelihood of mortality is low. Suitable habitat would be reduced by 459 acres (7 percent) due to regeneration harvest and mixed severity openings. Also due to structural changes (canopy/dead wood), there would be a 15- to 20-year reduction in habitat quality on 1,731 acres. Treatments would improve species and landscape diversity, and maintain 93 percent of the suitable habitat over the long-term. Also the risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. While mortality or disturbance are possible, because marten are largely restricted to upper elevations and deep snow (i.e. lands not proposed for treatment) and because widespread canopy reduction has reduced habitat suitability and likely use of the area, the likelihood or mortality is low. Suitable habitat would be reduced by 283 acres (4 percent) due to regeneration harvest and mixed severity openings. Also due to structural changes (canopy/dead wood), there would be a 15- to 20-year reduction in habitat quality on 1,088 acres. Treatments would improve species and landscape diversity, and maintain 96 percent of the suitable habitat over the long term. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. Elk Hunter access and hunting/non-hunting mortality would be unchanged. No change in open road density, elk security or habitat effectiveness would occur, although neither herd unit would comply with Plan standard 4a. Hiding cover would be provided on 55 percent (17,701 acres) and 35 percent (15,725 acres) of the Beaver Cr. and Keep Cool herd units respectively. Compliance with Plan standard 3a would occur on Beaver Cr, whereas Keep Cool would continue to fall below the Plan threshold. Winter range thermal cover would be provided on approximately 5 percent (938 acres) of the BC unit, and 4 percent (527 acres) of the KC unit. Both units would continue to fall below Plan thresholds. Continuing MPB mortality would reduce hiding and thermal cover in some areas. Forage would remain low, hardwood & shrub diversity would continue to decline, and herd No change in open road density or elk security would occur, although neither herd unit would comply with Plan standard 4a. There would be a short-term (<5 years) increase in administrative road density (2.6 miles) within the Beaver Creek unit, but habitat effectiveness recommendations would be maintained. Short-term increases in hunter related mortality may occur, but no long-term hunting/non-hunting mortality is anticipated. Hiding cover would be provided on 46 percent (14,826 acres) and 34 percent (14,994 acres) of the Beaver Cr. and Keep Cool Cr. units respectively. Neither herd unit would comply with hiding cover requirements in Plan standard 3. Winter range thermal cover would be provided on approximately 4 percent of the BC (754 acres) and KC (501acres) herd units, and both units would continue to fall below Plan thresholds (Plan standard 3). Forage would be increased on 5,863 acres and 2,700 acres of the BC and KC units respectively and herd health would be No change in open road density or elk security would occur, although neither herd unit would comply with Plan standard 4a. There would be a short-term (<5 years) increase in administrative road density (0.4 miles) within the Beaver Creek unit but habitat effectiveness recommendations would be maintained. Short-term increases in hunter related mortality may occur, but no long-term hunting/non-hunting mortality is anticipated. Hiding cover would be provided on 49 percent (16,034 acres) and 34 percent (15,237 acres) of the Beaver Cr. and Keep Cool Cr. units respectively. Neither herd unit would comply with hiding cover requirements in Plan standard 3. Winter range thermal cover would be provided on approximately 4 percent of the BC (754 acres) and KC (508 acres) herd units, and both units would continue to fall below Plan thresholds (Plan standard 3). Forage would be increased on over 4,500 acres and 2040 acres of the BC and KC units respectively and herd health BPS/Habitat/Species Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 numbers would be largely unchanged. Effects of predation would be largely unchanged. The risk of a long-term reduction in cover from wildfire is highest under this alternative. maintained in the short term and improved over the long term. Effects of predation would be largely unchanged. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is lowest under this alternative. would be maintained in the short term and improved over the long term. Effects of predation would be largely unchanged. The risk of stand replacing wildfire is reduced under this alternative. Mule Deer Hunter access would be largely unchanged. Hiding and winter range thermal cover would be reduced in areas with MPB mortality and unchanged over much of the project area. Forage would remain low and hardwood/shrub diversity would continue to decline. Herd health is not expected to change. The risk of wildfire is highest under this alternative. Short-term and localized increase in hunter access would occur, although no long-term changes in hunter access is anticipated. Hiding cover would be reduced by approximately 3,395 acres, and winter range thermal cover would be reduced by 92 acres. Forage on summer, winter and transition range would be increased on over 7,000 acres. Shrub, hardwood and landscape diversity would be improved. Herd health would be maintained in the short term and increase in the long term. The risk of stand replacing wildfire would be lowest under this alternative. Short-term and localized increase in hunter access may occur. No long-term changes in hunter access. Hiding cover would be reduced by 2,029 acres and winter range thermal cover would be reduced by 78 acres. Forage on summer, winter and transition habitat would be increased on over 5,000 acres. Shrub, hardwood and landscape diversity would be improved. Herd numbers are expected to increase in the long term due to increased forage. The risk of stand replacing wildfire would be reduced under this alternative. Migratory Birds While overstory cover would decline in some areas due to continued MPB mortality, understory cover would continue to increase. Migratory bird habitat would remain largely unchanged. This alternative complies with the MBTA. Proposed treatments would alter overstory and understory conditions on approximately 7,000 acres. Migratory bird habitat, including habitat for bird species of conservation concern, would be maintained across the landscape and declining habitats would be increased over the long term. Project design features are in place to maintain migratory bird habitat and reduce potential mortality. This alternative complies with the MBTA. Proposed treatments would alter overstory and understory conditions on approximately 5,000 acres. Migratory bird habitat, including habitat for bird species of conservation concern, would be maintained across the landscape and declining habitats would be increased over the long term. Project design features are in place to maintain migratory bird habitat and reduce potential mortality. This alternative complies with the MBTA.  Alternative 1 (No Action) There would be no direct effects to wildlife because there are no treatments proposed under this alternative. Forested communities that largely developed with long fire-return intervals and the wildlife species characteristic of these communities would be largely unchanged. Many project area forest communities historically developed with short fire-return intervals (see section 3.1). Anticipated indirect effects under this alternative include continued shifts in species composition and diversity within these communities. For example, understory conditions including conifer encroachment and increased abundance of shade-tolerant species have increased across the project area. In the absence of large-scale disturbance, these understory conditions would continue to increase. Effects on wildlife include increased habitat for species that prefer closed-canopy forest conditions and for species that prefer understories dominated by regenerating conifer. Conversely, there would be continued reduction in the open understory conditions that characterize fire dependent communities (e.g., ponderosa pine), and continued decline in suitable habitat for species that prefer or require open, forested stands with an herbaceous and shrub understory. Similarly, due to continued reductions in aspen and whitebark pine, available habitat for species that prefer or require these communities would continue to decline. Due to the shifts in fire and fire-tolerant species, as well as increased stand density, stands would be more susceptible to insect and disease-related mortality under this alternative. As a result, there would continue to be an increase in snags and down woody debris (DWD) and habitat for species that prefer or require these components. However due to the anticipated reduction in ponderosa pine, over the long term the availability of large-diameter trees and snags would be reduced. As described under the affected environment, due to years of fire suppression and past harvest, much of the project area currently contains dense forested stands that are relatively continuous across the landscape. As a result and considering fuels have further increased due to MPB mortality, the risk of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative. Potential effects of invasive weeds on wildlife are discussed in the Forest Weed Treatment FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006c), whereas the likelihood of increased spread within the project area are discussed in the project weed report (USDA Forest Service 20011d). Without control it is expected that existing infestations would increase by approximately 14 percent per year. However with implementation of biological and chemical control, this increase would be reduced and is expected to be largely contained. Stand replacing wildfires are known to increase the risk of invasion and spread of invasive species (D’Antonia 2000). As a result and considering that the risk of high intensity wildfire is greatest under this alternative, it is expected that invasive weeds would increase in the event of a wildfire. The effect on wildlife would vary depending on the acres affected and access (i.e. for control), but there would likely be a localized decrease in cover and forage as a result. Alternatives 2 and 3 (Action Alternatives) Direct and indirect effects of treatments are discussed by group and include species composition and structure changes, as well as potential direct and indirect effects to wildlife and wildlife habitat. Potential effects from timber harvest are discussed under Groups 1 through 5. However, because some burning is proposed within all groups and because effects vary depending on the type of burning proposed (e.g., low intensity vs. mixed severity), effects of burning are discussed by burning type. Also effect of roads and road management are discussed separately. The habitat and species-specific effects discussed in sections 4.5 and 4.6 are based largely on the treatment effects discussed here. Effects by Treatment Group Group 1(Intermediate Harvest) – Proposed harvest treatments would thin live trees and remove dead trees. All thinning would be from below and would favor trees of desired species. Trees would be thinned to an average spacing of 20 to 40 feet and 25 to 40 percent canopy cover would be maintained. Snags and 5-20 tons per acre of DWD including large diameter logs would be retained. While canopy closure would be reduced, mature forest conditions would continue to predominate on all sites receiving treatment and connectivity would not be reduced. Although the residual crown closure and composition of material removed would vary somewhat by site and forest type. Treatment would alter stand structure and understory conditions by removing primarily small and medium diameter trees and increasing light levels to the forest floor. This results in a short-term decrease in cover and an increase in the establishment of understory vegetation. While increases in herbaceous vegetation would occur immediately following treatment, increased availability of woody vegetation would take 5-15 years. Direct effects to wildlife from these harvest treatments are generally short term (less than 1 year) and may involve some direct mortality of some less mobile species during logging. Cutting may also result in avoidance of the site by some species sensitive to disturbance, while other species would be attracted to the site because of the increased slash and associated cover or the increased forage that would be available on the site (generally within 2 years of treatment). Over the long term (greater than 10 years) as the woody understory develops, treatment would create more diverse stand conditions with continued increases in both forage and cover. While mature forest species in the Rocky Mountains are generally less affected by partial harvest than regeneration harvest (Hejl 2011) (described below), a shift in species use following harvest can be expected, with benefits to ground foraging birds and small mammals and decreased use of some canopy and bole foraging species (Raphael et al. 1988 in Hejl 2011), (Salabanks and Arnett 2002, USDA Forest Service 2006b). Potential effects to reptiles and amphibians would also vary, and because few reptiles occupy closed-canopy forests in the western United States (with the exception of the rubber boa), potential impacts to this group would be expected to be low and short term. Conversely, because reducing canopy cover would result in warmer and drier conditions, potential impacts to amphibians would be greater including some reduction in diversity and abundance (USDA Forest Service 2006b). Due to increased structural diversity on these sites, amphibian diversity and abundance is expected to be maintained over the long term. Dead trees would be removed, so impacts to species requiring snags can be expected (Salabanks and Arnett 2002; Hejl 2011). Project design features that retain snags greater than 20 inches, as well as a component of small-diameter snags and snag recruitment trees would reduce impacts to these species and help to maintain suitable habitat on the treated site. Forest Plan snag requirements would be met or exceeded on all sites. Treatments would result in improved stand structure and diversity over the long term; it is expected that the diversity of snag and downed wood dependent species would be maintained or improved (USDA Forest Service 2006b). Following harvest, units would be underburned to promote ponderosa pine, early and fire tolerant species or jackpot burned to reduce fuels. Also periodic low-intensity fire would be used to maintain stand resistance to fire and insects (described in the following section Burn Treatment Effects) Collectively, treatments would initiate restoration of open stands dominated by mature Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine. Stands would be more resistant to wildfires and insect activity reducing potential for high intensity and high severity wildfires (USDA Forest Service 2012b) and insect epidemics. Treatment would promote development of future large diameter trees and snags. Group 2 (Intermediate Harvest) – Precommercial thinning treatments would thin small diameter trees to a spacing of 12 to 20 feet and would be completed by hand or machine, depending on tree size. Target canopy closure would be 25 to 40 percent, and like Group 1 harvest, with implementation of PDFs a minimum of 5-20 tons per acre DWD, and large-diameter DWD and snags would be retained following treatment. Because moderate to closed canopy conditions would be maintained, connectivity would not be reduced. Direct effects to wildlife would be similar to Group 1 and involve short-term behavioral avoidance of the site and some direct mortality to less mobile species. Like group 1, treatment involves modifying the overstory stand structure by opening up the canopy and increasing light to the forest floor. As a result, treatment would increase herbaceous and woody vegetation on the forest floor and increase understory diversity on the site. While there would be an immediate (1-2 years) increase in herbaceous species, increases in woody vegetation would take longer (5-10 years). Conversely, there would be a decrease in cover until woody understory vegetation is established on the site (10 to 15 years). As a result, effects include a reduction in habitat, decreased abundance of some mature forest species and improved habitat conditions for early seral and ground foraging species. Over the long term, treatments would result in a more diverse stands with increased levels of foraging and cover throughout the site. Slash would be piled and burned in some units; effects are described in the Burn Treatment Effects section below. Treatment would improve the health and vigor of remaining trees and increase resistance to insects and disease. Treatment would also promote the growth of large fire resistant trees and over the long term, would promote restoration of open stands of mature Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine and western larch. Group 3 (Regeneration Harvest) - Treatments include seedtree and shelterwood regeneration harvest. This treatment differs from Group 1 and Group 2 in that most of the live, and many of the dead trees would be removed, although seed and reserve trees would be retained. In some shelterwoods trees would be retained in groups, whereas in other units the remaining trees would be evenly distributed. Ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir and western larch would be planted where necessary to regenerate the stands to the desired seral and fire resistant species. Because most of the existing canopy would be reduced, contiguous blocks of mature forest habitat would be reduced. However proposed regeneration harvest is not proposed in areas of remote habitat (e.g. elk security or grizzly bear core) and these areas would be maintained. Also these treatments are only proposed in areas with concentrated mortality that are already having their canopy reduced. Consequently potential impacts to connectivity would be reduced and existing travel, migration and dispersal corridors by species that prefer closed canopy conditions would be largely unchanged. As with Groups 1 and 2, effects include some direct mortality to less mobile species and avoidance by species that are sensitive to disturbance. While intermediate harvest treatments (Groups 1 and 2) result in relatively minor changes in wildlife use, regeneration treatments can result in a much more dramatic change and some mature forest wildlife may be displaced for over 50 years, until a predominantly mature canopy is re-established. Species diversity and abundance can be expected to change (Salabanks and Arnett 2002). The reduction in overstory trees results in an increase in herbaceous vegetation, shrubs and tree seedlings, which provides habitat for many early seral species, as well as species that utilize a combination of early successional and mature forest. Wildlife use of the site following treatment also varies over time. For example habitat for species that utilize herbaceous vegetation would be improved immediately following treatment, whereas it would take up to 15 years for woody vegetation (seedlings and shrubs) to develop on the site. So while the wildlife community would shift to primarily early seral species immediately following treatment, many mature forest species such as elk would continue to use the sites due to the large quantities of forage and low growing cover created. As the canopy closes (30-40 years), early seral species would be replaced by mid-seral species and over the long term, wildlife diversity and abundance would be improved on the site due to improved species and structural diversity. Many of the units would be burned following harvest to reduce fuels and prepare the site for natural regeneration or planting. Natural regeneration in combination with species diversity planting would increase dominance by Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine and western larch. Over the long term treatment would promote development of a multi-storied stand that is dominated by fire resistant species, but also contains a minor Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir component that is more resilient to wildfire and insect activity. Group 4 (Regeneration Harvest) – Treatments include a clearcut harvest in which all trees would be removed except for scattered clumps or individual trees and trees necessary to meet resource needs (e.g., snags and DWD to meet wildlife and soil objectives). Following harvest, units would be burned to reduce fuels and promote natural regeneration. Sites are expected to naturally regenerate, although some planting of Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine and western larch may be done. In the short term, units would naturally regenerate to single-storied stands of predominantly lodgepole pine with some Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine regeneration and remnant large- diameter trees. Over the long term, treatment (including supplemental planting) would promote a more diverse insect and fire resistant stand that is predominantly lodgepole pine, but contains large ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir and western larch component in the overstory. Changes to connectivity would be the same as those described under Group 3. Effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat would be similar to those of Group 3 and the resulting stand conditions would be maintained by periodic low intensity fire described in the Burn Treatment Effects section below. Group 5 (Intermediate Harvest) – Treatment includes a sanitation salvage harvest that would remove dead and dying trees. Trees would be removed using ground based equipment. Slash would be reduced by hand piling and burning. While there would be little change in overstory stand conditions, effects of treatment include a reduction in ladder and surface fuels and understory vegetation. Because 40 to 60 percent canopy cover would be maintained on all sites and with implementation of PDFs to retain snags and downed woody debris, effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat would be similar to those described under Group 1. Slash would be piled and burned in some units; effects are described in the Burn Treatment Effects section below. Group 6 (Prescribed Burn) – Treatment involves cutting small trees on portions of the treatment units to create fuel beds conducive to low intensity burning. The prescribed burning would create openings less than 5 or 10 acres in size, with opening size varying by unit. Units would be prescribed burned to reduce fuels, kill small-diameter undesirable trees and prepare sites for natural regeneration. Prior to burning, all units would be assessed to identify existing whitebark pine regeneration that needs to be protected during burning, and existing aspen clones would be released by cutting conifers within and around the clone. Herbaceous vegetation would increase within the second year of treatment and continue to provide increased levels of forage for up to 30 years. Within 5 years woody vegetation (trees and shrubs) would start to become established on the site. Tree regeneration would establish in the openings and other areas of low stocking, with increases in Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, whitebark pine and western larch. Over the long term, stands would be characterized by more complex, multi-stored conditions with a variety of age classes, and would be more resilient to wildfire and insects. Overall, burning would occur in a patchy mosaic and approximately 20 percent of the site being unaffected, 25 percent of the site would appear as fire-created openings, and approximately 55 percent of the site would be underburned. Effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat are discussed in the Burn Treatment Effects section below. Groups 7 and 8 (Prescribed Burn) – Treatments include cutting small trees on portions of the site to create fuelbeds conducive to low intensity burning. Where the opportunity exists, small trees would be cut to create small openings around whitebark pine, ponderosa pine, western larch and Douglas-fir to promote regeneration. Units would be burned to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees and prepare the sites for natural regeneration. Treatments would create patches of mortality of 5, 10 or 20 acres in Group 7 units and 30 to 75 acres within Group 8 units. Like Group 6, all units would be assessed prior to burning to identify existing whitebark pine regeneration that needs to be protected during burning. Pre-burn treatments that would be implemented to promote whitebark pine include cutting and direction felling of conifer trees to increase fuel loading, improve the continuity of the fuelbed and reduce fuel loads around whitebark pine trees. These treatments would also be used to establish 1- to 5-acre areas that can be established as nutcracker caching sites. Like Group 6, suppressed conifers would be removed around existing aspen. Effects would be similar to those described under Group 6, however, because of the larger canopy gaps created by more intense burning conditions, shade intolerant and fire tolerant species would increase, with the greatest increase occurring under Group 8. Also horizontal structure and age class diversity would increase due to the larger openings and pockets of understory regeneration created. Approximately 25 percent of the site would be unburned within both group 7 and 8 units. Also within group 7 units approximately 20 percent would occur in openings 5 to 20 acres in size and 45 to 50 percent would receive a low intensity burn. Within group 8 units approximately 30 percent of the site would be in fire created openings of between 30 and 75 acres and 40 to 45 percent of the site would be underburned with low intensity fire. Effects on wildlife are discussed below under burn treatments. Group 9 (Prescribed Burn) – This treatment is only proposed under alternative 3 and involves prescribed burning using low intensity fire to reduce fuels on the site following harvest. Effects are similar to those described under Group 6. Group 10 (Intermediate Harvest mix with no harvest and Jackpot/pile burning) – This treatment is only proposed under alternative 3 and involves patches of thinning while maintaining canopy closure and burning piles to reduce fuels on the site following harvest. Effects are similar to those described under Group 1. Effects on wildlife are discussed in the Burn Treatment Effects section below. Burn Treatment Effects This section summarizes effects of proposed burning under each of the action alternatives including low severity/underburning, mixed severity (MS) burning and pile/jackpot burning. Low Severity Fire, Site Preparation Burn, Broadcast Burn and Underburning In order to ensure that desired burning conditions are met, all areas would be burned when weather conditions provide for safe ignition. A prescribed burn plan and all required documentation in accordance with USDA Forest Service, Region 1 or Helena National Forest standards must be completed and approved prior to implementation. These actions would ensure that burning conditions would be controlled and adequate smoke dispersal would occur. Additionally, prior to treatment Forest Service personnel would survey the site and identify firing patterns and retention areas expected to achieve objectives, including protection of riparian areas, shrub communities and unique or uncommon habitats. Collectively these actions would help to ensure that fire-related effects are consistent with those anticipated. Burning would take place in the spring (April-June) or fall (August-November), as long as required fuel, moisture and weather conditions are present. Once ignited, the burn moves through the project area driven by wind and terrain. Flame lengths should range from a few inches to 3 feet in height, consuming litter, grass, forbs and smaller fuels. Effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat are determined by a number of factors including the burning intensity, as well as site-level fuels, topography and moisture conditions. This burn intensity is expected to consume the litter, fine fuels and small diameter trees and shrubs less than 5 inches in diameter (Bowles et al. 2007); it generally would not be hot enough to scorch the soil or result in mortality of overstory trees on most of the area burned. There would be small areas that contain higher fuel levels and/or site conditions that create more intense burning conditions. In these areas, some overstory mortality may occur; however, any mortality would be widely scattered and consist of small canopy gaps. Burning intensity would not be uniform and treatment areas would have a mosaic of burned and unburned lands due to variations in site conditions. On average and based on past treatments, it is estimated that approximately 75 to 80 percent of the treatment area would be burned, with fingers and pockets of unburned areas occurring on approximately 20 to 25 percent of the unit. The amount and uniformity of burning would vary by forest type and topographic position. For example, south-facing slopes, plateau tops and drier forest types would likely experience a higher percentage of burned area. Burning intensity would be reduced in riparian areas, on northern exposures and within portions of units containing more mesic sites due to higher moisture conditions and lower slope position. After ignition operations are completed and the prescribed burn has adequate time to move through the unit, mop-up operations extinguish those areas that are still burning. Mop-up usually involves putting out burning or smoldering vegetation such as tree stumps, snags or downed logs. Mop-up does not occur unless the source is likely to cause the fire to spread outside of the control lines. Control is accomplished with water spray and/or hand tools, although it may also include falling burning snags that would drop outside the fire line. Direct Effects Approximately 64 percent and 73 percent of the project area would not be treated under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively, and there would be no direct effects on those areas. The following is a discussion of potential direct effects on the acres proposed for treatment. Proposed burning is expected to have some direct effects on wildlife inhabiting the site at the time of treatment, although this would vary depending on time of burn and fuel conditions, proximity to breeding habitat and species. For example, fall burns burn hotter, increasing the likelihood of mortality. However while some animals may be killed during burning, behavioral avoidance of wildlife by fire is well documented and large mobile mammals, adult birds and even small less mobile species (e.g., frogs and toads) are capable of either moving quickly to unburned refugia, or seeking out refugia in burrows and crevices (Kennedy and Fontaine 2009; Russell et al. 1999; Smith 2000; Yager et al. 2007). Potential direct impacts to riparian areas, as well as impacts to amphibian breeding habitat would be reduced with implementation of PDFs, streamside management zones, and considering that burned areas would be interspersed with unburned lands. Most undesirable direct effects are overcome by choosing proper times, places and methods of prescribed burning. For example, because burning would occur largely outside the breeding season, potential for direct mortality is reduced (Bagne and Purcell 2008). Natural and human-ignited fire has historically been a part of Montana landscapes (Amacher et al. 2008) and many forest species have evolved with the presence of fire. Consequently, when mortality does occur, it is usually negligible at the population level (Lyon et al. 1978) and is not expected to adversely affect local populations for any species. Indirect Effects Indirect effects of proposed burning include modifications or changes in vegetative conditions on the affected sites at both the stand and landscape level (Kennedy and Fontane 2009). Generally, burning would result in a reduction in shrubs and woody material and an increase in herbaceous vegetation (Bowles et.al. 2007; USDA Forest Service 2006b). In the short term this is expected to improve habitat for species that prefer or require forested habitat with a grass/forb understory, and decrease habitat for species that utilize understory shrubs or low cover provided by small- diameter woody vegetation. Burning intensity would vary and most treatment areas are expected to have a mosaic of understory conditions. These changes vary over time and Metlen and Fiedler (2006) found that while burning initially reduced cover and richness of the understory, by year 3, understory richness increased when compared to the pre-treatment and control. While there would be a reduction in DWD on the site, between 5 and 20 tons of DWD would be maintained. As a result, all sites would continue to meet or exceed Forest Plan guidelines for standing and downed woody debris, and suitable habitat for all species that currently use the site would continue to be available following treatment. Burning would modify understory conditions on up to 80 percent of the site, so there would be shifts in species diversity and abundance immediately following treatment. Changes in understory would vary over time. For example, small mammals that need high shrub cover to avoid predators may do poorly the first few years following treatment, whereas their numbers would be expected to exceed pre-treatment population levels when shrubs recover and forage (herbaceous vegetation and mast) increases (USDA Forest Service 2006b). So while impacts would affect species that prefer closed-canopy mature forest and utilize DWD and woody vegetation removed during burning, effects are expected to be short term. Considering that structural complexity and heterogeneity may be improved on the site (USDA Forest Service 2006b) and that the treated stand may be more resistant to wildfire and insects and disease, over the long term, habitat conditions and wildlife diversity and abundance would be improved both within the unit and across the landscape. Mixed Severity Fire Like low-severity fire, a prescribed burn plan would be completed prior to implementation. Since mixed severity burning is complex, Forest Service personnel would identify firing and holding patterns to achieve objectives, including protection of sensitive or unique communities/features. So like low severity burning, these actions would ensure that mixed-severity fire effects are consistent with those anticipated. Burning and mop up processes and conditions described under low severity burning would be similar. Treatment consists of low intensity burning that consumes herbaceous vegetation and small diameter woody vegetation as well as in pockets of more intense burning (resulting from fuels created in the pre-burn treatments) where much of the overstory is killed. Low intensity burning would occur on 50 to 55 percent of the site, whereas mixed severity burning would result in overstory mortality on between approximately 10 percent (Group 6), 20 percent (Group 7) and 30 percent (Group 8) of the unit. Approximately 20 to 25 percent of the site would be unburned, and based on effects of past treatment, unburned areas are expected to be dispersed across the site, as well as in riparian areas. Direct Effects Direct effects to wildlife resulting from mixed-severity burning would be similar to those described under low-severity burning, except that due to increased burning intensity in portions of the unit, the likelihood of mortality is greater. Mortality is expected to be low and is not expected to adversely affect local populations for any species since at least 70 percent of the site would be unburned or lightly burned. Indirect Effects Burning stimulates re-growth of vegetation and effects include enhancement of herbaceous vegetation on the area burned, as well as development of grasses, forbs, seedlings and shrubs within the canopy gaps created. Vegetative conditions post burning would be more diverse with small pockets of regenerating forest or herbaceous vegetation imbedded within the larger forested landscape. Over the long term the resulting forest communities would be more diverse and more resistant to stand replacing wildfire due to the development of fire-tolerant trees (e.g., ponderosa and whitebark pine) and shrubs as well as early seral species (e.g., aspen). Mixed severity burning promotes both early and late-successional habitat conditions that Halofsky et al. (2011) suggest can provide a unique vegetation and wildlife response. The critical habitat feature of mixed severity fire regimes affecting wildlife habitat is the mosaic of vegetation created, as well as the dynamic nature of that mosaic over time and space (Agee 1998 in Lehmkuhl et al. 2006). For example, low severity fires typically result in mature single-storied stands dominated by fire-resistant species. On mesic sites, understories can have a high component of fire-adapted shrubs. Moderate severity fires typically result in patchy mixed-age stands dominated mostly by large trees of fire-resistant species with a diverse understory. Consequently, the proposed burning is expected to promote more diverse habitat conditions. While burning would decrease DWD, the dynamics following a mixed severity burn are complex, with consumption of debris on the forest floor compensated by the creation of snags and patches of higher severity burning (Agee 2002). Also on average, woody debris appears relatively abundant in mixed severity vegetation types, although availability varies over time (Lehmkuhl et al. 2004), with high quality snags available for cavity nesting species (Bull et al. 1997). Also, although the availability of DWD fluctuates more than that of low severity fire, it contains elevated and relatively uniform levels of DWD, when compared to low intensity burning (Lehmkuhl et al. 2004). Wildlife use of a site varies and species in early seral to mid-seral patches can vary depending on the size of the patch, seed source availability, or vegetative regeneration. Generally, the larger the patch, the greater the dominance of early seral tree species, and the proportion of species breeding in early seral stages tend to increase with increasing fire size and intensity (Lehmkuhl et al. 2004). As a result, sites receiving a Group 8 treatment (30- to75-acre openings) would provide more habitat for species that utilize a mixture of early and mid- to late-seral habitat, whereas sites receiving a Group 6 treatment (less than 10 acres) would be favored by species that prefer a mid- to late-seral habitat, but also utilize the structure provided by small early-successional forest. Due to the development of small to medium-sized openings, Group 7 treatment would likely provide habitat for a diverse group of species including early successional, mature and late seral species. In their evaluation of fire severity and patch size on bird species response, Saab and Powell 2005, found that unburned areas in close proximity to burned areas were needed to serve species dependent upon live woody vegetation, especially foliage gleaners. While some species were more abundant in unburned sites (golden crowned kinglet, mountain chickadee, hermit thrush) and some species more abundant in burned sites (black-backed woodpecker, olive-sided flycatcher, three-toed woodpecker, mountain bluebird), a mixture of burned and unburned forest provides habitat for a wide variety of species. Some species that frequently nest in large dead trees but forage in live trees for seeds such as the white-headed woodpecker benefit from the mosaic of live and dead trees created by low and mixed severity fires (Saab and Powell 2005). Conversely, habitat for species that prefer or require closed-canopy mature forest conditions would be reduced on the areas that are intensively burned, due to the overstory mortality. While proposed mixed severity burning would create openings within existing forest, 20 to 25 percent of the burn unit would be unaffected and existing canopy conditions would be maintained on another 50 to 55 percent. As a result forest habitat would not be isolated due to creation of the openings and connectivity would be maintained. Also treatments would create landscape conditions characteristic of and within the range of historic conditions. Low and Mixed Severity Burning Summary Effects of proposed broadcast burning (low and mixed severity fire) on wildlife habitat vary by forest community (e.g., lodgepole, mixed conifer and ponderosa pine), as well as by fire return interval (Saab and Powell 2005). Many western conifer forests were historically affected by frequent, low to mixed severity fires (Amacher et al. 2008), therefore, native species are adapted to historical fire regimes and the resulting habitats (Saab and Powell 2005). Most effects are expected to be short term considering that prescribed burning often maintains or restores the composition and structure of naturally fire dependent vegetation. Fire management that includes a broad range of variability, including areas of more severe fire, are more likely to preserve a broad range of wildlife habitat than restoration with narrowly defined historic fire regimes (Allen et al. 2002 in USDA Forest Service 2006b; Fulé et al. 2004, Kaufman 2004, Kotliar et al. 2007, Noss et al. 2006, Schoennagle et al. 2004 in Kennedy and Fontaine 2009). Collectively, implementation of the proposed burning, combined with the widespread availability of untreated habitat (greater than 64 percent of the project area and 20 percent of each treatment unit), is expected to result in a more diverse landscape that provides habitat for all species that currently use the project area, as well as improve habitat for species that prefer or require declining fire dependent communities. Pile and Burn and Jackpot Burning This activity involves piling harvest-generated fuels, natural fuels, brush, and heavy accumulations of litter with mechanize equipment such as a tractor-mounted brush rake or a grapple or by hand. Burning usually occurs in the winter when fire danger is low. On some sites burning is allowed to creep away from piles allowing for a small scale underburn. This treatment would also reduce concentrations of natural fuels and those created from harvest activities resulting in predicted fire behavior within desired intensities. While it is possible that wildlife could be directly affected by this treatment, the likelihood of mortality is low because of the widespread availability of unburned lands interspersed between areas burned. Like low and mixed severity burning, indirect effects include a reduction in DWD on the site and habitat for species that utilize this component would be reduced. With implementation of PDFs, down woody debris including large-diameter logs would be maintained on site and suitable habitat would continue to be available. Consequently, potential effects would be localized and short term. Roads Roads can affect wildlife in many ways including; · Direct loss of habitat through a loss of forest cover · Degradation of habitat quality through increased sedimentation or risk of invasive plants · Habitat fragmentation including increased edge or a loss of interior habitat · Avoidance by wildlife sensitive to the disturbance · Increased mortality associated with hunting or poaching · Road mortality, or barriers to wildlife movement and dispersal (NRDC 1999) Conversely, benefits may result to species that utilize the herbaceous vegetation associated with the road right-of-way (ROW). The following is a description of the road treatments and a discussion of the general effects on wildlife, whereas additional road related effects are also addressed in the species specific analysis. Roads Built then Obliterated Immediately Following Timber Removal Direct effects are largely limited to activities that occur to the roadbed and the associated right-of-way (ROW). Roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would involve clearing a 20-foot ROW within existing forest, which would result in approximately a 6-acre and 1-acre reduction of forested habitat under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. It may also include shaping, adding culverts, improving drainage, and applying surfacing material. Effects include a short-term increase in sediment, as well as possible mortality to less mobile wildlife and behavioral avoidance of some mobile wildlife species during construction. However, potential effects depend in part on the location of the project road corridors. For example, all proposed roads occur within 0.25 mile of an existing road and do not access previously unroaded areas. As a result, the areas affected do not provide preferred habitat for species sensitive to disturbance and use associated with roads. All roads would be closed to public access during project implementation, so potential impacts associated with road use including road related mortality, poaching, noise and increased human activity are reduced. Additionally because all but 0.75 mile of proposed roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal occur within 0.25 mile of an existing open road, proposed roads are not expected to significantly increase human activity or access. Though roads would be permanently closed following use, by creating a new ROW, some increased human access would be expected to occur. Also low standard roads similar to those proposed have been shown to be barriers to the dispersal of some small mammals, reptiles and amphibians (NRDC 1999); hence, potential effects can be expected to occur on a localized basis for some species. Effects to movement and dispersal are not expected to affect long-term reproduction or local populations of affected species due to the small amount of acres affected, proximity to existing roads, and considering proposed roads do not isolate any forest patches. Interior habitat or lands greater than 0.25 mile from a road or human-caused opening is widespread in the northern half of the project area and occurs on 11,500 acres or 48 percent of the project area. While no large blocks of existing interior habitat would be affected, roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal proposed under alternative 2 would only reduce interior habitat by approximately 10 acres. Consequently remote habitat conditions would largely unaffected under both alternatives. Road Maintenance Road maintenance includes shaping the roadbed, adding culverts and/or applying surfacing material. Like road construction, this activity is expected to result in increased sedimentation during activities, although implementation of PDFs and Best Management Practices (BMP) would reduce these impacts. Like road construction, effects to wildlife also include possible mortality to less mobile species, as well as behavioral avoidance during maintenance activities. Wildlife related disturbance and mortality would be low because this activity would occur on existing roads. Road Management Many effects to wildlife are determined by road management, or whether a road is open, closed or restricted. The HNF reduces impacts to wildlife by keeping roads into key habitats closed or restricted during critical periods of the year. In addition, all roads used by the project which are currently closed or restricted to meet wildlife or other resource objectives would be maintained in their pre-project status. Further, in order to reduce disturbance-related impacts to wildlife, all roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be closed to public access during and following implementation. As a result, the road management strategy in effect is expected to greatly reduce potential road-related impacts to wildlife under both alternatives. Invasive Weeds Of the 24 species of noxious weeds found in the State, five are known to occur within the project area including butter and eggs (Linaria vulgaris), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), houndstongue (Cynoglossum officinale), St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) and spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa). In addition Common mullein (Verbascum thapsus) is listed as a noxious weed by Lewis and Clark County and it is likely that oxeye daisy (Leucanthemum vulgare also known as Chrysanthemum leucanthemum) and cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) occur along roadways, especially near areas of recent disturbance. There are currently 564 acres of known infestation (Englebert 2012a). The Forest weed treatment project FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006c) provides a detailed discussion on the effects of invasive weeds and their control on wildlife and this information is incorporated by reference into this analysis. A number of weed prevention project design features are in place to reduce to reduce the spread of invasive species during treatment and anticipated effects are discussed in detail in the project invasive weed report (Englebert 2012a). While the spread of noxious weed would continue under all alternatives, the rate of spread would be expected to be faster in areas proposed for treatment and it is estimated that alternatives 2 and 3 would result in an additional 311 and 233 acres of weed infestation respectively. Combined with known infestations within treatment areas, it is estimated that 653 acres of invasive weeds would occur under alternative 2 and 526 acres would occur under alternative 3. It is anticipated that a combination of biological and chemical control would be used to control infestations and by year 2 or 3 the project would continue to treat a minimum of 114 acres or potentially more depending on monitoring results. While invasive weeds would continue to spread over time, it is expected that ongoing monitoring and weed control would provide benefits over time through control of existing and new infestations. So while potential effects to wildlife and wildlife habitat from invasive plants would increase under both action alternatives, with implementation of PDFs to reduce weed infestation and monitoring and control treatments to reduce spread, it is expected that any effects would be localized and there would be no large areas of cover or forage affected. Also effects to sensitive habitats such are riparian areas and wetlands would be reduced due to implementation of INFISH buffers and reduced treatments in these areas. Finally there are no effects to wildlife anticipated that were not considered in the Forest Weed Treatment FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006c). Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives This section summarizes anticipated cumulative effects that would occur under all alternatives and information presented is used in the habitat and species cumulative effects analysis presented in the following sections. Cumulative effects (CE) related to wildlife are evaluated by looking at past, present and foreseeable future activities that could affect wildlife when considered cumulatively over time. When considering CEs to wildlife based on past and anticipated future disturbances, the primary factors of change included timber harvest, wildfire, insect and disease related tree mortality, road construction and management, private land development, grazing and recreational use. A complete list of past, ongoing and future activities that were considered in the cumulative effect analysis can be found in volume 2, appendix C; whereas a general discussion of effects to wildlife and wildlife habitat is provided below. The cumulative effects (CE) boundary used in this analysis varies by species. For example, CEs for species with small home ranges would be analyzed across the project area, whereas some species are analyzed across designated management areas such as lynx analysis units, bear management units, or elk herd units. For species that have large home ranges and select habitat based partially on landscape conditions (e.g., wolverine, gray wolf, fisher, etc.), the CE analysis area includes the project area combined with adjacent lands affected by mountain pine beetle (MPB) mortality and past wildfire. This combined area totals approximately 101,977 acres, including 67,042 acres of NFS land, and 34,935 acres of private land. Rationale for selection of this area includes: · This area is large enough to assess the individual home range for all species analyzed, thereby framing the context and significance of potential impacts to each species. · The CE area includes more developed private lands adjacent to the project area, which contain habitat components or levels of disturbance that may influence wildlife use of NFS lands. · This area includes all of the two Elk Herd Units (EHU) and Lynx Analysis Units (LAU) affected. · This area is large enough to assess landscape-level considerations and connectivity, including potential impacts to affected Bear Management Units (BMUs), EHUs and LAUs. · Including lands to the north and northwest would tend to dilute effects because of the large amounts of designated Wilderness and Inventoried Roadless Areas. · The CE area includes over 20,000 acres that have been recently (since 2003) affected by wildfire, which influence landscape level use and effects. · Wildlife habitat conditions and land uses within the area are representative of those found across the larger landscape or watershed(s). A determination of significance is made for each species/habitat evaluated. For the purpose of this analysis, significant cumulative effects are defined as effects that singly or incrementally could result in long-term impacts to wildlife or wildlife habitat that could result in a loss or reduction in viability (defined above). Past, Ongoing and Future Activities Past activities include commercial and non-commercial timber harvest, reforestation treatments, fuel treatments, grazing, mining, special use and outfitter guide permitting, motorized and non-motorized recreational use and wildfire. Effects of these activities vary spatially and temporally and while understory cover and forage was reduced immediately following partial harvest, reforestation and fuel treatments, understory structure and resulting cover and forage on many of the sites have been restored or enhanced. Similarly, overstory conditions on older regeneration harvest sites and sites affected by sanitation and intermediate harvest have closed, whereas more recent treatments (since 2000), continue to have more open overstory conditions. Also levels of harvest have been declining and many of the treatments between 2003 and 2009 were designed to remove fuels and re-establish natural vegetation following wildfire. In addition to management activity, approximately 23,000 acres have been affected by more recent wildfire (2003 to 2009). Most of this occurred as high intensity wildfire associated with the 2003 Snow Talon fire in the Copper Creek and Landers Fork drainages in the northeast corner of the analysis area. Overstory mortality within these drainages was widespread and most of the meadow shrub biophysical setting that exists on the analysis area was created by this event. Understory conditions are somewhat variable and while herbaceous vegetation has become established, woody regeneration is scattered. Also because of the widespread reduction in overstory, many of these lands currently don’t provide habitat for species that require high forested cover, or species that require overstory cover in close proximity to forage. Conversely, because of the abundance of snags and downed wood, this area provides habitat many species that utilize dead wood, as well as species such as the black backed woodpecker that prefer post-fire landscapes. As described in the project silvicultural report (Amell 2012), insect- and disease-related mortality has been occurring across much of the analysis area and has resulted in widespread overstory mortality. This has increased levels of standing and downed wood, created more open canopy conditions across much of the landscape and increased understory development on many sites. Vegetation and habitat changes resulting from past activities are largely reflected in the existing habitat condition discussed throughout this analysis. Also, effects of these activities on wildlife are variable and the methodology section for each discusses the data source(s) used. Past, present and future activities are displayed in volume 2, appendix C. Wildfires that occurred within the analysis area are shown in appendix C. A brief discussion of the effects of these past, ongoing and future treatments on wildlife follows, whereas more detailed analysis is provided in the individual species/habitat cumulative effect sections. Cumulative Effects Pertaining to Wildlife While anticipated cumulative effects have occurred on over 25,000 acres under all alternatives, not all activities result in long-term cumulative effects. For example, areas affected by outfitter guide use, or much of the trail or road maintenance work, does not modify habitat conditions and effects of these activities are short term (a few days per year), whereas activities such as grazing, hazard tree removal, prescribed burning, dispersed recreation, or firewood collection, can have long-term effects. The following is a brief summary of ongoing and future activities on wildlife. Also, it should be noted that a biological evaluation has (in the case of hazard tree removal) or would be completed to assess any future in-stream work or NNIS treatment and potential impacts to this species would be reduced through that process. Personal Use Firewood – Standing dead trees and downed woody debris would be removed on lands adjacent to roads open to the public. Effects include disturbance during collection, as well as reduced standing and downed wood along open road corridors. Road Maintenance – This involves re-surfacing, culver replacement, and right-of-way (ROW) maintenance (e.g., brushing) of existing roads. Effects include short-term disturbance during maintenance activities, and periodic removal of woody vegetation and associated wildlife cover along road ROWs. Short-term sedimentation would also occur, although activities would result in a reduction in sediment over the long term. Mining – Effects include localized disturbance to vegetation, soils, and stream banks. Effects to wildlife include disturbance during mining and a localized reduction in habitat for species sensitive to disturbance. Outfitter Guide Permits – This includes outfitter and guide special use permits for big game and spring bear seasons and associated day use and overnight camping. Effect include temporary displacement of wildlife from the affected area. Non-motorized Dispersed Recreation – This includes trail use (e.g., hiking, mountain bikes, stock use) maintenance on approximately 6 miles of hiking trial in the Sauerkraut drainage (outside the project area), use at three dispersed campsites in the northern half or the project area and hunting/fishing use. Effects to wildlife include avoidance of the immediate trail corridor and campground sites by species sensitive to human disturbance, as well as changes in movement patterns during hunting seasons. Effects also include increased presence of nonnative plant species, particularly at heavy use areas such as trailheads. Motorized Dispersed Recreation – This includes both road and snowmobile use and occurs largely on the existing road system, although the combined area also contains 15 miles of motorized trail. Because vehicle access in much of the project and combined area is good, effects include increased stress, changes in foraging behavior and use, long-term avoidance of open road corridors, seasonal avoidance along roads open for part of the year, and increased presence of invasive species. This impact is controlled to some extent through area closures, travel management and invasive weed control, which is discussed in the Blackfoot Travel Plan (USDA Forest Service 2012g). The cumulative effects area contains over 50 miles of snowmobile trail, most of which occur as groomed trails along existing roads, although there are approximately 8 miles of un-groomed trail. Additionally, all of the project area and most of the CE area are open to cross country snowmobile use. Effects of snowmobile on wildlife are discussed in detail in the Blackfoot Travel Plan (USDA Forest Service 2012g) and include increased stress, altered forging behavior and possible disturbance to denning or hibernating individuals. Similar to road related use, this can result in a long-term effects and loss of suitable habitat for species sensitive to disturbance. Effects of motorized and non-motorized use are evaluated in the Blackfoot Travel Plan, which includes reducing existing snowmobile trails within the cumulative effects area (USDA Forest Service 2012g). Private Land Development – This includes development for housing in several areas in the vicinity of Lincoln. Effects include increased disturbance and road use and possible displacement of wildlife. Because these lands occur in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, effects would occur primarily to species that are not sensitive to human disturbance or fragmentation. Grazing – Grazing has the potential to reduce understory diversity and composition. This could reduce wildlife forage, including both herbaceous and woody vegetation. Overgrazing could also reduce understory vegetative structure and wildlife cover, as well as the diversity of preferred species such as aspen, increase the spread of invasive species, and result in impacts to streams, riparian areas, and water quality. Conversely, managed grazing by livestock can increase the productivity and nutritive quality of forage (Clark et al. 2000). There is currently one riparian area adjacent to the Pine Grove campground that receives multiple impacts from grazing and recreation. Fencing was installed in 2012 to alleviate impacts from grazing, and it is expected that resource impacts will be reduced. Conifer encroachment reduced grasses and forbs and has affected use on transitory range in the Stonewall allotment. Use on the Keep Cool allotment has not exceeded 25 to 35 percent annually and use of this allotment is considered light to moderate. Also there are established INFISH buffer monitoring sites on Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creeks, which would be implemented in the future to identify and reduce resource impacts. Most of the primary forage areas on the Arrastra allotment occur on leased ground and cattle use on the allotment is strictly drift from leased ground (USDA Forest Service 2012b). While continued cattle use is expected to affect wildlife cover and forage, considering that (1) the existing impacts to Beaver Creek would be reduced with approved fencing, (2) use of the area has generally been moderate to light, (3) use is not expected to change but would be modified if necessary to reduce resource impacts, and (4) grazing systems would be designed to be compatible with wildlife needs (USDA Forest Service 2012b), there are no significant effects to wildlife from grazing anticipated under any alternative. Additionally, implementation of PDFs under the action alternatives help ensure that aspen and vegetation diversity is maintained following treatment. Hazard Tree Removal – Harvest involves removal of dead and dying trees within approximately 100 feet of roads. While snags and future downed woody debris are reduced, treatment includes implementation of Forest Plan standards, which include retention of snags on the site. As a result, a snag and future downed wood component is maintained. Effects to wildlife include short-term disturbance during treatment, a reduction in available snag and den trees, and an increase in herbaceous vegetation along affected roadsides. Due to the proximity to open roads, effects would occur primarily to species that are not sensitive to human disturbance. Campground Activities – This includes activities associated with campground maintenance and ongoing recreational use. Because of the concentrated human activity, effects are primarily related to disturbance during maintenance and use. Although habitat conditions would be largely unchanged, effects would include a localized long-term reduction in habitat for species sensitive to human activity. Wildfire – All recent (since 2011) fires burned in a patchy mosaic including some areas of low to moderate burning, as well as areas where the burning intensity was high. Based on assessment of the East Fork fire, which affects the largest acres, approximately 60 percent of the recent wildfires burned hot enough to result in overstory mortality, whereas approximately 40 percent were unburned or lightly burned. Effects include a long-term loss of forested cover on 60 percent of the acreage affected and a reduction in habitat for species that require mature forest conditions. Effects on the remaining 40 percent would be similar to those described under low severity burning and would include a short-term reduction in understory cover. Conversely wildlife forage would be expected to increase on all of the affected acres within the next 5 to 10 years. While older wildfires such as the Snow Talon fire (2003) reduced wildlife cover, they also increased herbaceous and woody vegetation on the site. Also, due to the continued development of understory vegetation, wildlife forage has been and would continue to increase. As a result, it is expected that by the end of the analysis period (2022) suitable habitat for species such as snowshoe hare, and species that utilize forage and low cover would increase. Conversely, habitat for species that require high forest cover would continue to be widely scattered or absent. Mountain Pine Beetle Mortality – It is expected that MPB mortality would continue to occur with some areas of concentrated mortality. As a result, recruitment of snags and downed wood, including larger diameter trees, would continue to occur across the landscape during the analysis period; whereas habitat for species that require more closed canopy conditions would be reduced. Blackfoot Winter Travel and North Belts Travel Management Plans – These analyses are ongoing and would address wildlife issues related to winter use and road management. A complete analysis of effects to wildlife would be completed. Also, because any decision would be consistent with existing regulation and direction related to wildlife, there are no effects anticipated that would result in long-term impacts to wildlife. Finally, while motorized and non-motorized recreation can adversely affect wildlife, ongoing travel planning efforts would likely be beneficial through modifications to access management and authorized recreational use (USDA Forest Service 2012g). NNIS Treatment – Treatment of nonnative invasive plants involves both mechanical and chemical treatment of target species, primarily along roads, infested riparian areas and administrative sites. Effects to wildlife include short-term disturbance during treatment, although long-term benefits to native vegetation and associated wildlife cover and forage would occur due to the control or containment of nonnative species. Prescribed Burning – Effects of burning activities included in the proposed action are described under treatment effects and effects to wildlife vary depending on the type of burning proposed. Pre-approved burning would be similar to low-intensity burning. Trail Work – These activities would result in some localized tree removal and a loss of understory vegetation on the trail surface. While effects include short-term avoidance of the area by wildlife during construction/maintenance, habitat conditions are largely maintained. Timber Harvest – Effects of harvest under the action alternatives is discussed in the Alternative Effects section, whereas effects of past harvest are discussed in appendix C. Off-forest harvest would be variable and include localized disturbance during operations, removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. It is assumed that habitat for species that utilize mature forest would be reduced on the affected acres. Because lands of other ownerships occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, it is not expected that harvest activities would further reduce landscape-level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity such as lynx, wolverine and grizzly. Habitat Effects This section describes alternative effects on the wildlife habitats associated with the biophysical settings described previously. Direct and indirect effects are evaluated across the Stonewall project area, whereas cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined cumulative effects boundary described above. Table 86 displays the amount of each habitat affected by treatments proposed under the two action alternatives, and this information is used in the evaluation of effects described in the following sections. Table 86. Alternative treatment acres by biophysical setting Habitat Area Treated Alt 2 Alt 3 Acres %1 Acres %1 Barren 68 acres - (<1%)     Prescribed Fire 7 10 5 7 Douglas Fir Dry – 5,579 acres (23%) 1,798 32 1,140 20 Intermediate Harvest 187 3 66 1 Prescribed Fire 1,511 27 975 17 Regeneration Harvest 100 2 99 2 Douglas Fir Moist – 5,862 acres (24%) 1,783 30 1,192 20 Intermediate Harvest 50 1 22 <1 Prescribed Fire 1,702 29 1,156 20 Regeneration Harvest 31 <1 14 <1 Mtn. Meadow with Shrub - 678 acres     Prescribed Fire 75 11 75 11 Mtn. Shrubland - 138 acres     Habitat Area Treated Alt 2 Alt 3 Acres %1 Acres %1 Prescribed Fire 18 13 18 13 Ponderosa Pine/Douglas-fir – 7,742 acres 3,821 49 3,077 39 Intermediate Harvest 1,849 23 946 12 Prescribed Fire 1,134 15 1,427 18 Regeneration Harvest 838 11 704 9 Lower Subalpine Forest – 3,331 acres     Prescribed Fire 900 27 887 27 Upper Subalpine Forest - 580 acres     Prescribed Fire 125 21 125 21 1 Percent of the biophysical setting within the project area Dry Forest Habitats Table 87 displays the amount of closed and open-canopy habitat under each alternative, as well as the species likely to be present. This information is used to identify alternative effects discussed. Table 87. Dry forest wildlife habitat summary by alternative Species Status Acres of Closed Canopy or Open Canopy with Dense Conifer Understory by Alternative Acres of Open Canopy with Grass/ Forb/ Shrub Understory by Alternative Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 13,322 8,640 9,907 1 4,6812 3,4142 Species Likely to be Abundant or Relatively Common red-breasted nuthatch, pine siskin, mountain chickadee, ruby-crowned kinglet, dark-eyed junco, yellow-rumped warbler, Clark’s nutcracker, red squirrel, deer mouse, mule deer, porcupine red-breasted nuthatch, pine siskin, dark-eyed junco, mountain chickadee, yellow-rumped warbler, American robin, Clark’s nutcracker, red crossbill, western wood-pewee, chipping sparrow, deer mouse, dusky flycatcher, mule deer, elk, coyote Species Likely to be Present  but Less Common white-breasted nuthatch, Townsend’s solitaire, hairy woodpecker, red crossbill, gray jay, evening grosbeak, blue grouse, American robin, northern redback vole, dusky flycatcher, elk, coyote, ruffed grouse white-breasted nuthatch, Townsend’s solitaire, hairy woodpecker, gray jay, evening grosbeak, blue grouse, western tanager, mountain bluebird, common flicker, pygmy nuthatch, lark sparrow, tree swallow, violet-green swallow, vesper sparrow, mourning dove, red-tailed hawk, red squirrel, mountain cottontail, yellow pine chipmunk, Richardson’s ground squirrel, badger, northern pocket gopher, red fox, porcupine, gopher snake Species of Special Concern northern goshawk, pileated woodpecker, western toad, wolf flammulated owl, northern goshawk, pileated woodpecker, western toad, wolf Priority Species chipping sparrow, blue grouse, pileated woodpecker, red crossbill, Cassin’s finch flammulated owl, chipping sparrow, blue grouse, pileated woodpecker, Lewis’s woodpecker, red crossbill, Cassin’s finch Featured Species elk, mule deer, moose, ruffed grouse elk, mule deer, moose, ruffed grouse 1-some open-canopy habitat would occur on sites where MPB mortality has opened up the canopy. However, ponderosa pine would not increase and over the long term the canopy would close and a dense conifer understory would develop. 2-includes Douglas-fir dry and Ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir sites proposed for intermediate harvest or prescribed fire. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects No treatments are proposed in the dry forest wildlife habitat, therefore no direct effects are anticipated. Restoration activities would not be implemented so existing ponderosa pine would continue to be lost due to continued MPB mortality and the trends toward Douglas-fir dominated stands would continue. Habitat for ponderosa pine- associated species including the flammulated owl, pileated woodpecker, and Williamson’s sapsucker would continue to decline, whereas habitat for closed-canopy mature forest species and species that utilize dead wood would continue to increase over time as canopies affected by MPB close and understory conifer develops. Snag densities including a component of large- diameter ponderosa pine snags would remain high for 10 to 20 years. The availability of large-diameter snags would decline after this period as existing snags fall to the ground, and ponderosa pine may not become established in the understory. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative because stand density would continue to increase and fuel loading would remain high or increase. Cumulative Effects Past, present and anticipated future cumulative effects considered in this analysis are described in volume 2, appendix C. As described under methodology, cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary, of which dry forest makes up 41 percent of the analysis area where biophysical data is available. Past regeneration harvest has affected approximately 20 percent of the dry forest community, although most of this occurred prior to 1980 and these stands are not characterized by closed canopy conditions. Approximately 5 percent has been affected by partial harvest, most of which has involved sanitation cutting and these stands are characterized by more open stand conditions, many of which are characteristic of this community. Fuel treatments have also occurred on another 5to 10 percent, although understory conditions have largely been restored. Wildfire has affected approximately 5,000 acres and much of the recent timber harvest has been focused on establishing natural regeneration on lands affected by fire. Many of the past and ongoing activities such as trail and campground activities would result in minor and localized changes in vegetation. Also while personal use firewood would reduce levels of downed woody debris, this would be restricted to roadside areas where there has already been a reduction in canopy Ongoing and future activities that would likely modify dry forest habitat and result in changes in structure or diversity include the following: · Prescribed fire – 113 acres · NNIS treatment on 2,120 acres · Grazing – 8,136 acres, · Hazard tree removal- 460 acres · Timber harvest on 241 acres · Wildfire – 44 acres. Collectively, these treatments would affect approximately 11,000 acres or 38 percent of the dry forest community within the analysis area. However, not all activities would have adverse effects to this community since NNIS treatment would reduce impacts associated with nonnative invasive species and prescribed fire would be expected to restore conditions. Grazing would be expected to modify understory diversity within this community, although monitoring is in place to identify and mitigate resource concerns associated with grazing. Firewood collection would remove downed woody debris along open road corridors and this could be expected to continue over the long term. Activities that would result in long-term changes in stand structure include timber harvest, hazard tree removal and past wildfire. Collectively this would affect approximately 6,000 acres of the dry forest community. Additionally MPB mortality would continue with some areas of concentrated mortality. Because over 80 percent of this community would be unaffected by activities that would result in long-term effects, and considering uses (e.g., grazing and recreation) are not expected to change, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments to the dry forest community under this alternative. While there are no irretrievable commitments that can be reasonably predicted at a single point in time, there would be a long-term decline in species diversity and canopy conditions characteristic of the dry forest community, including a reduction in habitat for species that prefer or require large diameter snags. Some wildlife associated with the dry forest community may continue to decline. Alternative 1 Conclusions While there would be little short-term change in dry forest habitat, in the absence of fire, existing ponderosa pine would continue to be lost due to MPB mortality and encroachment of shade tolerant species in the understory, reducing the likelihood that ponderosa pine regeneration would become established. Additionally, due to increased fuel loading, risk of high intensity wildfire would continue to increase and fire-tolerant species would continue to decline. Alternative 2 Direct and Indirect Effects Historically, early seral habitat existed on 15 percent of both the ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir and dry Douglas-fir communities. Regeneration treatments proposed under alternative 2 would create early seral habitat on 11 percent and 2 percent of these two communities respectively. Over the short term, habitat for early successional species and mature forest species that also utilize early successional vegetation would be improved. In the long term, habitat for mature open canopy species such as the flammulated owl or Lewis’s woodpecker would be created on this acreage. Additionally, the 2,036 acres of intermediate treatments would provide more immediate benefits to these species by creating mid-seral open-canopy stands on approximately 15 percent of the dry forest biophysical setting. Prescribed fire treatments would create open-canopy habitat on 2,836 acres and collectively, open-canopy forested habitat would occur on approximately 35 percent of the dry forest biophysical setting. Although a small amount of this (150 acres) would occur as late-seral habitat, most would occur as mid-seral open-canopy habitat. As described under treatment effects, collectively activities proposed under alternative 2 would maintain or increase species such as ponderosa pine, aspen and western larch and increase species diversity, while creating more heterogeneous and patchy stand conditions similar to those that occurred historically. Proposed treatments would enhance species diversity and promote development of fire tolerant species. Approximately 42 percent of the dry forest setting (includes regeneration harvest) would be at a reduced risk from stand-replacing wildfire and insect and disease related mortality. Potential for wildfire is also reduced on adjacent lands because treatments are interspersed throughout the project area. A total of 58 percent of the dry-forest setting would not be treated and effects would be similar to those described under alternative 1. Alternative 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Alternative 3 also restores open-canopy dry forest habitat, but at a reduced level than alternative 2. Under alternative 3, open-canopy ponderosa pine habitat would occur on a total of 26 percent of dry forest community, whereas early seral habitat would be improved on 6 percent. Approximately 68 percent of this community would not be treated and effects would be similar to those described under alternative 1. Reduced risk from wildfire and insect and disease activity would occur on 32 percent of the Dry Forest setting under this alternative. Like alternative 2, most wildlife species would benefit due to the reduced risk of wildfire. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, implementation of the action alternatives would result in up to (alternative 2) the following: · Intermediate Harvest – 2,036 acres · Regeneration Harvest – 938 acres · Prescribed Fire – 2,645 acres Mature forest would be reduced on the acres proposed for regeneration harvest and on approximately 275 acres proposed for mixed severity burning, due to the openings created in areas burned more intensively. This would create early seral habitat conditions on approximately 4 percent of this community. While ongoing and anticipated future activities would affect up to (alternative 2) approximately 20 percent of the dry forest habitat, mature forest conditions with open understory conditions characteristic of this community would be created on almost 80 percent of the acres affected by treatment. As a result treatment would be expected to result in a long-term improvement on this acreage. Also regeneration treatments are proposed in areas with concentrated mortality and while mature forest would be reduced, over the long term treatment is expected to help maintain ponderosa pine on the sites. So while harvest and fire would cumulatively affect almost 6,500 acres or 22 percent of the dry forest community, because most anticipated activities are designed to restore historic conditions and reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments to wildlife under any alternative. While the action alternatives would reduce snags and DWD and modify understory and overstory structure and species composition as described above, these habitats would continue to be available across the landscape. Additionally, due to fire restoration and reduced conifer encroachment, habitat for species that prefer or require the dry forest community would be maintained or improved over the long term. Action Alternative Conclusions The action alternatives are expected to re-introduce fire to the landscape and promote the development of mature, open-canopy dry forest conditions, promote fire tolerant species, provide long-term habitat for species that prefer or require large diameter snags, help to maintain hardwood (aspen) and shrub components and reduce risk of stand replacing wildfire. Collectively this is expected to help ensure the long-term sustainability of the dry forest community. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Forest Plan Standards applicable to management of dry forest habitat is included in the respective management area direction that pertains to the maintenance of big game forage and cover, as well as improvement of non-game habitat in MA W-1. Effects to big game habitat are described under the elk and mule deer environmental effects sections, whereas non-game habitat is discussed under migratory birds and the individual species sections. Because big game cover and forage would be maintained in the short term under all alternatives, and improved over the long term under alternatives 2 and 3, all alternatives are consistent with management area direction related to big game. Additionally, because all alternatives would maintain or improve habitat for migratory birds, sensitive species, birds of conservation concern and non-game MIS species, all alternatives are consistent with Forest direction to promote nongame habitat. Finally, because proposed actions would help ensure that this community and the wildlife species that rely on it are sustained over time, both action alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Cool-moist Forest Habitat As described previously, cool-moist forest habitats include a mix of seral and climax species with a mix of understory conditions. Historically 25 percent existed as early seral habitat, 25 percent as mid- to late-seral open-canopy structure and 55 percent as mid- to late-seral closed-canopy stands. Table 88 displays the species commonly associated with mid- and late- seral closed-canopy conditions, whereas species expected to move into the area or exhibit a noticeable increase in abundance with increases in early seral or open-canopied habitats are discussed following table 88. Table 88. Wildlife species associated with closed-canopy forests Species Status Wildlife Species associated with Moist Conifer Forests: Mid-Seral and Late-Seral Stands with Closed Canopies Species Likely to be Abundant or Relatively Common red-breasted nuthatch, mountain chickadee, ruby-crowned kinglet, gray jay, dark-eyed junco, pine siskin, red squirrel, deer mouse, mule deer Species Likely to be Present but less Common golden-crowned kinglet, Clark’s nutcracker, black-capped chickadee, Townsend’s solitaire, hairy woodpecker, blue grouse, American robin, brown creeper, Swainson’s thrush, hermit thrush, yellow-rumped warbler, red crossbill, black bear, American marten, long-tailed weasel, snowshoe hare, elk, coyote, golden-mantled ground squirrel, red-tailed chipmunk, northern flying squirrel, porcupine, northern redback vole, vagrant shrew, little brown myotis bat Species Likely to be Uncommon or Rare pileated woodpecker, white-breasted nuthatch, northern goshawk, boreal owl, great gray owl, ruffed grouse, red-naped sapsucker, Wilson’s warbler, western tanager, northern three-toed woodpecker, evening grosbeak, Stellar’s jay, Cassin’s finch, spruce grouse, dusky shrew, long-tailed vole, bushy-tailed woodrat, yellow-pine chipmunk, mountain lion, bobcat, Canada lynx, grizzly bear, fisher, wolverine, wolf, coyote, moose, white-tailed deer, western toad, rubber boa Species of Special Concern northern goshawk, pileated woodpecker, Canada lynx, wolf, fisher, grizzly bear, western toad Species Status Wildlife Species associated with Moist Conifer Forests: Mid-Seral and Late-Seral Stands with Closed Canopies Priority Species northern goshawk, pileated woodpecker, American marten, Canada lynx, fisher Featured Species elk, mule deer, moose, American marten, ruffed grouse Species use would vary depending on the availability of within-stand features such as water, woody debris, snags, rocks or proximity to edge. Species likely to increase measurably in abundance with expansion of early seral and open-canopied habitat include mountain bluebird, warbling vireo, solitary vireo, chipping sparrow, dusky flycatcher, western wood-pewee, olive-sided flycatcher, Williamson’s sapsucker, Cassin’s finch, northern flicker, western tanager, yellow-rumped warbler, violet-green swallow, great horned owl, northern pocket gopher, meadow vole, Richardson’s ground squirrel, badger, red fox, and coyote. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed in this alternative, so there would be no direct effects. In the short- and long-term stands would continue to progress successionally with continuing decreases in seral species (ponderosa pine, whitebark pine, aspen, Douglas-fir and Engelmann spruce) and increases in climax species. In the absence of fire, stands would continue to become more homogeneous with closed-canopy conditions predominating and the availability of early seral habitat would remain low. The dense stand conditions resulting under this alternative would provide cover for a variety of species including snowshoe hare, deer, and elk. A variety of bird species and small mammals (e.g., squirrels and marten) also seek food, cover and nest sites within dense mature forests. Conversely, herbaceous vegetation and shrubs as well as wildlife forage would continue to decline. Due to the continued increase in fuels, the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would increase. Should a wildfire occur, a long-term decrease in the availability of mature, open and closed-canopy habitat would also occur, whereas early-seral habitat would increase. Under either scenario (no fire or stand replacing wildfire), cool-moist forests would continue to decline in species and structural diversity and deviate from historical conditions. This decline in habitat diversity would result in a corresponding decline in wildlife diversity for some species (open canopy). The availability of snags and DWD would be similar to those described under dry forest. Cumulative Effects Past, present and anticipated future cumulative effects are described in appendix C. Since 1960, regeneration harvest has occurred on approximately 950 acres or 4 percent of this community, whereas partial harvest (e.g., thinning, sanitation and improvement cuts) has occurred on approximately 125 acres. Also, approximately 2,600 acres or 11 percent of this community has been affected by fuel treatments since the late 1950s. Effects of on vegetative structure and habitat from these activities were considered when evaluating the existing condition. Also, because most activities occurred prior to 1980, understory structure has been restored on most sites. More recent wildfire (since 2003-2009) has affected approximately 5,500 acres of this community. While understories have started to become re-established and created elevated levels of wildlife forage, with the exception of large quantities of standing and downed wood, cover on these lands is still largely absent. Ongoing and future activities under this alternative within the cool-moist community include, NNIS treatment on 502 acres, road hazard tree removal on approximately 15 acres, grazing on 1,712 acres, burning on an estimated 178 acres, and 587 acres affected by 2011 wildfires. Collectively, these treatments would occur on approximately 3,000 acres and affect approximately 14 percent of the cool-moist forest community within the analysis area. This would include a long-term reduction in mature forest on approximately 370 acres. Additionally, mortality due to stand overstocking and MPB would continue. While long-term changes in habitat have altered habitat conditions within this community, because use is not expected to change and considering the short-term nature of many effects and that habitat conditions would be maintained on approximately 75 percent of the cool-moist forest community, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There would be no irretrievable commitments to wildlife under this alternative. As in the dry forest setting, while there are no irreversible commitments that can be reasonably predicted at a single point in time, there would be a long-term decline in habitat for some species that require open-canopy conditions characteristic of this community, including a reduction in habitat for species that prefer or require large diameter snags. Alternative 1 Conclusions Alternative 1 would maintain the cool-moist forest across the project area, although species composition would continue to decline, structural diversity would remain low and risk of wildfire would continue to increase. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Both alternatives are designed to promote historical conditions and long-term sustainability through timber harvest and prescribed fire. Much of this community is remote with little access. So, proposed timber harvest would occur on less than 1 percent of this setting under either alternative. These treatments would result in a small increase in mid-seral open- canopy habitat (improvement cutting and precommercial thinning ) and early seral habitat (regeneration cutting). Both alternatives also propose a small amount of low-severity fire including 50 acres under alternative 2 and 30 acres under alternative 3. Effects of treatment would be similar to those described under treatment effects and under dry forest setting. Mixed-severity fire was the primary disturbance regime in the cool-moist community; as a result, over 95 percent of the treatment under both alternatives includes restoring mixed- severity fire to the landscape. Under alternative 2, mixed-severity fire would occur on 2,553 acres or 28 percent of this type, whereas alternative 3 would restore fire on 2,013 acres or 22 percent. Treatments would create more open-canopy conditions with increased herbaceous understory diversity on much of the acreage treated, as well as small (less than 5 acres) to medium (up to 75 acres) pockets of early seral habitat on sites receiving a mixed-severity prescribed burn. As described in section 4.3.2, proposed activities would promote more diverse structural conditions, increase the component of seral and fire-tolerant or dependent species such as ponderosa pine, aspen, whitebark pine and western larch, as well as reduce fuels. Both alternatives would increase the availability of open-canopy habitat close to historical levels (25 percent), while increasing the availability of early seral habitat over what currently exists. Seventy percent of this biophysical setting would not be treated under either action alternative. Cumulative Effects In addition to effects described under alternative 1, implementation of the action alternatives would result in up to (alternative 2) the following: · Prescribed Fire – 2,602 acres · Intermediate Harvest – 50 acres · Regeneration Harvest – 31 acres Cumulatively ongoing and anticipated future activities would affect approximately 5,700 acres or 26 percent of the cool-moist community, including a reduction in mature forest conditions on approximately 900 acres or 4 percent of this community (due to wildfire, regeneration harvest, hazard tree removal and openings created by mixed severity burning). As described under treatment effects, effects of most of the prescribed fire and the intermediate harvest are expected to be short term and treatments are expected to help restore or move towards historical conditions, reintroduce fire to the landscape and provide habitat conditions for species that prefer or require the conditions characteristic of this community. As a result, and considering that approximately 74 percent of the cool-moist forest habitat would not be affected, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. The action alternatives would reduce snags and DWD, and modify understory and overstory structure and species composition, including a reduction in mature forest; however, these habitats would continue to be available across the landscape. Additionally, due to fire restoration and reduced conifer encroachment, habitat for species that prefer or require the open canopy or early seral cool-moist forest community would be restored and increased. Action Alternative Conclusions Both alternatives would reduce available mature cool-moist forest, whereas proposed treatments would increase species diversity, promote stand- and landscape-level structural diversity and reduce the risk of wildfire. Over the long term this is expected to promote a greater diversity of wildlife habitat conditions, while maintaining or increasing available cool-moist forest habitat. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Forest Plan Standards applicable to management of cool-moist habitat is included in the respective management area direction that pertains to the maintenance of big game forage and cover, as well as improvement of non-game habitat in MA W-1. Effects to big game habitat are described under the elk and mule deer environmental effects sections, whereas non-game habitat is discussed under migratory birds and the individual species/habitat sections. Because big game cover and forage would be maintained in the short term under all alternatives, and improved over the long term under Alternatives 2 and 3, all alternatives are consistent with management area direction related to big game. Additionally, because all alternatives would maintain or improve habitat for migratory birds, sensitive species, birds of conservation concern, and non-game MIS species, all alternatives are consistent with MA W-1 direction to promote non-game habitat. Finally because both action alternatives would restore fire to the landscape, improve species composition, and promote long-term sustainability of this community while providing the mix of conditions necessary to maintain habitat for species that prefer or depend on this community, both action alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Upper Sub-alpine Fir (Whitebark Pine) Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed for this alternative, so there are no direct effects. However due to the absence of fire, continued insect- and disease-related mortality and conifer encroachment, both stand- and landscape-level whitebark pine would continue to decline. As a result, habitat for species such as grizzly bear, red squirrel and Clark’s nutcracker, as well as many mammals and birds that utilize its seeds may decline. Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Because this habitat is found at upper elevations, there have been few past activities, which have consisted of approximately 30 acres of timber harvest and fuel treatment and 200 acres of reforestation since 1960. More recent wildfire has also occurred on approximately 200 acres. Ongoing and anticipated future activities are limited largely to firewood collection and 32 acres of wildfire. Collectively, approximately 20 percent of this community has been affected, although vegetative structure and habitat from most past activities have been restored. While there would continue to be a reduction in whitebark pine, because over 80 percent of this community has been unaffected and considering vegetation and habitat have been restored on most lands affected by past treatment, there are no significant cumulative effects to the upper sub-alpine fir community anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There would be no irreversible commitments under this alternative. While there are no irretrievable commitments that can be reasonably predicted at a single point in time, in the absence of wildfire, whitebark pine would continue to decrease. Alternative 1 Conclusions Whitebark pine is a fire-dependent species and fire suppression would continue to occur; therefore, risks of stand replacing wildfire would continue to increase and the current decline in whitebark pine is expected to continue. Over the long term, suitable habitat for species such as the grizzly bear that rely on whitebark pine would be further reduced. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Both action alternatives propose approximately 900 acres of mixed-severity fire, as well as supplemental planting of whitebark pine in select stands proposed for harvest. As described under treatment effects, mixed-severity fire would result in a mosaic of burning conditions including both low intensity burning (50 percent), high severity burning (25-30 percent) and unburned areas (20-25 percent). As a result, early seral habitat would be created on up to 30 percent of the acreage treated or 8 percent of the existing upper sub-alpine fir community, whereas 80 percent of this community would be unaffected (includes unburned portion of treatment units). While effective treatments to restore whitebark pine are still being researched, based on the available information (USDA Forest Service 2010a; PIF 2000), the mix of treatments proposed, including pre-burning fuel enhancement and prescribed fire are the primary tools available for treating deteriorating whitebark pine stands and restoring this important species across the landscape. Because it may take decades to establish pine seedlings on the site (USDA Forest Service 2010a), it is important to maintain existing regeneration and available seed sources. Consequently, maintenance and regeneration of whitebark pine would be promoted in all units through a combination of planting and site preparation in harvest units, as well as through landscape burning using low- and mixed-severity fire. All units would be evaluated prior to burning to protect existing whitebark pine seedlings, and identify areas where pre-burn treatments can be applied to promote future regeneration from nutcracker caching. While research indicates that the mix of proposed treatments may be effective at development of nutcracker caching sites, because of the complexity of whitebark pine regeneration, it is expected that it may take at least 10 to 20 years for regeneration to become established (USDA Forest Service 2010a). As a result, while both alternatives would promote restoration of whitebark pine, there are no short-term benefits and benefits associated with regeneration and restoration of pine would be long term. Maintenance of whitebark pine has important implications for wildlife because of the reliance of grizzly bears on whitebark pine nuts in some ecosystems (Mattson and Jonkel 1989, Mattson et al. 1992 in PIF 2000). Whitebark pine seeds are also an important food source for many small mammals and bird species. Red squirrels (Tamiasciurus hudsonicus), chipmunks (Eutamias spp.), and golden-mantled ground squirrels (Citellus lateralis) are known to forage on whitebark pine seeds, with red squirrels demonstrating a high dependence on whitebark pine in subalpine habitats (Hutchins 1989 in PIF 2000). Whitebark pine is also used for foraging by a number of bird species and Clark’s nutcrackers are highly dependent on whitebark pine seed in the late summer and fall of each year, utilizing the seed caches throughout the winter (PIF 2000). Whitebark pine benefit directly from a mutual relationship with Clark’s nutcrackers through enhanced dispersal and seeding success resulting from germination of un-retrieved nutcracker caches (Tomback 1982 in PIF 2000). Consequently promoting the long-term restoration of whitebark pine, would improve habitat for a variety of mast- dependent wildlife. Cumulative Effects In addition to effects described under alternative 1, both action alternatives propose prescribed fire on 120 acres of the upper sub-alpine community. Because existing whitebark pine would be protected and considering that proposed burning is expected to maintain or restore whitebark pine, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments under these alternatives. Because proposed treatments would reduce snags, DWD and modify overstory and understory structure, there would be shifts in available mature and early seral upper sub-alpine fir habitat. However due to anticipated whitebark pine regeneration, over the long term treatments are expected to promote the long-term sustainability of this forest community and the wildlife species that depend on it. Action Alternative Conclusions Based on available information, treatments proposed under the action alternatives are expected to promote conditions necessary to maintain whitebark pine across the landscape. Additionally, habitat would be improved for grizzly bear and Clarks nutcracker, as well as for species that rely on hard mast in this important community. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Forest Plan Standards applicable to management of upper sub-alpine habitat is included in the respective management area direction that pertains to the maintenance of big game forage and cover, as well as improvement of non-game habitat in MA W-1. Effects to big game habitat are described under the elk and mule deer environmental effects sections, whereas non-game habitat is discussed under migratory birds and the individual species/habitat sections. Because big game cover and forage would be maintained in the short term under all alternatives, and improved over the long-term under alternatives 2 and 3, all alternatives are consistent with management area direction related to big game. Additionally, because all alternatives would maintain or improve habitat for migratory birds, T&E, and sensitive species, all alternatives are consistent with MA W-1 direction to promote non-game habitat. Finally, because of the importance of white-barked pine for grizzly bear, and a variety of other wildlife, both action alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12 . Riparian Habitats Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed for this alternative, so riparian habitats would be largely unchanged. Although over the long-term, species and structural changes described under alternative effects would continue to occur. There is mounting evidence that simply protecting riparian areas from fire and other disturbances may result in deterioration of habitat for wildlife (USDA Forest Service 2000b). For example, without low-intensity fire, uplands and streamside areas succeed to shade-tolerant coniferous species, with reduced dominance or loss of early successional deciduous trees and shrubs. These altered conditions can have important consequences for habitats of terrestrial and aquatic fauna (USDA Forest Service 2000b). Further, because of elevated levels of fuel loading, riparian areas and the species that depend on them would continue to be at risk from stand replacing wildfire. Cumulative Effects While there has been a small amount of timber harvest and fuel treatments within riparian areas since 1960 (less than 100 acres), riparian habitat has been largely unchanged from treatment. An exception would be the Copper Creek and Lincoln Gulch drainages, where wildfire has greatly reduced forested riparian habitat. Ongoing and future activities that occur within riparian habitat include grazing, a small amount of NNIS treatment (10 acres), and a small amount of burning associated with future prescribed fire. However, because fire is only allowed to back into riparian areas and with implementation of design features to reduce burning intensity, most of the riparian areas would be unburned or lightly burned. While wildfire has altered riparian habitat in the Copper Creek/Lincoln Gulch drainages, riparian habitat outside these areas and across most (over 75 percent) of the analysis area is expected to be maintained. As a result there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments While there may be a gradual reduction in hardwoods and shrubs due to continued conifer encroachment, there are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments to the riparian community anticipated under this alternative. Alternative 1 Conclusions Riparian habitats would be largely unchanged under this alternative, although due to conifer encroachment and continued reduction of aspen, vegetative diversity and structure may be reduced over time. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Based on treatment effects discussed in section 4.3, the action alternatives would result in removal of some mature trees, as well as smaller diameter down woody debris. However, with implementation of PDFs and streamside management zones, very limited harvest would occur. Any burning within riparian areas would be low intensity. As a result, much of the riparian habitat would be unburned or lightly burned and habitat for riparian-dependent wildlife would be maintained or improved, due to increases in herbaceous, woody and hardwood (aspen) vegetation and forage adjacent to and within the riparian community. While improvements would be localized, habitat for species such as the willow flycatcher that utilize riparian shrubs interspersed with openings are more likely to be maintained under these alternatives. Due to reduced fuels in adjacent uplands, the likelihood that there would be a long-term reduction in mature riparian forest from wildfire would be reduced. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects include those described under alternative 1, as well some burning that enters riparian areas. However, because fire would only be allowed to back into riparian areas, with the exception of scattered areas that receive a low-intensity burn, riparian vegetation would be largely unchanged. As a result, and due to the small amount of habitat affected, and considering any burned areas would help to maintain the riparian shrub/hardwood component, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments While there may be small changes in structure and understory/overstory conditions on a localized basis, there are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments anticipated under the action alternatives. Action Alternatives Conclusions While there would be some localized changes in the structure and composition of riparian forest in scattered areas from low-severity burning, both action alternatives would maintain riparian habitat and reduce the likelihood of high intensity wildfire and a long-term reduction in mature riparian forest. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The Forest Plan requires that riparian areas be managed to be compatible with dependent wildlife species. Because riparian habitat would remained relatively unchanged under alternative 1 and considering that both action alternatives protect riparian areas, as well as increase the shrub/hardwood component, all alternatives are consistent with this direction, as well as with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Mountain Meadow and Shrub Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed for this alternative, so there are no direct effects. In areas where MPB mortality has occurred, shrub and meadows may expand somewhat as the canopy opens, although continued conifer encroachment would likely result in a long-term decline in these communities. This may benefit some species in the short term, since cover in close proximity to foraging habitat would increase. However due to the absence of fire and expansion of conifers, over the long term, mountain meadow and shrub habitat would decline, resulting in decreased forage and cover. Also, because many shrubs are decadent with little regeneration occurring, the diversity of shrub age classes would continue to decline and the structural diversity important to many bird species that utilize the mountain shrub community would likely be reduced. Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Most of the existing mountain meadow and shrub habitat is a result of recent wildfires (2003 to 2009). Consequently, past activities have largely been associated with fuel reduction and re-establishment of forest regeneration. Past activities within the small meadow/shrub inclusions that are scattered across the analysis area have included primarily grazing. Ongoing and future cumulative effects include approximately 1,100 acres of continued grazing, 365 acres of NNIS treatment, and 75 acres of wildfire (2011). Cumulatively, approximately 1,550 acres or 11 percent of these communities may be affected. As described in section 4.4, grazing use is not expected to change and NNIS treatment would reduce the spread of invasive species. As a result, habitat conditions would be largely maintained and there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments While conifer encroachment would continue to reduce mountain meadow and shrub communities, it is likely a wildfire would maintain them in the future and there are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments under this alternative. Alternative 1 Conclusions While habitat would be maintained in the short term under this alternative, conifer encroachment would continue to reduce mountain meadow and shrub communities across the project area. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Alternatives 2 and 3 propose prescribed fire (mixed severity) on 75 acres of meadow habitat (11 percent) and 18 acres of mountain shrub habitat (13 percent). Effects of proposed burning include mortality and a reduction in shrubs, as well as a change in shrub density on the acres treated. Although there would be mortality in the decadent and mature size class, burning would result in development of a younger age class or rejuvenate decadent shrubs, as well as increase herbaceous vegetation (Peterson and Best 1987). As a result, treatment would improve the diversity and health of stands over the long term, as well as provide habitat for species such as the calliope hummingbird that utilize re-growth after a fire (PIF 2000). Soil disturbance during burning may make meadows more susceptible to weeds, so implementation of burning could lead to increased risk of NNIS, although mitigation and monitoring are expected to reduce this risk. While treated shrub stands would be more open, with retention of some of the existing shrub cover they would continue to provide habitat for wildlife. For example, prescribed burning in Idaho indicated that while there may be a short-term (1 to 2 years) reduction in use for birds such as brewer’s sparrows immediately following burning, some species such as the sage sparrow and sage thrasher are largely unaffected, whereas western meadowlarks increase slightly immediately following burning. Also within 4 years of the burn, total burn densities were higher than on control plots, and densities of Brewer’s sparrow doubled (Peterson and Best 1987). Additionally, because burning within both mountain meadow and shrub communities would increase herbaceous vegetation, forage availability for species such as elk and mule deer would increase (USDA Forest Service 2006b). So while short-term effects to species diversity and abundance may occur, over the long term, increases in wildlife forage, maintenance of unburned habitat and improved shrub vigor within burned areas are expected to maintain or improve wildlife diversity and abundance within these communities. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, prescribed fire would occur on up to 93 acres (alternative 2). While some shrub mortality would occur, project design features are in place to ensure that some existing shrubs are retained. Additionally, it is expected that proposed burning would increase shrub vigor and reproduction. As a result and considering that 89 percent of these communities would not be treated, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments of shrubs and meadows associated with the action alternatives. Alternative 2 and 3 Conclusions Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in some mortality of existing shrubs and reduce available grasses and foraging habitat on approximately 75 acres of meadow and 18 acres of mountain shrub habitat respectively and elevate the risk of invasive plants. The risk of NNIS would be reduced through implementation of PDFs and post-treatment monitoring. Habitat for wildlife that depend on shrub and meadow communities would continue to be available since a shrub component would be maintained on all sites, and over 80 percent of these communities would not be treated. The health and vigor of native shrubs and grasses would be improved on approximately 15 percent of the available habitat, and conifer encroachment would be reduced. Both alternatives would help promote the long-term sustainability of the mountain meadow and shrub communities. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Forest Plan Standards applicable to management of mountain meadow-shrub habitat is included in the respective management area direction that pertains to the maintenance of big game forage, as well as improvement of non-game habitat in MA W-1. Effects to big game habitat are described under the elk and mule deer environmental effects sections, whereas non-game habitat is discussed under migratory birds and the individual species sections. Because big game cover and forage would be maintained in the short term under all alternatives, and improved over the long-term under alternatives 2 and 3, all alternatives are consistent with management area direction related to big game. Additionally, because all alternatives would maintain or improve habitat for a variety of nongame species, including bird species of conservation concern, all alternatives are consistent with MA W-1 direction to promote nongame habitat. Finally, because proposed actions would reduce conifer encroachment and improve herbaceous and woody diversity, both action alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Aspen Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there would be no direct effects. However, due to the absence of disturbances such as fire, existing aspen would continue to decline in the short term, and would be largely eliminated in the long term (USDA Forest Service 2010a). Should a wildfire occur, aspen would be rejuvenated and maintained, although the longer it takes for a wildfire to occur, the greater the likelihood that the distribution of aspen may be reduced. Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Past activities have included some timber harvest and wildfire which has helped to maintain aspen, as well as grazing which has reduced aspen in some areas. Ongoing and future cumulative effects include continued browsing by livestock and elk, possible increases in invasive species and localized improvements due to burning associated with the Blackfoot and Dry Creek prescribed fires. However, because grazing use is not expected to change and considering proposed fire would help to maintain aspen in affected drainages, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. While it is likely that future wildfire would maintain an aspen component, due to continued conifer encroachment, aspen may continue to decline. Alternative 1 Conclusions Due to the absence of fire and conifer encroachment the aspen community has been declining across the project area. With continued fire suppression, and in the absence of future fire, the amount and distribution of aspen would continue to decline and habitat for species that prefer this community would be reduced over the long term under this alternative. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Successful regeneration of aspen requires disturbance that stimulates sucker regeneration. As a result disturbance associated with prescribed fire and timber harvest proposed under both alternatives would successfully regenerate existing aspen and lands containing an aspen component would be treated on approximately 6,000 and 5,000 acres of alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. While alternative 2 proposes treatment on more acres, PDFs require that aspen be promoted and maintained where it occurs. As a result, treatments proposed under both action alternatives are expected to maintain or improve the aspen component (USDA Forest Service 2006b, USDA Forest Service 2000b) on the acres affected. Effects to wildlife include improved habitat for species that prefer or require aspen such as ruffed grouse, deer, elk, and snowshoe hare, as well as a number of nongame species including the olive-sided flycatcher. In addition to improving the amount of aspen, prescribed fire is expected to greatly improve the amount and nutritional quality of forage within 1 to 2 years following treatment (USDA Forest Service 2006b). Cumulative Effects In addition to effects described under alternative 1, burning and harvest treatments would occur on up to 6,000 acres of stands that contain an aspen component (alternative 2). Proposed treatments are expected to promote aspen; although continued browsing by livestock and wildlife has the greatest potential to adversely affect this community. However project design features are in place to protect and promote aspen, including potential impacts from livestock grazing. As a result and considering proposed activities are expected to help restore historic conditions and promote aspen, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated under either alternative. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Because proposed activities are expected to promote the long-term sustainability of aspen, there are no irretrievable commitments on the acreage treated. However, like alternative 1, aspen would continue to decline where it exists outside of treatment areas. Alternative 2 and 3 Conclusions Implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may result in the reduction of scattered mature aspen due to proposed burning. Collectively, proposed treatments are expected to promote existing aspen by reducing conifer encroachment and stimulating aspen regeneration. Consequently, aspen forage and cover and associated wildlife habitat would be improved in the short term. Over the long term, proposed treatments are expected to promote the distribution and sustainability of the aspen community across the project area. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Forest Plan Standards applicable to management of aspen is included in the respective management area direction that pertains to the maintenance of big game forage, as well as improvement of non-game habitat in MA W-1. Effects to big game habitat are described under the elk and mule deer environmental effects sections, whereas non-game habitat is discussed under migratory birds and the individual species sections. Because big game cover and forage would be maintained in the short term under all alternatives, and improved over the long-term under Alternatives 2 and 3, all alternatives are consistent with management area direction related to big game. Additionally, because all alternatives would maintain or improve habitat for a variety of non-game species, all alternatives are consistent with MA W-1 direction to promote non-game habitat. Finally, because both action alternatives would help to retain aspen across the landscape, both action alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Dead Wood Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed for this alternative, so there are no direct effects. However, habitats would continue to change and result in effects to wildlife habitat. For example, risks associated with disturbance such as wildfire, root disease and insects would likely increase as forested stands become denser and more susceptible to these agents. As a result, standing dead and DWD would increase and provide habitat for cavity and wildlife dependent on down wood. Although due to the reduction in ponderosa pine, over the long term the number of large-diameter snags would be expected to decrease. Historically, wildfires included a combination of low, mixed and high-severity fires where some snags and large DWD were maintained or increased across the landscape (low- and mixed- severity fires). Increasing levels of dead wood and ladder fuels leave the project area susceptible to increased, severe stand-replacing wildfire, and the likelihood that low-severity fires may occur is reduced. As a result, it is likely that a larger area of high-severity fire may occur, than would have occurred historically. Standing and downed, dead trees have many ecological roles in a landscape recovering from wildfire (Beschta et al. 1995, Saab and Dudley 1998, Smith 2000, Brown et al. 2003, Beschta et al. 2004, Saab et al. 2004 in USDA Forest Service 2008a). The snags and down logs that result from fire serve a vital role in the structure and function of healthy forest ecosystems and play an important role in post-fire recovery and long-term site productivity. Also Hutto (1995) found that 15 species of birds were more frequently found in post-fire habitats than in any other major cover type in the northern Rockies. As a result, and considering that the possibility of stand-replacing wildfire is highest under this alternative, the likelihood that habitat would be provided for these species is high. Conversely, because of the large acreage burned, habitat for some species that utilize dead wood within a live forest canopy such as mountain bluebirds or Lewis’s woodpecker would be reduced (Saab et al. 2007). Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary and past, ongoing and anticipated future effects are in volume 2, appendix C. While many past activities have reduced standing and downed wood, dead wood has been recruited on older stands affected by harvest and fuel treatments, whereas Forest Plan standards for dead wood have been met on all sites affected by harvest since 1986. As a result, sites affected by past activities continue to provide habitat for species that prefer or require dead wood. Additionally, past MPB mortality as well as wildfire has greatly increased the amount and distribution of dead wood across the landscape. Potential ongoing and future cumulative effects include a reduction in dead wood along open roads due to firewood collection and hazard tree removal, although recent wildfires would increase levels of snags and future downed wood. However, dead wood including snags and downed woody debris would continue to be widely available. As a result, there are no significant cumulative effects to these resources or the wildlife species that depend on them. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated, although irretrievable commitments include a reduction in large-diameter snags. Alternative 1 Determination Due to continued fire suppression, snags and DWD would continue to be abundant. While the component of large diameter snags would be reduced in the future under this alternative, available dead wood habitat would continue to be widely available across the landscape and adequate habitat would be available to meet the needs of species that prefer or require this component. Also, due to increased risk of large-scale wildfire, it is likely that habitat would be provided for species that utilize dead wood associated with post-fire habitat. Alternative 2 Direct and Indirect Effects Under alternative 2 approximately 64 percent of the project area would not be treated, and effects would be the same as that described under alternative 1. As shown in table 89, approximately 40 percent of the project area would be affected by treatment and there would be some reduction in DWD on most of this acreage. Also, snags would be reduced on approximately 13 percent of the project area due to proposed timber harvest. Conversely, snags would be increased on approximately 18 percent of the project area proposed for low and mixed severity burning. Alternative 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Effects would be similar to those of alternative 2, except that 73 percent of the project area would not be treated and effects on this acreage would be similar to that of alternative 1. Also, because of reduced harvest, approximately 8 percent of the project area would have a reduction in DWD. Due to proposed burning, alternative 3 would increase snags in all size classes on approximately 15 percent of the project area. Alternatives 2 and 3 Both alternatives propose a mix of treatments that would have varying effects on snags and DWD. Table 89 displays the different treatments, the amount proposed under each alternative and general effect on dead wood. Table 89. Snag and DWD effect and treatment summary Treatment Effects Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres % Acres % Regeneration Harvest1 Long-term reduction in snags and DWD, Retention of large diameter snags >20 inches, as well as a component of small diameter snags and snag recruitment trees. Some DWD including component of large diameter logs retained. 1,713 7 816 3 Intermediate Treatments1 Reduction in snags and DWD. Retention of large diameter snags >20 inches, as well as a component of small diameter snags and snag recruitment trees. Some DWD including component of large diameter logs retained. 2,106 9 1,054 4 Low Severity Fire1 Large diameter snags retained and an increasing number of small diameter snags available. Reduction in small diameter DWD across the area treated, although some DWD including large diameter logs would be retained. Distribution would be patchy or clustered (Agee 2002). Twenty percent of the site would be unaffected. 449 2 1,366 6 Mixed Severity Fire1 Increase in small and large diameter snags. Some DWD including large diameter logs retained. DWD patchy in areas with low severity fire, whereas more intense burning would have decreased DWD and increased snags in all size classes. Net increase or pulse of DWD likely (Agee 2002). Twenty percent of the site would be unaffected. 5,014 21 3,301 14 Unaffected Habitat Increasing levels of standing and DWD in the short and long-term, although possible long-term reduction in large diameter snags on sites containing ponderosa pine. 14,723 61 17,478 73 1-Forest Plan and Regional standards related to retention of snags and DWD would be met Effects Common to the Action Alternatives With implementation of PDFs, both alternatives would meet or exceed Forest Plan standards related to snags and downed wood. Habitat for some species would be reduced on sites receiving timber harvest and low-severity burning, but suitable snags and downed wood habitat would continue to occur on all sites treated. Treatments proposed under both alternatives would increase the ponderosa pine component, therefore, future recruitment of large diameter snags and large downed wood would increase under both alternatives, when compared to no action. The distribution of snags also affects wildlife. For example, within treatment units snags retained would be more evenly distributed and would likely favor secondary cavity nesters, whereas a more patchy distribution of concentrated snag mortality associated with mixed-severity fire would likely favor primary cavity nesters (Bunnell et al. 2002). As a result, the mix of treatments proposed combined with the large area that would not be treated would provide an adequate distribution of snags to meet the needs of both primary and secondary cavity nesting species. Both alternatives would result in a reduction in snags and DWD and habitat for some species would be reduced. Snags and downed wood would be retained in all units, and considering treatment sites are interspersed with unaffected areas, snags and downed wood would continue to be available across the landscape. The mix of treatments including the use of mixed and low severity fire is similar to the disturbance regimes that occurred historically, so changes to the wildlife community would be expected to be within the natural range of variation. As a result, habitat for wildlife species that prefer or require DWD would continue to be available under both alternatives. Cumulative Effects Like alternative 1, anticipated cumulative effects include a continued reduction in snags and DWD due hazard tree removal, firewood collection and past wildfire. Additionally, proposed timber harvest would reduce snags and downed woody debris on up to (alternative 2) 3,099 acres. However snags and DWD would be retained on all units and prescribed burning would be expected to result in an increase in snags and recruitment of downed wood. As a result and considering the elevated levels of snags and DWD available across the landscape due to ongoing MPB mortality and over stocked stands, there are no significant cumulative effects to these resources anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. While the action alternatives would reduce snags and DWD on the acreage treated, standing and downed woody debris would continue to be available on sites treated, consequently, there are no irretrievable commitments to dead- wood-dependent wildlife under either alternative. Like alternative 1, there would continue to be a reduction in large-diameter snags on sites containing ponderosa pine that are not proposed for treatment. Alternative 2 and 3 Conclusions Alternatives 2 and 3 would affect dead-wood habitat on 36 and 27 percent of the project area, respectively. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, both alternatives would maintain or improve habitat for dead-wood-dependent wildlife. · Due to MPB mortality, levels of standing and downed woody debris greatly exceed historical levels. Because over 60 percent of the project area habitat would not be treated, snags and DWD would continue to be widely available across the landscape. · Forest Plan and Regional levels of snags and downed wood would be met in all sites proposed for treatment. · Proposed treatments would promote development of future large-diameter snags, which may be reduced over the long term under no action. · Adequate snags and downed woody debris would continue to be available to meet the needs of dead-wood-dependent wildlife. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The following Forest Plan direction is related to snags (USDA Forest Service 1986 p. II-21-22) · To keep an adequate snag resource through the planning horizon, snags should be managed at 70 percent of optimum (snags/acre) within each third order drainage – Based on snag monitoring data provided under the dead wood section and with implementation of PDFs that require 70 percent of optimum snag retention during all harvest activities, all alternatives are consistent with this direction. · Large, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, spruce and subalpine fir, in that priority, are the preferred species for snags and replacement trees – With implementation of PDFs that identify this order of priority for snag retention, all alternatives are consistent with this direction. · Management areas other than T-1 should be the primary source for snag management. However if adequate snags cannot be found outside of T-1, then sizes and snags should be retained at rates designated on page II-21 of the Forest Plan – Project Design Features require that snags be retained at designated levels and all alternatives are consistent with this direction. Landscape Diversity and Connectivity Landscape Diversity While many species prefer specific forest communities, wildlife use of an area is often determined by the diversity of habitat conditions that exist across the landscape (Reynolds et al. 1992; Wright 1992). As a result, this section summarizes alternative changes in the landscape- level, size and age class diversity of forested habitat, which is summarized in table 90. Non-forest habitat, which makes up approximately 4 percent of the project area, is not displayed as it is essentially the same under all alternatives. Existing landscape diversity is discussed in the Project Area Description section. Table 90. Forested size and age class diversity by alternative Size Class Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3  acres1 %2 Acres1 %2 Acres1 %2 <1 inch d.b.h. (seedling) 0 0 968 4 816 3 1-4 inches d.b.h. (sapling/pole) 3,845 17 3,747 16 3,776 16 5-9.9 inches d.b.h. (small diameter mature) 10,743 47 10,049 42 10,142 42 10-14.9 inches d.b.h. (medium diameter mature) 8,103 35 7,909 33 7,938 33 >= 15 inches d.b.h. (large diameter mature) 333 1.4 333 1.4 333 1.4 1 Acres within the project area. 2 Percent of project area. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects Landscape diversity would remain largely unchanged under this alternative. As a result, small and medium-sized mature forest would continue to predominate on 82 percent of the project area, whereas seedling forest would continue to be absent. Consequently, the Stonewall project area would continue to provide widespread habitat for mature forest species, whereas habitat for species that prefer a diversity of age and structural conditions would continue to be low across most of the project area. Also due to conifer encroachment, the availability of mountain meadow and shrub habitat would continue to decline. The ongoing MPB outbreak most likely has already resulted in altered travel patterns for some species. As mortality continues, wildlife in the project area would continue to alter movement patterns to account for lack of screening and potential barriers created by large levels of DWD. The availability of dispersal, migration, and travel corridors depends on the species of interest and their requirements for movement. Over time, the availability of wildlife corridors would fluctuate somewhat with forest succession and, potentially, wildfire as these processes change the nature of these corridors temporally and spatially. However travel migration corridors would be maintained. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary and past, ongoing and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Long-term changes in the landscape and effects on wildlife dispersal and travel are most affected by activities that alter the overstory or isolate forest patches. Past activities that have fragmented mature forest have included road construction, private land development and regeneration harvest on all ownerships and wildfire. Most off-forest harvest occurred at lower elevations within portions of the analysis area that had already been fragmented due to human development or adjacent to lands dominated by nonforest. Additionally, 8,000 acres of regeneration harvest have occurred since the late 1950s. While most of these stands are now characterized by predominantly closed canopy conditions, young forest still predominates on approximately 2,200 acres, and these sites would continue to reduce habitat and modify movement for many mature forest obligates. While past intermediate harvest, (2,300 acres) affected movement following treatment, understory conditions and cover as well as movement by wildlife has been largely restored. Similarly, understory conditions and wildlife movement would have been largely restored in most area affected by past fuel treatments. Recent wildfire (2003 to 2009) has affected 23,418 acres, which has greatly reduced seasonal movements and altered migration and dispersal of forest obligate species within much of the Copper Creek and Lincoln Gulch drainages. Finally, past and ongoing mountain pine beetle mortality has killed most of the mature lodgepole pine, which has altered dispersal, migration and travel corridors, particularly on lower elevation lands within the analysis area. While some new development of private lands may occur, this is expected to be localized and to occur largely in areas that are already developed. No new road work is proposed, although the existing road system would continue to impact wildlife species that are affected by the road itself or associated edge effects. Ongoing hazard tree removal would affect approximately 570 acres of roadside habitat by removing dead and dying trees on approximately 100 feet on either side of the road. Additionally, recent wildfire has reduced mature forest on another 450 acres. While the future and recent loss of cover from hazard tree removal and wildfire may cause some species to alter movement patterns, because the canopy is already dead and considering lands affected by recent wildfire (since 2011) are interspersed with unburned lands and surrounded by intact mature forest, it is not anticipated that the seasonal migration, dispersal or daily movement for any species would be significantly altered. Implementation of alternative 1 would contribute to the effects associated with past timber harvest, fuel treatments and wildfire. Ongoing and future MPB mortality would continue to reduce mature forest and create seral forest conditions. These areas would continue to be avoided by forest obligates. Road use that is the result of past actions would continue to impact wildlife that avoid roads. Cumulatively, past ongoing and future effects have reduced closed canopy conditions and altered wildlife movement on approximately 27,000 acres or 27 percent of the analysis area. However, with the exception of the Copper Creek and Lincoln Gulch watersheds, connectivity within the analysis would remain relatively unchanged. As a result, and considering that areas of unaffected forest are available to serve as alternate travel routes, there are no significant cumulative effects to connectivity or diversity. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments Early seral habitat would continue to decline, although due to increased risk of wildfire, it is likely that this component would increase in the future and there would be no landscape-level irreversible or irretrievable commitments under this alternative. Alternative 1 Conclusions While MPB mortality would continue to reduce closed canopy forest conditions, there would be little change in landscape-level habitat or age class diversity, and the analysis area would continue to provide habitat preferred by species that favor mature forest conditions. While some earl seral habitat would be provided in areas of concentrated MPB mortality, habitat for species that prefer or require higher levels of horizontal and vertical diversity across the landscape would remain low. Hazard tree removal and continued MPB mortality would reduce connectivity and alter the seasonal and daily movement and dispersal of wildlife. However, unaffected lands would continue to be available to serve as alternate movement corridors and existing connectivity would be largely maintained. Action Alternatives Direct and Indirect Effects Like alternative 1, late-successional habitat (greater than 15 inches d.b.h.) would remain largely unchanged. While alternative 2 would result in more seedling (18 percent) habitat, both alternatives would increase early seral habitat by 3 to 4 percent and result in a corresponding decrease in mature forest habitat. While landscape level diversity would increase, because mature forest conditions would be maintained on over 75 percent of the project area, habitat for species that prefer landscapes dominated by mature forest conditions would continue to predominate. Under the action alternatives, timber harvest and prescribed burning would occur within existing dispersal, migration and travel corridors. Intermediate harvest would result in a reduction in canopy cover and tree density that may render these areas unsuitable as corridors for mature forest obligates. Treatment could also affect movement corridors between summer and winter range or alter the way in which big game and other wildlife use these seasonal corridors. Conversely, because understory vegetation including the amount and diversity of forage would increase on these sites, treatment would allow animals to forage as they move through the area, or increase seasonal use of these sites. Regeneration harvest treatments are proposed mainly in stands with concentrated mortality. These stands have already lost their suitability as a corridor for species associated with more closed canopy conditions. For some species, the removal of standing dead trees would further reduce hiding cover or screening that otherwise could allow safe passage throughout the area. Low severity and most of proposed mixed severity burning would have little impact on dispersal, migration and travel patterns of wildlife. While there may be some short-term displacement during prescribed burning activities until the understory is reestablished, impacts should be minimal. Larger openings created by mixed severity burning could result in long-term changes in movement or dispersal for species such as wolverine, which are reluctant to cross burned areas (Hornocker and Hash 1981). Conversely, species including deer and elk would be attracted to these areas because they provide elevated levels of forage adjacent to cover (USDA Forest Service 2006b). Finally while burning would alter movement and dispersal for wildlife that use the project area, considering that many western conifer forests were historically affected by frequent, low- to mixed-severity burning, and that native species are adapted to historical fire regimes and resulting habitats (Saab and Powell 2005), it is expected that landscape level dispersal, movement and migration following proposed fire would be maintained. Both alternatives propose activities that would reduce mature forest cover, including regeneration harvest and the construction of roads. Alternative 2 proposes approximately 20 percent more regeneration harvest than that of alternative 3 and a total of 2.6 miles of road would be built then obliterated immediately following implementation (versus 0.4 miles under alternative 3). Consequently, the risk of impacting wildlife movement is somewhat higher under alternative 2. Effects of these treatments on wildlife are discussed in section 4.4. As discussed, proposed roads would occur in areas that are already roaded, reducing effects to interior species or species most affected by road use. Proposed roads would result in a barrier to some less mobile species, although they would not further fragment patches of forest or isolate habitat for any species. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, proposed activities would open up forest understories and reduce screening on up to 5,313 acres (intermediate harvest and low severity burning), and reduce mature forest habitat and connectivity on up to 2,227 acres (road construction, regeneration harvest, high severity fire) under alternative 2. As a result, habitat for mature forest species would be reduced and movement and dispersal of wildlife on these lands would be altered. However, these areas are interspersed with lands unaffected by treatment, which would provide alternate routes of travel. Also, regeneration harvest occurs in areas where MPB mortality has already reduced connectivity, effects of intermediate harvest and low severity burning would be short term, and native species have adapted to habitats created by low and mixed severity burning (Saab and Powell 2005). Collectively, for these reasons and considering both alternatives would increase horizontal and vertical diversity across the landscape, there are no significant cumulative effects to landscape level diversity or connectivity anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments under either alternative. However, both alternatives would result in an irretrievable commitment in the form of proposed project roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Action Alternatives Conclusions Timber harvest and prescribed burning would open up patches of forest habitat and occasionally disrupt movement patterns across the landscape for some forest obligates. Treatments would not preclude travel through most sites, but would affect movement to some degree. Areas of untreated forest would remain interspersed with treated stands, providing a variety of alternate travel routes. Due to changes in the understory, proposed actions would increase sight distances and allow animals moving through the area to be seen from further away. The open stands created by partial harvest and most of the burning would continue to screen large animals such as elk, deer, moose, and black bear, but at reduced levels. Conversely, the forage value of the treated areas would be higher, allowing animals more opportunity to feed as they moved through the area. The proximity of forage to cover and potential effects are discussed in more detail in section 4.6 and under the species-specific sections. Due to proposed regeneration harvest and avoidance of late-successional habitat/future old growth, landscape-level age and structural diversity would increase and habitat would be improved for species that prefer landscapes containing greater horizontal and vertical diversity. Like alternative 1, habitat for species that prefer mature forest conditions would continue to predominate. In the short term, some wildlife would have to adjust their movement patterns to take advantage of untreated areas. Given that harvest and prescribed burn patterns would mimic historic patterns, it is expected that landscape level dispersal, movement and migration would be maintained. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans There are no specific Forest Plan standards applicable to management of dispersal, migration, and/or travel corridors. Because habitat connectivity would be maintained, all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Species Effects Threatened and Endangered Species This section describes alternative effects on threatened and endangered species evaluated in detail (See the Habitat and Species Evaluated section). Canada Lynx The analysis of effects to lynx and their habitat concentrate on whether or not the proposed activities are consistent with the objectives, standards and guidelines identified in the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD) (USDA Forest Service 2007a), effects described in the Biological Opinion (BO) (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b), and affect to critical habitat. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects No treatments are proposed for the no-action alternative, so there would be no direct effects on lynx. However, habitat conditions would change. Many of the stands affected by MPB mortality have been opened up, but do not currently provide winter foraging habitat because the understory vegetation is not yet established within the canopy gaps. In the absence of wildfire conifer regeneration would continue to increase as stands mature. While this would increase the availability of multi-storied habitat, in the absence of future wildfire stand initiation habitat would be reduced or largely eliminated within the next 20 to 30 years. Generally, spruce/fir types which provide preferred lynx habitat have been less affected by fire suppression due to longer return intervals. Also large stand replacing fires can provide high quality snowshoe hare forging habitat after approximately 10 to 30 years (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). In the last 9 years 28 percent of BL-08 has recently been affected by wildfire and winter foraging habitat has been reduced within this LAU. Also low-elevation mixed conifer stands are interspersed with dryer communities that have shorter fire return intervals, and these areas have been affected by past fire suppression. As a result, the risk of wildfire is increased (USDA Forest Service 2012d) and the likelihood of a further reduction in lynx den and winter foraging habitat is greatest under this alternative. There is no way to predict if or when wildfire would occur, but the departure from historical conditions on much of the project area, as well as increased fuel loading increases the likelihood of fire. Cumulative Effects The cumulative effects analysis area for lynx includes the combined LAUs (BL-07 and BL-08) affected by treatment, which totals 54, 211 acres. This area was chosen because (1) it is large enough to assess habitat conditions within the home range of a female lynx, (2) will allow for a good distribution of lynx habitat components and can be used to adequately assess effects to movement/connectivity, (3) it includes all lynx critical habitat affected, (4) expanding the boundary to the north will incorporate wilderness, which would tend to dilute effects, and (5) lands to the south include private land which is highly fragmented, which don’t provide preferred habitat conditions. There are a number of past and ongoing activities occurring within the analysis area that have affected lynx habitat; a complete list of all activities considered can be found in volume 2, appendix C. While some of these past activities have adversely affected lynx by reducing winter foraging and den habitat, others have had positive effects because treatment has improved understory structure and the amount and distribution of snowshoe hare habitat. Effects also vary over time. For example, while older regeneration harvest treatments reduced multi-story or mid-seral habitat initially, many of these sites now provide stand initiation habitat. Similarly, while past partial harvest treatments such as thinnings and improvement cuts reduce forage and cover immediately following harvest, many of these sites are now dominated by multi-story habitat. Also, much of the recent management (since 2000) in BL-08 has been related to salvage and reforestation activities associated with the Snow Talon fire. So while treatments reduced dead wood and den habitat, treatments were designed to promote the development of tree regeneration following the fire, including increased stand diversity. Also, it is expected that many of these sites would provide winter hare habitat by the end of the analysis period (i.e., 2022). In addition to past activities that have influenced the existing condition, ongoing and future activities within the combined project LAUs include; winter recreation, existing campground and outfitter guide use, prescribed burning, trail construction, campground rehabilitation, stream work, grazing, nonnative invasive weed treatments (NNIS), road maintenance, hazard tree removal, recent wildfire and the Blackfoot Winter Travel Plan. A total of approximately 9,148 acres of mapped lynx habitat would be affected by anticipated cumulative effects. Of these 3,610 acres or 26 percent of the existing winter foraging habitat would be affected. The following cumulative effects are expected to occur within the analysis area by 2022. · Campground Rehabilitation – 5 acres of mapped habitat (all winter foraging). · Prescribed Fire – 129 acres of mapped habitat including 86 acres of winter foraging. · Grazing – 5,912 acres of mapped habitat including 2,250 acres of winter foraging. · Off-road Invasive Weed Treatment – 1,358 acres of mapped habitat including 636 acres of winter foraging. · Road Treatments including NNIS, Hazard Tree Removal and Recent Wildfire – 1,545 acres of mapped lynx habitat including 539 acres of winter foraging. · Stream Restoration – 3 acres of mapped habitat including 1 acre of winter foraging. · Trail Construction – 196 acres of mapped habitat including 93 acres of winter foraging. · Blackfoot Winter Travel Plan – address wildlife issues related to motorized and non-motorized winter use. While 23 percent and 26 percent of the mapped and winter foraging habitat would be affected during the analysis period, many of the treatments would not adversely affect lynx habitat. For example habitat would be largely unchanged due to campground rehabilitation, trail construction, stream work and NNIS treatments. As a result and considering that lynx are generally tolerant of human activities (Ruediger et al. 2000), effects would occur largely as short-term avoidance of the area during treatment. Similarly, while hazard tree removal and firewood collection would reduce snags and future downed woody debris along roads, these areas would not be preferred for denning due to increased levels of human disturbance (Ruediger et al. 2000; Koehler and Brittell 1990) and understory vegetation and winter foraging habitat would be largely unchanged. As a result effects from these treatments would consist largely of avoidance during implementation. Finally it is expected that some of the unsuitable stand initiation habitat created as a result of the 2003 Snow Talon fire would have developed enough low cover to provide winter snowshoe hare habitat by the end of the analysis period and project implementation. As a result, many of the anticipated cumulative effects would not result in long-term adverse impacts to lynx or their habitat. Approximately 5,900 acres of mapped habitat would be affected by grazing. While understory vegetation would be affected, existing use is not expected to change. As a result and with implementation of pdfs to reduce grazing impacts to recovering vegetation, winter forage and cover would be largely unchanged. Finally, there is no evidence that grazing is a factor threatening lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b) and there are no long-term adverse effects to lynx anticipated. The Blackfoot Winter Travel Plan is expected to address wildlife issues, including potential impacts of winter use on lynx. Because the final decision would be consistent with NRLM direction, there are no significant cumulative effects to lynx anticipated from winter recreational use. New information indicates that climate change may be an issue of concern for the future conservation of lynx because lynx distribution and habitat is likely to shift upward in elevation within its currently occupied range as temperatures increase (Gonzalez et al. 2007), although this information still needs to be developed to determine effects to lynx and their habitat. Also, projections for future climate change in lynx habitat are not available. For mountain-dwelling species like lynx, it is likely that upper elevation habitat would become increasingly important in the face of climate changes, although in the absence of wildfire upper elevation habitat would remain largely unchanged. In addition to cumulative effects within the CE area, two projects on critical lynx habitat within the Lincoln District are currently being analyzed that fall outside this project’s CE area. These include the Dalton Vegetation Management Project and the Helmville Face Wildlife Habitat Enhancement Project, which lie approximately 3 to 5 miles south of the Stonewall project area. The district has been field validating lynx habitat within affected lands and treatments proposed under these projects would not reduce winter hare habitat. Additionally, a number of treatments within the Dalton project have been dropped to reduce disturbance in areas with documented lynx, wolverine, and grizzly use. As a result, although specific treatment areas are not finalized, activities proposed under both projects would be in compliance with NRLM direction and there are no long-term adverse effects to lynx anticipated. While future timber harvest on state and private lands has been occurring and is expected to continue to occur into the future, generally these lands occur at lower elevations or as scattered parcels in fragmented portions of the analysis area. As a result these areas provide less suitable or unsuitable lynx habitat and it is not expected that past or future activities on state or private land would further reduce suitable lynx habitat or create barriers to lynx movement. So, in summary, considering that (1) effects of many past activities are short term or have improved lynx habitat, (2) past and continued MPB mortality is expected to increase the availability of den habitat across the landscape, (3) over 70 percent of the mapped and winter forage lynx habitat would be unaffected, and (4) existing uses would be largely unchanged, there are no long-term adverse or significant cumulative effects to lynx or lynx habitat anticipated under alternative 1. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments to lynx or lynx habitat under this alternative. Determination and Conclusions The risk of wildfire remains high, however, because there are no direct effects and considering winter foraging and den habitat remains largely unchanged, implementation of alternative 1 would have no effect on Canada lynx. Action Alternatives Direct Effects Direct effects include those that result from activities or increased human presence that may result in harm or harassment to individual lynx and/or affect reproduction. Scientific literature is limited regarding the effects of human activities and associated disturbance factors that might affect lynx. To date there is little evidence that lynx are particularly sensitive to human disturbance other than near reproductive den sites (Ruediger et al. 2000; Koehler and Brittell 1990) and some authors have described lynx as being generally tolerant of human activities (Ruediger et al. 2000). Potential effects to den sites are largely affected by the likelihood that activities would occur during the denning period and research in Montana indicates that lynx mate in late winter and females localize at natal dens in mid-May. Also during late May and June, lynx may move kittens from the natal den to a series of maternal dens. (Forest Carnivores 2012, Available at: http://forestcarnivores.org/lynx/research/denning_ecology.php, accessed 10/2/2012). It is anticipated that proposed burning would occur largely in the fall outside the denning period. Also approximately 950 acres of lower elevation timber harvest in potentially suitable den habitat would occur during the frozen winter conditions, outside the spring denning period. Finally, much of the spring denning season occurs during spring break-up, or when wet conditions would restrict timber harvest. Collectively for these reasons, as well as the widespread availability of unaffected den habitat, the likelihood that an active den would be affected by treatment is greatly reduced and considered low. As a result, and considering denning habitat is not limiting (USDA Forest Service 2007b p. 15), there are no effects to den habitat expected that would reduce lynx viability. Approximately 15 and 12 percent of the mapped lynx habitat would be affected under Alternatives 2 and 3 respectively and direct effects in the form of disturbance to foraging or dispersing individuals during treatment may occur. However proposed treatments would occur over a ten year period. Also 20 percent or more of stands proposed for prescribed burning would be unaffected by treatment. As a result and due to the widespread availability of unaffected habitat, suitable lynx habitat would be available within all affected watersheds to accommodate any animals displaced by treatment. Consequently any effects associated with disturbance from proposed treatments would be short term. Because proposed harvest would open up stand conditions, direct effects also include disturbance associated with dispersed recreational use of the area, including snow related recreation (snowmobiling and skiing outside of designated areas). While some off-trail snowmobile use does occur, most use occurs along designated trails which only affect a small portion of the analysis area. Also any increase in off-trail use is expected to be short term because woody vegetation would become established within 10 to 20 years of treatment and any roads built would be obliterated immediately following timber removal. Further most prescribed burn units occur away from roads and access for snowmobiles, and anecdotal information suggests that lynx are not displaced by human presence, including moderate levels of snowmobile traffic (Mowat et al. 2000, Squires 1999, G. Byrne 1999). Collectively for these reasons, the potential for direct effects from snowmobile use is reduced and there are no long-term direct impacts to lynx from winter recreation anticipated. Indirect Effects Indirect effects are presented in three parts including (1) an alternative summary of habitat changes and compliance with NRLMD vegetation standards for affected lynx analysis units, (2) effects of individual treatments and proposed actions on lynx habitat, and (3) a summary of alternative compliance with applicable NRLMD objectives, standards and guidelines. Alternative Summary of Habitat Changes For BL-07 and BL-08 Lynx Analysis Units Expected changes by alternative and compliance with NRLMD vegetation standards are displayed in table 91 for BL-07 and table 92 for BL-08. Changes under the action alternatives displayed in these tables are based on effects of proposed treatments which are described below. Table 91. Blackfoot 07 alternative lynx habitat Habitat/Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Existing Acres (%) Acres (%) Change Acres (%) Change Habitat Conditions Total acres 26,662 26,662 0 26,662 0 Acres mapped habitat 17,632 (66) 17,632 (66) 0 17,632 (66) 0 Acres potential denning habitat 17,145 (64) 14,133 (53) -3,012 15,146 (57) -1,999 Acres winter hare habitat 9,714 (36) 8,751 (33) -963 9,201 (34) -514 Acres mid-seral habitat 7,431 (28) 6,945 (26) -486 6,990 (26) -441 Acres of unsuitable stand initiation habitat 331 (1.2)1 1,780 (6.7)1 +1449 1,286 (4.8)1 +955 Compliance with VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, VEG S6 and VEG G10 Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated 0 460 +460 230 +230 Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated within the WUI 0 460 +460 230 +230 Acres of multi-story habitat treated 0 477 +477 289 +289 Acres of multi-story habitat treated within the WUI 0 477 +477 289 +289 Meets VEG S1: No more than 30% of the lynx habitat currently in the unsuitable stand initiation structural stage Yes Meets 331 acres (1) Yes Meets 1,780 (7) +1,449 Yes Meets 1,286 (5) +955 Do three or more adjacent LAUs exceed VEG S1? No No No Meets VEG S2: Timber management projects shall not regenerate more than 15% of lynx habitat in a 10-year period Yes Meets 38 acres (<1) Yes Meets 739 (3) +701 Yes Meets 613 (2) +582 VEG S5: Precommercial thinning - Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated within a WUI 0 432 (2) +432 204 (1) +204 VEG S5 cont’d – Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated under exceptions 1-6 0 0 0 0 0 VEG S6: Multi-story habitat - Acres of multi-story habitat treated within the WUI 0 477 (2) +477 289 (1) +289 VEG S6 cont’d: Acres of multi-story habitat treated under exceptions 1-3 0 0 0 0 0 Meets VEG G10 – Fuel treatment projects within the WUI Yes Meets See Table 40 Yes Meets See Table 40 Yes Meets See Table 40 Habitat/Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Existing Acres (%) Acres (%) Change Acres (%) Change Forestwide Summary of VEG G10 VEG G10: Acres of total treatment Forestwide under exceptions to VEG S1, S2, S5 or S6 82 1,259 +1,177 747 +665 VEG G10 cont’d: Forest wide cap of 26,400 acres (6 percent of Forest lynx habitat) Revised cap of 26,318 Revised cap  of 25,141 Revised cap Of 25,653 1 - Due to development of stand initiation habitat by project completion (2022), it is anticipated that the amount of unsuitable stand initiation habitat would be reduced from that displayed (see unsuitable stand initiation habitat summary below). Table 92. Blackfoot 08 alternative lynx habitat Habitat/Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Existing Acres (%) Acres (%) Change Acres (%) Change Habitat Conditions Total acres 27,549 27,549 0 27,549 0 Acres mapped habitat 21,421 (78) 21,421 (78) 0 21,421 (78) 0 Acres potential denning habitat 13,184 (48) 11,038 (40) -2,146 11,474 (42) -1,710 Acres winter hare habitat 4,170 (15) 3,938 (14) -232 4,027 (15) -143 Acres mid-seral habitat 9,014 (33) 8,737 (32) -277 8,767 (32) -247 Acres of unsuitable Stand initiation habitat 7,864 (28)1 8,373 (30)1 +509 8,254 (30)1 +390 Compliance with VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, VEG S6 and VEG G10 Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated 0 0 0 0 0 Acres of multi-story habitat treated 0 240 +240 146 +146 Acres of multi-story habitat treated within the WUI. 0 240 +240 146 +146 Meets VEG S1: No more than 30% of the lynx habitat currently in the unsuitable stand initiation structural stage Yes Meets 7,864 (28) Yes Meets 8,373 (30) +509 Yes Meets 8,254 (30) +391 Do three or more adjacent LAUs exceed VEG S1? No No No Meets VEG S2: Timber management projects shall not regenerate more than 15% of lynx habitat in a 10-year period Yes Meets 495 (2) Yes Meets 495 (2) 0 Yes Meets 495 (2) 0 VEG S5: Precommercial thinning - Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated within a WUI 0 0 0 0 0 VEG S5 cont’d: Acres of stand initiation hare habitat treated under exceptions 1-6 0 0 0 0 0 VEG S6: Multi-story habitat - Acres of multi-story habitat treated within the WUI 0 240 +240 146 +146 Habitat/Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Existing Acres (%) Acres (%) Change Acres (%) Change VEG S6 cont’d: Acres of multi-story habitat treated under exceptions 1-3 0 0 0 0 0 Meets VEG G10: Fuel treatment projects within the WUI Yes Meets See Table 40 Yes Meets See Table 40 Yes Meets See Table 40 Forestwide Summary of VEG G10 VEG G10: Acres of total treatment Forestwide under exceptions to VEG S1, S2, S5 or S6 82 1,259 +1,177 747 +665 VEG G10 cont’d: Forest wide cap of 26,400 acres (6 percent of Forest lynx habitat) Revised cap of 26,318 Revised cap  of 25,141 Revised cap Of 25,653 1 - Due to development of stand initiation habitat by project completion (2022), it is anticipated that the amount of unsuitable stand initiation habitat would be reduced from that displayed (see unsuitable stand initiation habitat summary below). Effects of Treatment Treatments proposed under both action alternatives emphasize fuel reduction and reducing wildfire risk, while re-introducing fire and improving vegetative species diversity. The following is a discussion of the individual treatments proposed under the two action alternatives, their effects to lynx habitat and compliance with NRLMD standards and guidelines. Individual treatments with similar effects on vegetation structure have been grouped together and include regeneration harvest (clearcutting, and shelterwood/seedtree harvest), intermediate harvest (improvement cutting, sanitation salvage) and prescribed burning (low and mixed severity fire, underburning and jackpot burning). Also burning treatments include lands where only burning would be conducted, as well as lands that would receive both harvest and burn treatments. Effects of these activities on lynx habitat, as well as compliance with NRLMD objectives, standards and guidelines are summarized in tables 38, 39 and 40. Because both action alternatives have a similar mix of treatments they are discussed collectively. However, it should be noted that alternative 3 drops or modifies treatments in order to reduce short-term impacts to wildlife, including lynx habitat. All effects of treatment assume implementation of project design features identified in table 9, chapter 2, and both alternatives would retain downed wood, large diameter logs and understory inclusions of shrubs. Additionally, the following would be implemented. Multi-story habitat inclusions outside the WUI: While some of the proposed burn units outside the tri-county WUI contain pockets of multi-story habitat, this largely occurs along the unit perimeters and these areas would be avoided during layout and implementation. Also, there are a few patches of MS habitat that occur as small inclusions within the interior of a burn unit. Past experience has shown that the crew would spend up to 2 weeks prior to ignition to identify firing patterns and control lines that would meet objectives including retention of unique or sensitive wildlife habitats. This pre-treatment field review and implementation of the following project design feature would ensure that any inclusion of MS habitat within a prescribed burn unit would not be affected: Alternatives 2 and 3 · The ignition pattern and/or control lines in all burning units outside the WUI would be modified to ensure that lands classified as MS habitat would not be treated. Promote aspen and reduce impacts to MS and SI habitat within the WUI: Portions of three stands contain aspen, which need to be released if this declining community is to be maintained over the long term. Additionally, in order to minimize disturbance to MS and SI habitat within the WUI, the following PDFs would be implemented: Alternatives 2 and 3 · To promote and maintain important habitat characteristics in MS and SI habitat where activities are proposed, treatments would be designed and laid out in coordination with the local Forest Service biologist · Ignition patterns would be modified to minimize burning in areas classified as MS lynx habitat. Alternative 3 · Unit 46 – improvement cutting in MS habitat is dropped and treatment is restricted to underburning only. · Unit 75 – treatment in SI habitat is reduced to 19 acres immediately adjacent to private land. · Unit 47 – improvement cutting in MS habitat would be reduced by 50 percent or more and targeted entirely at promoting aspen and reducing mortality of large diameter ponderosa pine. Also approximately 50 percent of the unit would be underburned. Regeneration harvest: All proposed regeneration harvest occurs within the CWPP WUI. Within BL-07, regeneration harvest is proposed on 701 acres under alternative 2 and 582 acres under alternative 3. While regeneration harvest would occur on up to 107 acres of MS habitat and 21 acres of SI habitat under alternative 2, approximately 80 percent of the regeneration harvest under both alternatives occurs in mid-seral habitat that presently has a poorly developed understory. There is no regeneration harvest proposed within BL-08. Proposed treatment removes or alters stand structure, and eliminates snowshoe hare foraging/cover and lynx cover until the site is regenerated (15 to 20 years) and treatment would create unsuitable stand initiation habitat conditions. It also reduces potential for denning and red squirrel habitat by removing large trees and down logs on the site (Ruediger et al. 2000). However, with implementation of pdfs that includes retention of snags and 5 to 20 tons of DWD per acre including large diameter wood, as well as with implementation if INFISH buffer restrictions, some den habitat would be retained on sites treated. Sites proposed for treatment only occur in areas where there has been extensive MPB mortality. So while regeneration harvest units initially may not be used by hares and lynx, over the long term (in 15 years or more depending on the type of forest) treatment would create early successional stages with dense understories preferred by snowshoe (USDA Forest Service 2007a, appendix P). As a result, treatment would help to maintain a stand initiation habitat component in the future. NRLMD Compliance: Proposed treatments occur in areas with concentrated MPB mortality and regeneration harvest and reforestation treatments are designed to reduce fuels and wildfire risk, increase understory species diversity including fire tolerant species and hardwoods and promote the long-term sustainability of forested habitat. As a result, treatments are in compliance with VEG G1. Because unsuitable stand initiation habitat would be at or below 30 percent in both BL-07 and BL-08, and less than 15 percent of the lynx habitat on NFS lands within affected LAUs would be regenerated during a 10-year period, both action alternatives are in compliance with VEG S1 and VEG S2. Also because all MS and SI habitat proposed for treatment occurs within the WUI, treatments are in compliance with VEG S5 and VEG S6. Finally, because 80 percent of the treatment would occur in stands that presently lack a developing understory and considering treatment would promote development of future SI habitat and increase hardwood and conifer species diversity while reducing the risk of future wildfire, treatment would help promote the long-term sustainability of lynx habitat and both alternatives are in compliance with VEG G10. Intermediate harvest: This activity is concentrated adjacent to private lands and structures and all intermediate harvest is proposed within a WUI. Within BL-07, intermediate harvest is proposed on 600 acres of mapped lynx habitat under alternative 2 and 328 acres under alternative 3. Of this, treatment in MS habitat would occur on 286 acres under alternative 2 and on 162 acres under alternative 3, whereas treatment in SI habitat would occur on 6 acres under both alternatives. Within BL-08, intermediate harvest is proposed on 197 acres and 130 acres under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively, and all but 3 acres of this occurs in MS habitat. Approximately 50 percent of the treatment under both alternatives would occur in mid-seral habitat that presently have poorly developed understory conditions. Partial or intermediate treatments remove understory and overstory vegetation to improve the growth, quality, vigor and species composition of the stand. These may temporarily (less than 10 years) reduce the cover and forage values for lynx, and reduce winter forage opportunities for snowshoe hare. This reduction in habitat may be due to the harvest of trees, or due to mechanical operations that create skid trails or damage to understory vegetation. These treatments can also modify vegetation structure that contributes to red squirrel habitat (Ruediger et al. 2000), although large-diameter trees, a downed wood component and suitable red squirrel habitat would be maintained within treatment sites. Overall effects include a short-term reduction in the quality of foraging and den habitat, although habitat would be restored or enhanced as the understory develops (Bose et al. 2012). For example, much of the existing multi-storied hare habitat is largely a result of previous partial harvest activities, and treatments are expected to promote development of MS habitat sooner than would occur under no action. Also much of the intermediate harvest occurs in mid-seral habitat that presently lacks understory structure and winter hare habitat. While short-term habitat quality would be affected, implementation of PDFs ensures that some foraging and den habitat would be maintained on sites treated. NRLMD Compliance. Intermediate harvest, as well as associated burning described below is designed to reduce fuels, future conifer mortality and wildfire risk, promote development of herbaceous and woody (shrub and conifer) vegetation in the understory, and promote or maintain aspen. Also, because approximately half of the intermediate harvest is proposed in mid-seral habitat which presently does not provide winter hare habitat, treatment would result in development of future MS habitat sooner than would occur under no action. As a result, both alternatives are in compliance with VEG G1 and VEG O4. Because all MS and SI habitat affected occurs within the WUI, treatments are in compliance with VEG S5 and VEG S6. Finally, because both alternatives retain over between 92 and 95 percent of the existing winter hare habitat within affected LAUs, increase species and structural diversity within treatment sites, promote development of future MS habitat and reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire, treatment would promote the long-term sustainability of lynx habitat and are in compliance with VEG G10. Precommercial thinning: Within BL-07, precommercial thinning (PCT) is proposed on 712 acres of mapped lynx habitat under alternative 2 and on 451 acres under alternative 3. Of this, PCT within stand initiation habitat would occur on 432 acres under alternative 2 and on 204 acres under alternative 3. The remaining thinning would occur in mid-seral, stem exclusion or unsuitable stand initiation habitat. Within BL-08, treatment in mapped lynx habitat would occur on 291 acres and 244 acres under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively, all of which would occur in mid-seral habitat. This treatment involves thinning young trees, which reduces the density of sapling-sized conifer trees and understory shrubs and therefore reduces available snowshoe hare habitat (Ruediger et al. 2000). Treatment is designed to reduce fuels in close proximity to private lands and all precommercial thinning occurs within the WUI. It is assumed that foraging habitat would be reduced over the long term (greater than 15 years) and treatment within stand initiation habitat would result in unsuitable stand initiation habitat conditions. Potential den habitat would also be reduced, although retention of 5 to 20 tons/acre of DWD would help to restore den habitat. NRLMD Compliance. Treatment is designed reduce wildfire risk to private land and structures, while promoting development of large diameter trees and conifer diversity and reducing future insect and disease related mortality. As a result, and because all proposed precommercial thinning occurs within the CWPP WUI, both alternatives comply with VEG G1 and VEG S5. About 78 percent of the stand initiation habitat was initially avoided (alternative 2) and thinning was only proposed on lands that pose a risk to private land/structures from wildfire. Also an alternative (alternative 3) was developed that retained approximately 90 percent of the existing stand initiation habitat. As a result, the Stonewall project was designed considering VEG S5 and complies with VEG G10. Also, see alternative compliance to VEG G10 in table 93. Pile and jackpot burning. Within BL-07, treatment would occur on 246 acres of mapped lynx habitat under alternative 2 and on 229 acres under alternative 3. Within BL-08, there is no jackpot burning proposed under alternative 2, whereas 214 acres would occur under alternative 3. Approximately 73 percent of proposed jackpot/pile burning under alternative 2 and 40 percent under alternative 3 occurs in mid-seral habitat that presently has a poorly developed understory. Burning piles or concentrations (jackpots) of fuels would reduce foraging and den habitat. However with implementation of PDFs that call for the retention of large DWD and maintenance of INFISH buffers, some cover and den habitat would be maintained on sites following treatment. While some den and summer foraging habitat would be retained, it is assumed that treatment would reduce habitat for 10 to 15 years, after which both den and winter foraging habitat would be restored. NRLMD Compliance. Treatment is designed to reduce fuels and the risk of wildfire within the WUI. Also this treatment is largely used in combination with intermediate or regeneration harvest activities and would help to achieve objectives described under these treatments. As a result, treatment is compliance with VEG G1 and VEG G10. Broadcast burning. This includes sites proposed for low severity burning or underburning, as well as most of the sites (55 percent) proposed for mixed severity burning. Within BL-07, treatment would occur on 773 acres under alternative 2 and on 385 acres under alternative 3. Of this, MS habitat within the WUI would occur on 82 acres and 23 acres under Alternatives 2 and 3, respectively, whereas the remainder would occur in mid-seral or unsuitable stand initiation habitat. Within BL-08, treatment would occur on 1,156 acres and on 899 acres under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. Of this, MS habitat within the WUI would occur on 23 acres under alternative 2 and on 2 acres under alternative 3. Approximately 94 percent of the proposed burning under alternative 2 and 98 percent under alternative 3 occur in mid-seral habitat that presently has poorly developed understory conditions. Because treatment kills young trees and reduces small diameter woody debris, broadcast burning is expected to reduce available forage and cover on the sites treated. Although, where burning prescriptions are designed to retain large-sized woody debris, habitat for snowshoe hare and lynx would be expected to be retained (Ruediger et al. 2000). As a result, and with implementation of PDFs that retain 5 to 20 tons of DWD per acre including large-diameter wood, as well as pockets of understory shrubs and vegetation, and considering that 20 percent or more of the site would be untreated, some denning and foraging habitat would be retained on treatment sites. Also, broadcast burning is expected to stimulate regrowth by many herbaceous plants beneficial to snowshoe hares during summer, and provide heat to release seeds of conifers with serotinous cones. Although cover and forage would be reduced for 5 to 10 years, because mature forest that have openings created through fire can provide snowshoe hare habitat (Squires et al. 2006), burning would also be expected to result in establishment of tree seedlings and shrubs and improve foraging habitat over the long term. Similarly, due to recruitment of downed woody debris, den habitat would be restored within a few years of treatment and is assumed that treatment would result in a short-term effects to den and foraging habitat. NRLMD Compliance. Proposed broadcast burning is designed to achieve a variety of objectives including, restoring historic levels of fire to the landscape, reducing fuels and wildfire risk, increase understory herbaceous and woody (shrubs) vegetation, promote the development of fire tolerant conifer species, and maintain or enhance aspen and white bark pine. Also, all MS habitat proposed for treatment occurs within the WUI and most treatment occurs on lands that have poorly developed understories. Collectively, for these reasons, treatment proposed under both alternatives would promote the long-term sustainability of lynx habitat and are consistent with VEG O4, VEG G1, VEG G10, and VEG S6. Because most burning is proposed on steeper sideslopes and with retention of un-burned lands within treatment units, habitat and travel corridors along ridgelines would be maintained and both alternatives are in compliance with VEG G4. Also, because 20 percent of the site would be left un-burned and due to retention of large diameter trees and enhancement of conifer regeneration, habitat for alternate species such as red squirrel would be maintained or improved and treatment is consistent with VEG G5. Finally, because burning would re-store historic levels of fire to the landscape, as well as increase landscape level diversity and winter hare habitat, treatment is consistent with VEG O1, VEG O2, and VEG O3. Snow compaction and compliance with VEG G4 is discussed below. Mixed severity burning. Within BL-07, mixed severity burning is proposed on 1,269 acres of mapped lynx habitat under alternative 2 and on 685 acres under alternative 3. Of this, MS habitat within the WUI would occur on 90 acres and 11 acres under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. Within BL-08, treatment is proposed on 2,035 acres and 1,564 acres of mapped lynx habitat under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. Of this, MS habitat within the WUI would occur on 40 acres under alternative 2 and on 2 acres under alternative 3. Over 95 percent of the mixed severity burning under both alternatives is proposed in mid-seral habitat that presently has poorly developed understories. Mixed severity burning would exhibit a wide range of effects on vegetation including unburned (20 percent of the site), lightly burned (55 percent of the site) and moderate to severe fire (25 percent of the site). Effects of lightly burned areas are discussed under broadcast burning. Moderate to severe fire would create overstory canopy openings of various sizes ranging from 10 to 75 acres. However over time (greater than 15 years) as the understory develops, forage would be created within these openings, increasing the diversity of winter foraging habitat across the landscape. Also due to the recruitment of dead wood from fire mortality, den habitat would be restored within these openings within 5 to 10 years of treatment. Due to the canopy reduction resulting from higher severity fire, approximately 25 percent of the acres proposed for mixed severity treatment would have a long-term reduction in foraging habitat and unsuitable stand initiation habitat conditions would be created on this acreage. There would also be a short-term reduction in potential den habitat in these fire-created openings, whereas approximately 55 percent of the site (i.e., acres affected by low severity burning) would have short-term effects to foraging and den habitat. About 20 percent of the site would be unburned and there would be no change in den or foraging habitat on these lands. Overall, mixed severity burning would provide a diverse forest in terms of both structure and species composition which would maintain foraging and den habitat in the short term and long term, and improve the amount and distribution of winter hare habitat over the long term. NRLMD Compliance. Treatment would create a variety of conditions on the site and treatment is designed to restore historic levels of low and mixed severity fire to the landscape, reduce fuels and wildfire risk, promote landscape diversity including future MS and SI habitat, and maintain or enhance species diversity including aspen, white bark pine, fire tolerant conifers and herbaceous and woody understory conditions. Also, all MS habitat proposed for treatment occurs within the tri-county WUI and over 95 percent of the treatment occurs in mid-seral stands that currently have a poorly developed understory. As a result, treatment is expected to promote the long-term sustainability of lynx habitat while reducing wildfire risk and treatment under both alternatives are in compliance with VEG O4, VEG G1, VEG G10, VEG S1 and VEG S6. Like underburning, due to the restoration of fire and increased landscape diversity, treatment is consistent with VEG O1, VEG O2 and VEG O3. Also because 20 percent of the site would be left un-burned and due to retention of large diameter trees and downed wood, habitat for alternate species such as red squirrel would be maintained and treatment is consistent with VEG G5. WUI Summary All timber harvest proposed under both alternatives falls within the CWPP WUI. Also, neither alternative proposes burning in multi-story or stand initiation habitat outside the WUI. While mid-seral habitat outside the WUI is proposed for prescribed burning there are no NRLMD restrictions to this activity. Also treatment is expected to promote development of winter hare habitat sooner than would occur under no action. Habitat Connectivity Management should be designed to maintain or restore lynx habitat connectivity in and between LAUs and in linkage areas (NRLMD objective All O1). With the exception of the northeast portion of BL-08 that has been affected by recent wildfire, lynx habitat is currently well connected (see figure 69). Treatments that would reduce connectivity include roads to be constructed then obliterated immediately following timber removal and regeneration harvest. While openings would be created in portions of sites receiving a mixed severity burning treatment, it is not expected that they would alter connectivity as they would be widely scattered and interspersed with large blocks of mature forest. Also as described under treatment effects, proposed roads would not isolate any forest patches, nor would they be built in un-roaded areas. Regeneration harvest is also concentrated near private land where MPB mortality has already eliminated most of the overstory and treatment units. Collectively, for these reasons and considering that research has documented lynx presence and reproduction in a variety of managed landscapes (NRLMD p. 153), and that several authors have reported lynx movement through large areas of nonforest (Ruediger et al. 2000, Roe et al. 2000 in USDA Forest Service 2007a), it is expected that habitat connectivity would be maintained under both alternatives. Roads While there is no evidence that suggests that forest roads pose a threat to lynx (USDA Forest Service 2007b, p. 3), roads may reduce lynx habitat by removing forest cover and plowed roads may provide access for lynx competitors. Conversely lynx have been documented using less traveled roads where the vegetation provides good hare habitat and Squires et al. (2010) concluded that forest roads with low vehicular or over-snow vehicle traffic had little effect on lynx seasonal resource-selection patterns in Montana. While preliminary information suggests lynx do not avoid roads (USDA Forest Service 2007b, p. 26), potential impacts are reduced when access, traffic volume and road speed are reduced. Consequently, NRLMD guidelines HU G6, HUG7, HU G8 and HU G9 restrict new permanent road construction in linkage areas and lands important to lynx movement, reduce potential impacts associated with public access and identify road maintenance and management considerations to reduce impacts to lynx. There are no new permanent roads proposed, nor are there any roads proposed in BL-08, although 2.6 miles and 0.4 miles of roads to be constructed then obliterated following use would be built in BL-07 under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. All roads to be constructed occur in portions of BL-07 that are well roaded and do not affect linkage areas or travel corridors. As a result, and because no permanent new road construction is proposed, both alternatives are in compliance with HU G7. Similarly, because neither alternative proposes upgrading unpaved roads to maintenance levels 4 or 5, both alternatives are in compliance with HU G6. As described under treatment effects, new roads would be closed to public access during project implementation and obliterated following use (approximately 5 years). Consequently, both alternatives are in compliance with HU G9. Finally, with implementation of PDFs that limit the cutting of brush to the minimum necessary to meet public safety, both alternatives are in compliance with HU G8. In summary, because no new permanent roads would be constructed, because unroaded areas would be unaffected, and considering any roads to be constructed would be closed to public access during implementation and obliterated following use, proposed roads would not be expected to increase long-term public access or open up new lands to possible competition from other predators. Snow Compaction NRLMD objective HU O1 pertains to snow compaction and discourages expansion of snow-compacting activities in lynx habitat. There are currently 12 miles of designated snowmobile trails within the Stonewall project area including the Beaver Creek/Dry Creek Trail (7 miles groomed), the Sucker Creek Road (1 mile groomed), the Stonewall Mountain trail (3 miles ungroomed) and the trail near Reservoir Lake (1 mile ungroomed). While the Stonewall project would not change any motorized route designations, the project area is currently open to cross-country travel by snowmobiles and the creation of more open forest conditions by some treatments may enhance opportunities for snowmobiling and a potential increase in predators and impacts to lynx and snowshoe hare. Because most burning would occur away from roads and snowmobile access and due to dead and down material remaining on these sites within unburned areas, potential conflicts are most likely to occur in sites proposed for timber harvest, particularly regeneration harvest. However, the likelihood of effects is reduced because by the time regeneration sites provide winter foraging habitat, they would no longer be accessible to snowmobiles. Similarly, due to development of understory vegetation within partial harvest sites and burn units, snowmobile access would be reduced. Finally, research in northwestern Montana concluded that there is little evidence that compacted snowmobile trails increased exploitation competition between coyotes and lynx during the winter, suggesting that compacted snow routes did not appear to enhance coyotes’ access to lynx and hare habitat so would not significantly affect competition with snowshoe area (Kolbe et al. 2007). Collectively, for these reasons, there are no long-term increases in cross country snowmobile use or impacts to lynx anticipated. The Copper Bowls area north of the project area seems to be the most popular destination for cross-country snowmobiling and any increased use as a result of the Stonewall project would likely be minor, as most of the use is concentrated on the designated/groomed trails in this area. In summary, considering that (1) approximately 80 percent or more of mapped habitat would be unaffected, (2) that development of woody vegetation within treatment sites would reduce snowmobile use over the long term, (3) that regeneration harvest sites do not provide winter foraging habitat, and (4) that most snowmobile use is expected to occur on designated trails, there are no long-term impacts associated with snow compaction and roads anticipated and both alternatives comply with HU O1. Grazing Approximately 5,900 acres of mapped habitat would be affected by grazing. While understory vegetation would be affected, existing use is not expected to change. As a result, and with implementation of PDFs to reduce grazing impacts through monitoring and management changes, effects to recovering vegetation, winter forage and cover and aspen, would be reduced. Finally there is no evidence that grazing is a factor threatening lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b) and there are no long-term adverse effects to lynx anticipated. As a result, both alternatives are in compliance with GRAZ O1, GRAZ G1, GRAZ G2, and GRAZ G3. Red Squirrel Habitat NRLMD objectives include providing habitat for alternate prey species, primarily red squirrel in each LAU (VEG G5). While red squirrel habitat would be reduced over the long-term on sites proposed for regeneration harvest and high severity burning, 94 and 96 percent of existing suitable mature forest would be maintained on BL-07 and BL-08, respectively under alternative 2 and on 95 and 97 percent would be retained under alternative 3. Additionally, PDFs require retention of refugia, snags and downed woody debris and stand structure on treatment sites. Also, treatments would maintain or promote tree diversity and seed production over the long-term, which would maintain or improve red squirrel habitat. Collectively for these reasons, habitat for alternate prey species would continue to be available in both BL-07 and BL-08 and alternatives 2 and 3 comply with VEG G5. Denning Habitat Summary NRLMD VEG G11 requires that denning habitat should be distributed in each LAU in the form of pockets of large amounts of coarse woody debris, either as down logs, root wads or large piles of wind thrown trees. Also, if denning habitat appears lacking in an LAU, then projects should be designed to retain some coarse woody debris or residual trees to provide denning habitat in the future. Due to widespread MPB mortality and decades of increased stocking, snags and downed wood are readily available across the landscape. Also with implementation of PDFs, downed wood, including a component of large diameter logs would be retained in all treatment units. Further, implementation of INFISH buffers and maintaining unburned lands on 20 percent of the sites proposed for burning would further maintain dead wood and den habitat within treatment sites. Collectively for these reasons denning habitat would continue to be well distributed within affected LAUs and both alternatives are in compliance with VEG G11. Unsuitable Stand Initiation Habitat Summary As shown in table 91, BL-07 currently has approximately 1 percent unsuitable stand initiation habitat. Because it would take 10 years to complete proposed burning, by 2022, unsuitable stand initiation habitat created by proposed regeneration harvest and mixed severity burning would occur on 1,780 acres and 1,286 acres under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. Following implementation, the total amount of unsuitable stand initiation habitat within BL-07 would occur on 7 percent under alternative 2 and on 5 percent under alternative 3. Because less than 30 percent of BL-07 would occur as unsuitable stand initiation habitat, both alternatives are in compliance with VEG S1 for BL-07. While there is no regeneration harvest or precommercial thinning proposed in BL-08 under either alternative, mixed severity burning may create up to approximately 509 acres of unsuitable stand initiation habitat under alternative 2 and up to approximately 391 acres under alternative 3. This would result in approximately 30 percent of BL-08 occurring as unsuitable stand initiation habitat by 2022 under both alternatives. However, most of the existing unsuitable stand initiation habitat within BL-08 is a result of the 2003 Snow Talon fire. As a result and because large stand replacing fires produce high quality winter snowshoe hare habitat after approximately 10 to 30 years (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b), it is anticipated that by project completion (i.e., 2022), that the amount of existing unsuitable stand initiation habitat would be reduced as stands develop. Consequently unsuitable stand initiation habitat within BL-08 would be at or below 30 percent and both action alternatives are in compliance with VEG S1. NRLMD Lynx Risk Factors Table 93 summarizes lynx management standards and guidelines and conservation measures to address factors affecting lynx productivity as outlined in the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). Table 93. Lynx amendment alternative comparison of objectives, standards and guidelines Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Objectives ALL O1 – Maintain or restore lynx habitat connectivity in and between LAUs and in linkage areas. Large areas of forested habitat are available across the analysis area. Moderate road densities of 1.9 to 2.8 miles/mi2 occur within both LAUs although many existing roads are closed year-round BL-07 and BL-08 - The forested character of the area would be retained and connectivity within and between LAUs would be maintained. The project would have no effect upon lynx linkage area and both alternatives comply with ALL O1. VEG O1 – Manage vegetation to mimic or approximate natural succession and disturbance processes while maintaining habitat components necessary for the conservation of lynx. Fire has been excluded from the analysis area and stands are losing vigor. Edges between old and young forests are sharp due to past regeneration harvest. Existing stand initiation habitat is maturing providing less winter foraging habitat. Recent wildfire has reduced existing foraging and den habitat but would create future stand initiation habitat in portions of the project area LAUs. Widespread MPB mortality is increasing stand structure and den habitat. BL-07 and BL-08 combined - Proposed treatments are designed to restore naturally occurring fire regimes and associated vegetative communities. Burning is proposed on 3,373 acres of mapped lynx habitat. Wildfire risk would be reduced. 91% of existing winter forage and 83% of existing den habitat would be maintained. Winter foraging habitat would be better dispersed across the landscape and collectively for these reasons, alternative 2 complies with VEG O1. BL-07 and BL-08 combined - Proposed treatments are designed to restore naturally occurring fire regimes and associated vegetative communities. Burning is proposed on 2,509 acres of mapped lynx habitat. Risks of wildfire are reduced. 95% of the winter foraging habitat and 88% of the existing den habitat would be maintained. Winter foraging habitat would be better distributed across the landscape and collectively for these reasons, alternative 3 complies with VEG O1. VEG O2 – Provide a mosaic of habitat conditions through time that support dense horizontal cover and high densities of snowshoe hares. Provide winter snowshoe hare habitat in both the stand initiation structural stage and in mature, multi-story conifer vegetation. BL-07 - Multi-storied habitat has been increasing. Existing stand initiation is limited to a few stands created by past timber harvest and is widely scattered. BL-08 - Recent wildfires have reduced MS habitat and created a large block of unsuitable stand initiation habitat. BL-07 and BL-08 combined – 94 and 77% of existing MS and SI habitat would be maintained in the short term. Over the long term, treatments would create SI habitat on 1,518 acres and promote horizontal and vertical structure and denning/foraging habitat on approximately 5,800 acres. BL-07 and BL-08 - The distribution of foraging habitat would be improved across the landscape and alternative 2 complies with VEG O2. BL-07 and BL-08 combined – 96 and 88% of existing MS and SI habitat would be maintained in the short term. Over the long term, treatments would create SI habitat on 1,136 acres and promote horizontal and vertical structure and denning/foraging habitat on approximately 4,200 acres. BL-07 and BL-08 - The distribution of foraging habitat would be improved across the landscape and alternative 3 complies with VEG O2. Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 VEG O3 – Conduct fire use activities to restore ecological processes and maintain or improve lynx habitat. Fire has been successfully suppressed within the project area since the early 1900s. Little prescribed fire has been implemented within the project area to date. BL-07 and 08 combined - Prescribed fire activities that restore fire to the landscape and result in the long-term improvement in lynx habitat would occur on 3,373 acres. Treatment would occur within all watersheds over a 10-year period, increasing the amount and distribution of foraging and den habitat and restoring fire across the landscape. Alternative 2 complies with VEG O3. BL-07 and 08 combined - Prescribed fire activities that restore fire to the landscape and result in the long-term improvement in lynx habitat would occur on 2,209 acres. Treatment would occur within all watersheds over a 10-year period, increasing the amount and distribution of foraging and den habitat and restoring fire across the landscape. Alternative 3 complies with VEG O3. VEG O4 – Focus vegetation management in areas that have potential to improve winter snowshoe hare habitat but presently have poorly developed understories that lack dense horizontal cover. Currently 36% of BL-07 and 15% of BL-08 provide winter snowshoe hare habitat. BL-07 – 70% of the treatments are proposed in mid-seral habitat that lacks a developing understory. Future winter snowshoe hare habitat would be created on 2,293 acres of existing mid-seral and stem exclusion habitat. BL-08 – 90% of the treatments are proposed in mid-seral habitat that lacks a developing understory. Future winter snowshoe hare habitat would be created on 2,320 acres of existing mid-seral habitat. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because between 70 and 90% of the treatments in both LAUs occur in stands that currently have poorly developed understories, alternative 2 complies with VEG O4. BL-07 – 75% of the treatments are proposed in mid-seral habitat that lacks a developing understory. Future winter snowshoe hare habitat would be created on 1,646 acres of existing mid-seral habitat. BL-08 – 93% of the treatments are proposed in mid-seral habitat that lacks a developing understory. Future winter snowshoe hare habitat would be created on 1,898 acres of existing mid-seral habitat. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because between 75 and 93% of the treatments in both LAUs occur in stands that currently have poorly developed understories, alternative 3 complies with VEG O4. HU O1 – Maintain the lynx’s natural competitive advantage over other predators in deep snow by discouraging the expansion of snow compacting activities in lynx habitat. Existing snow compacting activities are primarily associated with roads and designated trails. Some off road use is occurring. BL-07 and BL-08 – Roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be closed to public access and obliterated within 5 years. While some increased winter motorized use is likely within low-elevation treatment units, this would be short term due to encroachment of woody vegetation. Snowmobile use of burned areas is not expected to increase due to standing dead tree component. Future use is expected to occur largely on designated trails and there are no expected long-term increases in snow compacting activities. As a result both alternatives comply with HU O1. Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 HU O2 – Mange recreational activities to maintain lynx habitat and connectivity Existing recreational use is concentrated on designated trails. Some winter recreation use of suitable habitat occurs at scattered locations.. BL-07 and BL-08 – Recreational use would not significantly change or adversely affect lynx habitat and connectivity. Both alternatives comply with HU O2. HU O5 – Manage human activities – such as exploring and developing minerals and oil and gas, placing utility corridors and permitting special uses – to reduce impacts on lynx and lynx habitat. All activities are controlled through special use permits. BL-07 and BL-08 – Activities are not expected to increase and would continue to be controlled through special use permits. Both alternatives comply with HU O5. HU O6 – Reduce adverse highway effects on lynx by working cooperatively with other agencies to provide for lynx movement and habitat connectivity and to reduce the potential of lynx mortality. The Helena NF is involved with these interagency relationships BL-07 and BL-08 – The Helena NF would continue to be involved in interagency relationships to provide for lynx movement and reduce potential lynx mortality. Both alternatives comply with HU O6. LINK O1 – In areas of intermingled land ownership, work with landowners to pursue conservation easements, habitat conservations plans, land exchanges or other solutions to reduce the potential of adverse impacts on lynx and lynx habitat. The Helena NF is currently involved in these types of activities and exchanges. BL-07 and BL-08 – The Helena NF would continue to be involved with landowners to reduce potential impacts to lynx and both alternatives comply with LINK O1. GRAZ O1 – Manage livestock grazing to be compatible with improving and maintaining lynx habitat. Approximately 5,900 acres or 15% of the mapped lynx habitat is affected by grazing. BL-07 and BL-08 – Existing grazing patterns would be largely unchanged, although grazing would be deferred in units where aspen is regenerating and where necessary to establish vegetation. Both alternatives would increase landscape level forage, maintain riparian areas, promote shrub and understory diversity and maintain or improve aspen. As a result both alternatives comply with GRAZ O1. Standards ALL S1 – New or expanded permanent developments and vegetation management projects must maintain habitat connectivity in an LAU and/or linkage area. Large areas of forested habitat are present within both LAUs. Road densities are moderate to high, but most roads are closed year-round. BL-07 and BL-08 – No new or permanent developments are proposed. Stands proposed for vegetation treatment would be more open and there would be a reduction in cover on treatment sites. However because (1) regeneration harvest is restricted to areas with concentrated MPB mortality, (2) sites proposed for burning would maintain landscape level connectivity, and (3) open road densities would not increase and roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would occur in areas that are already roaded, linkage areas and connectivity within and between LAUs would be maintained and both alternatives comply with ALL S1. Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 VEG S1 – Unless a broad scale assessment has been completed that substantiates different levels of stand initiation structural stages, limit disturbance in each structural stage as follows: If more than 30% of the lynx habitat in an LAU is currently in a stand initiation structural stage that does not yet provide winter snowshoe hare habitat, no additional habitat may be regenerated by vegetation management projects. In addition, fuel treatment projects may not result in more than three LAUs exceeding the standard. BL-07 – Currently 1% exists as unsuitable stand initiation habitat. BL-08- Currently 28% exists as unsuitable stand initiation habitat. BL-07 – Regeneration harvest, mixed severity burning, and thinning in SI habitat would increase unsuitable stand initiation habitat to 1,780 acres or 7% of the LAU. Three or more adjacent LAU’s would not exceed VEG S1. BL-08 – Mixed severity burning would increase unsuitable stand initiation habitat to 8,373 acres or 30% of the LAU. Three or more adjacent LAU’s would not exceed VEG S1. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because it would take 10 years to complete implementation, existing unsuitable stand initiation habitat would be reduced from the above acreage. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because unsuitable stand initiation habitat would occur on 30% or less of both LAUs, and considering 3 or more adjacent LAUs do not exceed this standard, alternative 2 complies with VEG S1. BL-07 – Regeneration harvest, mixed severity burning, and thinning in SI habitat would increase unsuitable stand initiation habitat to 1,286 acres or 5% of the LAU. Three or more adjacent LAU’s would not exceed VEG S1. BL-08 – Mixed severity burning would increase unsuitable stand initiation habitat to 8,255 acres or 30% of the LAU. Three or more adjacent LAU’s would not exceed VEG S1. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because it would take 10 years to complete implementation, existing unsuitable stand initiation habitat would be reduced from the above acreage. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because unsuitable stand initiation habitat would occur on 30% or less of both LAUs, and considering 3 or more adjacent LAUs do not exceed this standard, alternative 3 complies with VEG S1. VEG S2 – Timber management projects shall not regenerate more than 15% of lynx habitat on NFS lands within a LAU within a 10-year period. Regeneration harvest on NFS lands in the last 10 years has included: Bl-07 – 38 acres (<1 percent) Bl-08 – 495 acres (2 percent) BL-07 – A maximum of 701 acres or 4% of the NFS lands would be regenerated with timber harvest within a 10-year period. BL-8 – No regeneration harvest would occur within lynx habitat during the next 10-year period. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because less than 15% of the NFS lands within both LAUs would be regenerated, alternative 2 complies with VEG S2. BL-07 – A maximum of 582 acres or 3% of the NFS lands would be regenerated with timber harvest within a 10-year period. BL-8 – No regeneration harvest would occur within lynx habitat during the next 10-year period. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because less than 15% of the NFS lands within both LAUs would be regenerated, alternative 3 complies with VEG S2. VEG S5 – Precommercial thinning projects that reduce snowshoe hare habitat, may occur from the stand initiation structural stage until the stands no longer provides winter snowshoe hare habitat only if they are within 200 feet of admin site, dwelling or outbuildings, for research There has been no precommercial thinning in either LAU since 1997. BL-07 – A total of 432 acres of stand initiation hare habitat would be precommercially thinned. All treatments lie within the WUI as identified in the CWPP and all treatments are designed to reduce the risk of wildfire to private BL-07 – A total of 204 acres of the stand initiation hare habitat would be precommercially thinned. All treatments lie within the WUI as identified in CWPP and all treatments are designed to reduce the risk of wildfire to private lands/structures. Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 purposes, if they are based on new information that has been peer reviewed, for conifer removal in aspen or to restore whitebark pine. This applies to all precommercial thinning projects except fuel treatment projects that use precommercial thinning as a tool within the WUI as defined by HFRA. Fuel treatment projects within the WUI that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6, shall occur on no more than 6% of the lynx habitat on the Forest and would be designed considering standards VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 to promote lynx conservation (see VEG G10). lands and structures. Treatment within the WUI would reduce the 26,400-acre forest cap by 432 acres. BL-08 – No precommercial thinning would occur and alternative 2 meets the VEG S5 standard. Cumulatively Forestwide, the acres of treatment under exceptions to VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 would occur on 1,259 acres, revising the cap to 25,141 acres. Also see discussion under VEG G10. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because (1) all precommercial thinning occurs within the WUI, (2) less than 6% of the fuel treatment projects on the Forest do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, or VEG S6, and (3) treatments are designed to promote lynx conservation (see VEG G10), alternative 2 complies with VEG S5. Treatment within the WUI would reduce the 26,400-acre forest cap by 204 acres. BL-08 – No precommercial thinning would occur and alternative 3 meets the VEG S5 standard. Cumulatively Forestwide, the acres of treatment under exceptions to VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 would occur 747 acres, revising the cap to 25,663 acres. Also see discussion under VEG G10. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because (1) all precommercial thinning occurs within the WUI, (2) less than 6% of the fuel treatment projects on the Forest do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, or VEG S6, and (3) treatments are designed to promote lynx conservation (see VEG G10), alternative 3 complies with VEG S5. VEG S6 – Vegetation management projects that reduce snowshoe hare habitat in multi-story or late successional forests, may occur only if they are within 200 feet of admin site, dwelling or outbuildings, for research purposes, or for incidental removal during salvage harvest. This applies to all projects except fuel treatment projects within the WUI as defined by HEFRA. Fuel treatment projects within the WUI that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 shall occur on no more than 6% of the lynx habitat on the administrative unit (Helena NF). Also fuel treatment projects should be designed considering VEG S1, S2, S5, and S6 (VEG G10). There have been no vegetation management treatments within multi-storied habitat since 1996. BL-07 – A total of 477 acres of the multi-storied hare habitat would be treated. All treatments are designed to reduce risk to private land/structures and all sites lie within the CWPP WUI. BL-08 – A total of 240 acres of multi-storied hare habitat would be treated. All treatments are designed to reduce risk to private land/structures and all sites occur within the CWPP WUI. Cumulatively forest-wide, exceptions to VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 would occur 1,259 acres of the 26,400-acre forest cap. Also see discussion under VEG G10. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because (1) all treatment in MS habitat occurs within the CWPP WUI, (2) less than 6% of the fuel treatment projects on the Forest do BL-07 – A total of 289 acres of multi-storied hare habitat would be treated. All treatments are designed to reduce risk to private land/structures and all treatments lie within the CWPP WUI. BL-08 – A total of 146 acres of multi-storied hare habitat would be treated. All treatments are designed to reduce risk to private land/structures and all treatments occur within the CWPP WUI. Cumulatively forest-wide, exemptions to VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 would occur on 747 acres of the 26,400-acre forest cap. Also see discussion under VEG G10. BL-07 and BL-08 – Because (1) all treatment in MS habitat occurs within the CWPP WUI, (2) less than 6% of the fuel treatment projects on the Forest do not Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, or VEG S6, and (3) treatments are designed to promote lynx conservation (see VEG G10), alternative 2 complies with VEG S6. meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, or VEG S6, and (3) treatments are designed to promote lynx conservation (see VEG G10), alternative 3 complies with VEG S6. Guidelines VEG G1 – Vegetation management projects should be planned to recruit a high density of conifers, hardwoods, and shrubs where such habitat is scarce or not available. Priority for treatment should be given to stem exclusion, closed-canopy structural stage stands to enhance habitat conditions for lynx or their prey (e.g., mesic monotypic lodgepole stands). No vegetation management is planned under alternative 1. 71% of the treatments in BL-07 and 93% of the treatments in BL-08 are proposed in mid-seral, stem exclusion, or unsuitable stand initiation habitat that presently do not provide the structural conditions necessary for winter hare habitat. BL-07 and BL-08 – Treatment is expected to promote preferred habitat for prey species sooner than would occur under no action. Treatment would maintain or increase aspen and whitebark pine, as well as promote the development of understory shrubs and increase the diversity of prey habitat across the landscape. As a result, alternative 2 complies with VEG G1. 76% of the treatments in BL-07 and 94% of the treatments in BL-08 are proposed in mid-seral or unsuitable stand initiation habitat that presently do not provide the structural conditions necessary for winter hare habitat. BL-07 and BL-08 – Treatment is expected to promote preferred habitat for prey species sooner than would occur under no action. Treatment would maintain or increase aspen and whitebark pine, as well as promote the development of understory shrubs and increase the diversity of prey habitat across the landscape. As a result, alternative 3 complies with VEG G1. VEG G4 – Prescribed fire activities should not create permanent travel routes that facilitate snow compaction. Constructing permanent firebreaks on ridges or saddles should be avoided. No prescribed fire or fire breaks are planned under alternative 1. BL-07 and BL-08 – While some burning to ridgelines and saddles would occur, most burning occurs on steeper slopes away from existing snowmobile trails. Also portions of all units would be unburned and establishment of woody vegetation following treatment would reduce any long-term access. Consequently, planned prescribed burning activities are not expected to create permanent travel routes or facilitate snow compacting activities. As a result, and because no fire breaks would be constructed, both alternatives comply with VEG G4. VEG G5 – Habitat for alternate prey species, primarily red squirrel, should be provided in each LAU. Suitable mature coniferous forest currently exists on 60 and 45% of BL-07 and BL-08, respectively. Regeneration harvest and high severity burning would reduce suitable mature forest on 984 acres in BL-07 and on 509 acres in BL-08. Approximately 94% and 96% of the existing mature coniferous forest would be maintained in BL-07 and BL-08, respectively. BL-07 and BL-08 – PDFs require retention of refugia, snags and downed Regeneration harvest and high severity burning would reduce suitable mature forest on 745 acres in BL-07 and on 391 acres in BL-08. Approximately 95% and 97% of the existing mature coniferous forest would be maintained in BL-07 and BL-08, respectively. BL-07 and BL-08 – PDFs require retention of refugia, snags and downed woody debris Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 woody debris and stand structure on intermediate and burning sites would be maintained. Treatments would maintain or promote tree diversity and seed production over the long term and maintain or improve red squirrel habitat. Collectively, for these reasons, alternative 2 complies with VEG G5. and stand structure on intermediate and burning sites would be maintained. Treatments would maintain or promote tree diversity and seed production over the long-term and maintain or improve red squirrel habitat. Collectively, for these reasons, alternative 3 complies with VEG G5. VEG G10 – Fuel treatment projects within the WUI as defined by HFRA should be designed considering Standards VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6 to promote lynx conservation. No fuel treatments are planned under alternative 1. BL-07 and BL-08 – Proposed actions comply with VEG S1 and VEG S2. While activities would result in a reduction in 432 acres of stand initiation habitat (VEG S5) and 140 acres of multi-storied habitat (VEG S6), all treatments occur within the CWPP WUI. Also 77% of the stand initiation habitat and 94% of the multi-story habitat would be avoided and would remain intact. Further, treatments would reduce risks from fire and insect and disease, increase the amount and distribution of winter forage on over 5,500 acres, increase hardwood, conifer and shrub diversity and promote long-term diversity and sustainability of lynx habitat. Collectively, for these reasons, treatments under alternative 2 were developed considering standards to VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6. BL-07 and BL-08 – Proposed actions comply with VEG S1 and S2. While activities would result in a reduction in 204 acres of stand initiation habitat (VEG S5) and 95 acres of multi-storied habitat (VEG S6), all treatments occur within the CWPP WUI. Also approximately 88% of the stand initiation habitat and 96% of the multi-story habitat would be avoided and remain intact. Further, treatments would reduce risks from fire and insect and disease, increase the amount and distribution of winter forage on over 4,300 acres, increase hardwood, conifer and shrub diversity and promote long-term diversity and sustainability of lynx habitat. Collectively, for these reasons, and considering alternative 3 was developed in part to reduce impacts to winter hare habitat, treatments under this alternative were developed considering standards to VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5, and VEG S6. VEG G11 – Denning habitat should be distributed in each LAU in the form of pockets of large amounts of large woody debris, either down logs or root wads or large piles of wind thrown trees (jack strawed piles). If denning habitat appears to be lacking in the LAU, then projects should be designed to retain some coarse woody debris, piles or residual trees to provide denning habitat in the future. Denning habitat is currently well distributed across both LAUs, both of which contain large blocks of mature forest. BL-07 and BL-08 – Proposed treatments are designed to retain patches of dead and dying trees which would contribute to coarse woody debris recruitment. A minimum of 5 to 20 tons per acre of downed woody debris would be retained and PDFs require retention of large diameter snags and logs. Forest coarse woody debris and snags (future debris) guidelines would be met or exceeded. Burning would be designed to retain pockets of understory vegetation and shrubs and 20% of the site would be unburned. As a result and considering that over 83% of the existing suitable habitat would be unaffected, den habitat would continue to be widely available in both LAUs and both alternatives comply with VEG G11. HU G6 – Methods to avoid or reduce effects on BL-07 and BL-08 – No unpaved roads would be upgraded to maintenance levels 4 or 5 and all alternatives comply with HU Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 lynx should be used in lynx habitat when upgrading unpaved roads to maintenance levels 4 or 5, if the result would be increased traffic speeds and volumes, or a foreseeable contribution to increases in human activity or development. G6. HU G7 – New permanent roads should not be built on ridge-tops and saddles, or in areas identified as important for lynx habitat connectivity. New permanent roads and trails should be situated away from forest stringers. BL-08 and BL-08 – There are no permanent roads proposed and all alternatives comply with HU G7. HU G8 - Cutting brush along low-speed, low-traffic-volume roads should be done to the minimum level necessary to provide for public safety. BL-07 and BL-08 – Cutting of brush along roads would be done at levels necessary to maintain public safety and all alternatives comply with HU G8. HU G9 – On new roads built for projects, public motorized use should be restricted. Effective closures should be provided in the road designs. When the project is over these roads should be reclaimed or decommissioned, if not needed for other management objectives. No roads would be built under alternative 1. BL-07 – 2.6 miles of temporary roads would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. All roads would be closed to public access and permanently closed and restored following project implementation. BL-08 – no roads would be built. BL-07 and BL-08 – alternative 2 is in compliance with HU G9. BL-07 – 0.4 miles of temporary roads would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. All roads would be closed to public access and permanently closed and restored following project implementation. BL-08 – no road would be built. BL-07 and BL-08 – alternative 3 is in compliance with HU G9. GRAZ G1 – In fire- and harvest-created openings, livestock grazing should be managed so impacts do not prevent shrubs and trees from regenerating. Approximately 5,900 acres of the project area are currently being grazed. BL-07 and BL-08 – Livestock grazing would be maintained at existing levels unless range analysis monitoring indicates that changes in numbers are necessary. Grazing systems would be designed to be compatible with wildlife needs and if necessary improvements for livestock management would be designed in cooperation with a wildlife biologist. Both alternatives comply with GRAZ G1. GRAZ G2 – In aspen stands, livestock grazing should be managed to contribute to the long-term health and sustainability of aspen. Aspen stands are declining due to lack of disturbance and existing regeneration is being grazed. BL-07 and BL-08 – Grazing would be maintained at existing levels unless monitoring indicates that changes in numbers are necessary. Fencing, temporary herding, or other techniques may be used to protect regeneration and aspen where needed. Both alternatives comply with GRAZ G2. GRAZ G3 – In riparian areas and willow areas, livestock grazing should be managed to contribute to maintaining or achieving a preponderance of mid- or late-seral stages similar to conditions that would have occurred INFISH buffer monitoring for Keep Cool Creek and Beaver Creek have been occurring since 1999 and mitigation measures have been implemented to reduce BL-07 and BL-08 – Livestock use is not expected to change and INFISH buffers and monitoring would continue to be implemented to reduce grazing related impacts in riparian areas. Both alternatives comply with GRAZ G3. Criteria Pre-treatment Compliance (Alternative 1) Post-treatment Compliance Alternative 2 Alternative 3 under historic disturbance regimes. grazing impacts to riparian areas. GRAZ G4 and LINK G2 – Livestock grazing in shrub-steppe habitats should be managed to contribute to maintaining or achieving a preponderance of mid- or late-seral stages, similar to conditions that would have occurred under historic disturbance regimes. There are three grazing allotments within the analysis area including the Stonewall and Arrastra cattle and horse allotments and the Keep Cool Liverpool sheep and goat allotment. Bunchgrass parks and shrub habitats are being invaded by conifer. BL-07 and BL-08 – Livestock grazing would be maintained at existing levels unless range analysis monitoring indicates that changes in numbers are necessary. Grazing systems would be designed to be compatible with wildlife needs and if necessary improvements for livestock management would be designed in cooperation with a wildlife biologist. Both alternatives are in compliance with GRAZ G4 and LINK G2.   Cumulative Effects As described under alternative 1, the cumulative effect analysis area for lynx includes the combined LAUs (BL-07 and 08) which totals 54,211 acres. There are a number of past and ongoing activities occurring within the analysis area that cumulatively affect lynx and lynx habitat. Effects of many of these activities are discussed under alternative 1; Table 94 summarizes anticipated cumulative effects under each of the alternatives evaluated. A complete list of all activities considered when analyzing cumulative effects to lynx can be found in appendix C. Table 94. Action alternative cumulative effects summary Activity Alternative 1-Acres Alternative 2-Acres Alternative 3-Acres Mapped Habitat2 Winter Forage2 Den Habitat2 Mapped Habitat2 Winter Forage2 Den Habitat2 Mapped Habitat2 Winter Forage2 Den Habitat Campground Rehabilitation 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 Prescribed Fire1, 129 86 122 3,502 249 3488 2,638 136 2629 Grazing 5,912 2,250 4,552 5,912 2,250 4,552 5,912 2,250 4,552 Off-road NNIS treatment 1,358 636 1,255 1,358 636 1,255 1,358 636 1,255 Road Treatments 1,545 539 1,342 1,545 539 1,342 1,545 539 1,342 Stream Restoration 3 1 3 3 1 3 3 1 3 Trail Construction 196 93 159 196 93 159 196 93 159 Partial Timber Harvest2 0 0 0 1,800 936 1,771 1,153 507 1,136 Regeneration Harvest 0 0 0 701 128 694 582 111 575 Total Acres 9,148 3,610 7,438 15,022 4,837 13269 13,392 4,278 11656 Percent of Total Habitat 31 26 25 38 35 44 34 31 38 1 – includes burn only to avoid duplication of acres 2 – habitat affected Effects associated with winter recreation are discussed under direct and indirect effects and as described there are no long-term effects anticipated. Also as described under alternative 1, lynx habitat would be largely unchanged due to campground rehabilitation, trail construction, stream work or NNIS treatment. As a result and considering that lynx are generally tolerant of human activities (Ruediger et al. 2000), effects would occur largely as short-term avoidance of the area during treatment. Also like alternative 1, because roadside areas would not be preferred for denning and considering hazard tree removal and firewood collection would not alter foraging habitat, effects from these activities would consist largely of avoidance during treatment. Lands affected by grazing occur on approximately 5,900 acres of suitable habitat. While understory vegetation would be affected, existing use is not expected to change. Also proposed activities would increase understory vegetation across the landscape and grazing would be deferred if necessary in areas where aspen is regenerating. As a result, and considering that there is no evidence that grazing is a factor threatening lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b), there are no long-term adverse effects to lynx anticipated. As described under indirect effects, low intensity burning and improvement cutting would result in short-term effects (less than 10 years) to den and foraging habitat, whereas longer-term effects (greater than 10 years) including an increase in unsuitable stand initiation habitat would result from proposed regeneration harvest, precommercial thinning within existing SI habitat, and openings created by mixed severity burning. Alternative 2 would reduce winter forage and den habitat by 1,195 acres and 5,158 acres, respectively. Under alternative 3, winter forage and den habitat would be reduced by 657 acres and 3,709 acres, respectively. Potential cumulative effects include climate change and final treatments in the Dalton and Helmville Face. However as described under alternative 1, it is anticipated that all treatments included in these two projects would be consistent with NRLMD direction. Additionally, because upper elevations would likely become more important due to possible climate changes and considering that both alternatives are expected to improve the amount, diversity and distribution of winter forage habitat at upper elevations, lynx and hare habitat would continue to be available in the future. While both action alternatives would reduce the amount and quality of winter forage and den habitat, considering that: (1) over 80 percent of the existing den habitat and over 91 percent of winter foraging habitat would be maintained, (2) den habitat is widely available across the landscape, (3) proposed treatments would increase the future amount and distribution of winter foraging habitat, (4) both alternatives would provide for lynx movement and dispersal, and (5) both alternatives are consistent with NRLMD direction, there are no cumulative effects anticipated that would adversely affect the recovery of lynx populations. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments to lynx or lynx habitat under either alternative. While there would be a reduction in suitable lynx habitat or habitat quality on sites treated, suitable den habitat would be maintained on all sites and foraging habitat would be maintained or improved in the long-term. There are no irretrievable commitments anticipated. Alternative 2 Determination and Conclusions Alternative 2 would reduce winter hare and den habitat. Some increased snowmobile use is likely, although effects would be short term. A total of 432 acres of SI habitat would be precommercially thinned and 717 acres of multi-storied habitat would be treated. All treatments fall within a WUI, meet exceptions for VEG 05 and VEG 06, and comply with VEG 10. Treatments comply with VEG 01 and VEG 02, and fuel treatment projects that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5 and VEG S6 occur on less than 6 percent of the available habitat on the Helena Forest. Proposed treatments comply with Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007b), and there are no effects anticipated that were not considered in the BO (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). As a result implementation of alternative 2 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect Canada lynx. Additionally, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, alternative 2 is expected to promote the long-term sustainability of lynx habitat. · 80 percent of the mapped lynx habitat within the combined LAU's would be unaffected by proposed treatments. · 91 percent of existing winter foraging and 83 percent of the potential den habitat within the combined LAU's would be unaffected by proposed treatments. · Proposed treatments are designed to restore naturally occurring fire regimes and associated vegetation communities. Natural fire regimes would be restored on 3,373 acres. · Over the long-term treatments would result in greater stand and landscape diversity, including both spatial and temporal improvement in winter foraging habitat. Potential den habitat would be maintained across the landscape during implementation, and maintained or improved over the long-term. · Regeneration treatments focus on stands that have MPB mortality in order to promote regeneration of lodgepole and ensure suitable lynx habitat is maintained. Collectively treatments are also expected to reduce risks from insects and disease, and reduce the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire. · All roads would be closed to public access during and post implementation and no increased development is anticipated. · Treatment would promote development of aspen and increase shrub, conifer and understory diversity. Lynx foraging and den habitat would be provided across the landscape and the anticipated increase in structural and vegetative diversity would provide the mosaic of habitat conditions necessary for snowshoe hare production, which would contribute to the recovery and survival of lynx. Alternative 3 Determination and Conclusions Alternative 3 would reduce winter hare and den habitat, but at a reduced level from that of alternative 2. Some increased snowmobile use is likely, although effects would be short term. A total of 204 acres of SI habitat would be precommercially thinned and 435 acres of multi-storied habitat would be treated. All treatments fall within a WUI, meet exceptions for VEG 05 and VEG 06, and comply with VEG 10. Treatments comply with VEG 01 and VEG 02, and fuel treatment projects that do not meet VEG S1, VEG S2, VEG S5 and VEG S6 occur on less than 6 percent of the available habitat on the Helena Forest. Proposed treatments comply with Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007b), and there are no effects anticipated that were not considered in the BO (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). As a result implementation of alternative 3 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect Canada lynx. Additionally, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, alternative 3 is expected to promote the long-term sustainability of lynx habitat.86 percent of the mapped lynx habitat would be unaffected. · 86 percent of the mapped lynx habitat within the combined LAU's would be unaffected by proposed treatments. · 95 percent of the winter foraging habitat and 88 percent of the potential den habitat within the combined LAU's would be unaffected by proposed treatments. · Proposed treatments are designed to restore naturally occurring fire regimes and associated vegetation communities. Natural fire regimes would be restored on 2,498 acres. · Over the long term, treatments would result in greater stand and landscape diversity, including both spatial and temporal improvement in winter foraging habitat. Potential den habitat would be maintained spatially across the landscape during implementation, and maintained or improved over the long term. · Regeneration treatments focus on stands that have MPB mortality in order to promote regeneration of lodgepole and ensure suitable lynx habitat is maintained. Collectively treatments are also expected to reduce risks from insects and disease, and reduce the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire. · All roads would be closed to public access during and post implementation and no increased development is anticipated. · Treatment would promote development of aspen and increase shrub, conifer and understory diversity. Lynx foraging and den habitat would be provided across the landscape and the anticipated increase in structural and vegetative diversity would provide the mosaic of habitat conditions necessary for snowshoe hare production, which would contribute to the recovery and survival of lynx. Critical Habitat Critical habitat is a specific geographic area(s) that is essential for the conservation of a threatened or endangered species that may require special management and protection (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2006, 2009). Critical lynx habitat affected by the SVP project includes BL-07 and BL-08 as described under the affected environment. Critical habitat contributes to individual species conservation by focusing on the species’ primary constituent elements (PCEs). Within the Northern Rocky Mountains, the primary constituent elements for lynx critical habitat include a boreal forest landscape supporting different successional forest stages and containing the following attributes (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2009): a. The presence of snowshoe hares and their preferred habitat conditions including dense understories of young trees or shrubs tall enough to protrude above the snow, and mature multi-storied stands with conifer boughs touching the snow surface b. Winter snow conditions that are generally deep and fluffy for extended periods of time c. Sites for denning having abundant, coarse woody debris, such as downed trees and root wads d. Matrix habitat (e.g., hardwood forest, dry forest, nonforest, or other habitat types that do not support snowshoe hares) that occur between patches of boreal forest in close juxtaposition (at the scale of a lynx home range) such that lynx are likely to travel through such habitat while accessing patches of boreal forest within a home range. The important aspect of matrix habitat for lynx is that these habitats provide the ability to allow unimpeded movements of lynx through them as lynx travel between patches of boreal forest Effects to critical habitat are evaluated by looking at effects to or changes in PCEs and the following is a summary of effects by element. Boreal habitat that contains snowshoe hares and their habitat Existing lynx habitat within BL-07 and BL-08 is summarized in table 67 and mapped lynx habitat currently occurs on 72 percent of the combined LAUs, hereafter referred to as the analysis area. Suitable habitat predominates across the analysis area, and includes 13,844 acres (26 percent) of snowshoe hare or lynx winter foraging habitat. Forging habitat has been reduced for a number of reasons including; (1) over 20,000 acres of recent wildfires, (2) no large disturbance or management that would create suitable habitat has occurred in the last 15 years, and (3) decades of fire suppression in combination with logging early in the century have created fairly homogeneous stand conditions, including highly stocked stands with closed-canopy conditions and little understory development. Blackfoot-BL-08 in particular has reduced levels of foraging habitat due to recent wildfire. Under alternatives 2 and 3 a total of 1,195 acres and 656 acres of winter foraging habitat respectively are proposed for treatment. While 8 percent (alternative 2) and 5 percent (alternative 3) of the existing winter foraging habitat would be reduced, as described under treatment effects, implementation of the following PDFs would help ensure that these sites continue to contain some suitable hare habitat. · Between 5 and 20 tons/acre of downed woody debris would be retained in all burn units. · Where they exist, maintain at least four down logs per acre 12 inches in diameter (at the large end) and 20 feet long. · During burning, avoid consumption of large coarse woody debris to the extent possible. Where feasible and consistent with fuel management objectives, use control lines and/or firing techniques to maintain pockets of understory vegetation and shrubs retained during harvest and small pockets of understory vegetation at scattered locations in unburned harvest sites. Treatments are designed to maintain understory vegetation on the site and promote aspen regeneration. Prescribed burning treatments would leave a minimum of 20 percent of the sites unburned. Implementation of PDFs and promoting existing hardwood regeneration are expected to maintain some hare and denning habitat on these sites. Due to elevated fire risk within the WUI and proximity of private land/structures, precommercial thinning is proposed within stand initiation hare habitat on 432 acres under alternative 2 and 204 acres under alternative 3. With implementation of PDFs, portions of these sites would be expected to continue to provide den habitat, although suitable winter hare and den habitat would be reduced. While precommercial thinning would affect winter hare habitat, proposed regeneration harvest would create an additional 701 acres and 582 acres of early successional habitat under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. Within 20 years the amount of stand initiation hare habitat would increase in both LAUs. Due to proposed partial harvest and burning within non-winter foraging habitat, understory conditions preferred by hare would be improved on over 5,000 acres under alternative 2 and over 3,600 acres under alternative 3. Collectively, it is expected that within 15 to 20 years both the amount and distribution of snowshoe habitat would be greatly increased under the action alternatives. Recent wildfires have resulted in a large reduction in foraging and den habitat within the analysis area. Because treatments are designed to reduce fire risk and burning intensity should a wildfire start, while improving landscape diversity, both alternatives are expected to promote the long-term sustainability of snowshoe hare and critical lynx habitat. Winter snow conditions that are generally deep and fluffy for extended periods of time · Proposed treatments would increase snow compaction during harvest on those sites that are winter logged. As described previously, some additional snowmobile use can be expected within some units. Compaction due to harvest would be limited to approximately 15 percent of the unit. Approximately 2 percent of the mapped lynx habitat would be affected. Most of the anticipated snowmobile use is expected to occur on designated trails that are groomed and currently do not provide suitable winter hare habitat. Any cross-country use would be short term due to encroachment of woody vegetation. As a result, both alternatives would maintain the deep, fluffy snow conditions required by hare and lynx over the long-term. Provide sites for denning that having abundant, coarse woody debris, such as downed trees and root wads. · While treatments proposed under both alternatives would reduce downed woody debris, large-diameter logs would be retained on all sites proposed for treatment. Prescribed fire units would have a mosaic of burned and unburned lands. It is expected that all sites would continue to provide conditions conducive to denning. Due to the widespread MPB mortality and large number of snags (see table 65 and figure 67), over 80 percent of the analysis area would contain elevated levels of downed woody debris for the next 20 to 30 years. As a result, suitable denning habitat would be widespread under both alternatives Provide matrix habitat in a manner that will allow unimpeded movements of lynx between patches of boreal forest · Over 95 percent of the analysis area contains boreal forest and suitable lynx habitat is currently well distributed and interconnected. While mature forest would be reduced on up to 3 percent of the analysis area, sites treated would continue to provide key habitat components (e.g., downed wood, understory vegetation) to help maintain suitable lynx habitat. Due to their location in roaded areas, roads to be built then obliterated following use would not isolate any forested habitat. Approximately 85 percent or more of the existing suitable habitat would not be affected. It is expected lynx would have unimpeded movement across the analysis area. Critical Habitat Determination Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, a May Affect, Not Likely to Adversely Affect Critical Habitat determination is made for both alternatives 2 and 3. · Eighty-five percent or more of the mapped lynx habitat would be unaffected. · Ninety-one percent or more the existing winter foraging and 83 percent of existing den habitat would be unaffected. · All sites proposed for treatment would continue to provide some den habitat and would not impede lynx movement or dispersal. Also den habitat would continue to be widely available across the landscape. · Without treatment or disturbance, stand initiation habitat would continue to decline. Proposed treatments would increase the amount and distribution of stand initiation habitat across the landscape. · The risk of a continued reduction in winter forage and den habitat from high intensity wildfire would be reduced. · All treatments are consistent with the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). · 30 percent or less of each LAU would occur in the early seral stand initiation stage that is not hare habitat and less than 15 percent of either LAU would be regenerated. These conditions promote a balance and a mosaic of young and older stands and are not expected to result in adverse effects to lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b). · All treatments are consistent with the NRLMD (USDA Forest Service 2007b). While some treatments within winter foraging habitat would occur within the WUI, treatments were designed considering standards to promote lynx conservation and collectively application of the standards for vegetation management are expected to avoid adverse effects to lynx (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007b p. 43). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Lynx habitat would be largely unchanged under alternative 1. While both action alternatives would reduce den and snowshoe hare habitat within critical lynx habitat, suitable den habitat would continue to be abundant and well distributed across affected LAUs. Also over the long term the distribution and amount of snowshoe hare habitat would be improved and future impacts from insect and disease and stand-replacing wildfire reduced. All alternatives would comply with the NRLMD and are consistent with the Helena National Forest Plan, as amended (USDA Forest Service 2007b), National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b) and FSM 2670.12), and with Endangered Species Act requirements to conserve endangered and threatened species and to ensure that actions authorized, funded, or carried out are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any threatened or endangered species, or result in the destruction or adverse modification of their critical habitat. Grizzly Bear The following issue indicators are used to evaluate effects to grizzly bear: · Compliance with Forest Plan standards and guidelines · Amendment 19 compliance and changes in TMRD, OMRD and Security Core within the NCDE · Effects to denning bears and den habitat · Effects to bears outside the denning period and changes in cover and forage. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative; accordingly, there would be no direct effects to bears, nor would there be changes in TMRD, OMRD or Core habitat. Risk of wildfire would remain high; therefore the likelihood of long-term loss of grizzly bear habitat from stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Whitebark pine is anticipated to continue to decline, due to continued fire suppression and insects and disease under this alternative. Cumulative Effects As described under methodology, the cumulative effect boundary includes 89,216 acres, or the combined sub-units. Of this 75 percent occurs on National Forest System land, less than 1 percent is State owned land and 24 percent is in private ownership. Changes to grizzly bear habitat are evaluated in part by looking at changes in forested canopy cover, which are based on post-kill data using R1-Vmap. Post-kill data is used because it best represents the existing live canopy conditions. Currently the analysis area is 78 percent forested with 64,825 acres (75 percent) containing canopy cover in excess of 25 percent and 49,460 acres occurring as more closed canopy stands with greater than 40 percent canopy cover. Most of the existing nonforested habitat results from recent wildfires, including over 21,000 acres that were associated with the 2003 Snow Talon fire. Past, ongoing and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. These activities include hazard tree removal, campground rehabilitation and trail work, stream restoration, dispersed recreation, road maintenance, NNIS treatment, grazing, private land development, dispersed recreational use and firewood collection, timber harvest, trail maintenance, wildfire and prescribed burning. Effects of past activities have varied temporally and spatially and as described in appendix C, some activities reduced cover and forage immediately following treatment, whereas others resulted in long-term increases in forage. Effects of past wildfire are also variable and while cover has been reduced, particularly in the Copper Creek drainage, herbaceous, shrub and tree diversity would develop over the long-term increasing diversity within this drainage. Bear use within the Cooper Creek drainage (approximately 20 percent of the analysis area) has been and would continue to be reduced due to the widespread reduction in cover. While road density is relatively high in lower elevations and on private land, there has been little permanent new road construction on NFS lands in recent years and most roads are closed to public use during critical periods of the year. Ongoing activities such as NNIS treatment, campground and trail work and stream restoration would result primarily in changes to the understory and would not significantly modify bear habitat. Also, treatments such as road maintenance and firewood collection largely occur along open road corridors that would less likely be utilized by bear. Activities that could result in long-term effects to grizzly include those that would alter cover or forage over the long term or increase human activity, including past and recent wildfire; future prescribed burning, hazard tree removal and timber harvest. Ongoing future activities that have or would alter grizzly bear habitat include 408 acres of recent wildfire, 481 acres of roadside hazard tree removal, 257 acres of pre-approved prescribed burning and 187 acres of off-forest timber harvest. Cumulatively, during the analysis period a total of 1,133 acres or approximately 2 percent of the analysis area would be affected by these activities. Effects of prescribed burning would be similar to those described under alternative effects and while some localized tree mortality would occur, the canopy would be maintained. Also, effects to the understory would be short term and improve grizzly foraging habitat over the long term. However the overstory would be largely removed on sites affected by hazard tree removal, off-forest harvest and 60 percent of the recent burning. As a result, there would be a reduction in overstory canopy cover on approximately 900 acres under this alternative. There are no roads proposed, and road management and dispersed and developed recreation would remain relatively unchanged, therefore, human access and bear security would not change. While bear use in the Cooper Creek drainage has been reduced, considering there would only be small changes in overstory conditions from ongoing and future activities, and human access and bear security would be unchanged, there are no significant cumulative effects to grizzly anticipated under this alternative. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments to grizzly. Due to continued fire suppression, white bark pine would likely continue to decline and risks of catastrophic wildfire would remain high. Based on available information, the continued reduction in whitebark pine that would occur under this alternative may be considered an irretrievable commitment. Alternative 1 Determination and Conclusions The risk of stand replacing wildfire remains high, but no direct effects are anticipated and in the absence of wildfire, grizzly habitat would be largely unchanged. Because whitebark pine would likely continue to decline, implementation of alternative 1 may affect but is not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. Action Alternatives Action alternatives are evaluated by key elements of grizzly bear habitat including roads/access, den habitat, cover/forage and food storage. Table 95 displays treatments within the recovery area by sub-unit, whereas changes in grizzly bear habitat resulting from the proposed treatments are displayed in table 97. Table 95. Grizzly habitat treated1 Treatments Core Habitat Treated Den Habitat Treated Total Treatment Acres Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Intermediate Harvest 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,832 1191 197 197 Regeneration Harvest 0 0 0 0 16 2 0 0 764 612 108 108 Total Harvest1 0 0 0 0 16 2 0 0 2,596 1,803 305 305 Underburn  0 0 0  0 0 0  302 0 0 Low Severity Fire 124 2 0 0 43 18 0 0 303 180 0 0 Mixed Severity Fire <30 acres 1,666 1,036 434 0 442 456 59 27 2,428 1,695 1,352 373 Mixed Severity 30-75 acres 182 182 178 603 8 8 428 428 199 199 1,034 1,034 Jackpot 0  0 78 0  0  0 0 0 326 Treatments Core Habitat Treated Den Habitat Treated Total Treatment Acres Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Burning Total Burning1 1,848 1,220 612 681 493 482 487 455 2,930 2,376 2,386 1,734 1 - Treatment is also proposed on 314 acres outside the recovery area, including 197 acres of timber harvest and 117 acres of low severity burning. Both action alternatives propose a total of 81 acres of prescribed fire in Management Situation 1 lands, whereas all other treatments are in Situation 2 lands. Direct and Indirect Effects Disturbance It is anticipated timber harvest would be completed in the next 5 years, whereas it may take up to ten years to complete the proposed burning. Because all treatments increase human presence and activity, it is expected some bears would be displaced during the non-denning period while treatments are implemented. Although road access would be unchanged, some long-term disturbance may occur on sites where harvest creates conditions that facilitate foot access. Harvest is proposed on 12 percent and 9 percent of the project area under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. Most of the proposed harvest (80 percent) occurs close to roads and or private lands, reducing the likelihood that a bear would be affected. Also untreated habitat to accommodate any displaced bears would be widely available within both sub-units. As a result disturbance related effects would be largely limited to short-term avoidance of the sites during treatment. Roads, Access and Core Alternatives 2 and 3 A total of 2.6 miles and 0.4 mile of roads would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. These roads would be closed to public access during implementation and permanently closed and obliterated following harvest. Road maintenance would be completed to meet best management practices (BMP) on approximately 46 or 44 miles of roads under alternatives 2 and 3, respectively. The majority of road work would occur on existing open roads in the summer or fall. Table 96 displays road densities and security core areas that currently exist, as well as what would occur during and after project implementation for each of the action alternatives. Table 96. Alternative grizzly bear access/core habitat summary IGBC Desired Condition Open Road Density Total Road Density Security Core Habitat <= 19 <=19 > = 68%  Arrastra Sub-unit  Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 2 Alt 3 Existing Condition 17 17 21 21 73 73 During Project 1 1 1 1 73 73 Post Project 17 17 21 21 73 73  Red Mountain Sub-unit IGBC Desired Condition Open Road Density Total Road Density Security Core Habitat <= 19 <=19 > = 68% Existing Condition 25 25 24 24 56 56 During Project 25 25 24 24 56 56 Post Project 25 25 24 24 56 56 1 – total and open road density would increase slightly during project implementation (for up to 5 years) due to roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Because of the small amount of roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, and considering that these routes occur in areas that are already roaded, there would be no effect to security core habitat. While there would be a temporary increase in total and open road density due to project implementation within the Arrastra sub unit, open road densities would continue to remain below established guidelines. There would be no changes in core habitat or road density in the Red Mountain subunit under either alternative. Denning Habitat Alternative 2 Modeled den habitat proposed for treatment is displayed in table 95 and treatments proposed under alternative 2 would affect 980 acres or 24 percent of the existing den habitat within the project area including 18 and 40 percent of the den habitat within the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units respectively. Of this 16 acres would be regenerated within the Arrastra sub-unit and den habitat would be reduced on this acreage. Also mixed severity burning would create openings and reduce den habitat on approximately 112 acres and 122 acres within the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units respectively. Overall modeled den habitat would be reduced by 250 acres. Suitable den habitat would be retained on 75 percent of the acreage affected by treatment (low severity and unburned portions of burn units) and overall, 94 percent of the existing modeled den habitat would be retained. Alternative 3 Treatments within lands that are currently at moderate fire risk were dropped under alternative 3, as a result only 2 acres of potential den habitat would be harvested, and total den habitat affected would be reduced to 937 acres. Openings created by proposed mixed severity burning would reduce den habitat by 116 and 114 acres of the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units respectively. Like alternative 2, proposed burning would retain suitable den habitat on 75 percent of the acreage affected and 94 percent of the existing modeled den habitat would be retained under this alternative. Overall modeled den habitat would be reduced by 232 acres. Alternatives 2 and 3 In order to reduce potential impacts to denning bears, the following PDF would be implemented. · No mechanical treatment activities and hauling or prescribed burning would occur above 6,000 ft. in elevation during the denning season (December 1 through March 31). With implementation of this PDF, it is not expected that denning bears would be adversely affected by treatment under either alternative. Food Storage and Sanitation Alternatives 2 and 3 People working in the woods provide opportunities for grizzly bears to be attracted to food and garbage and to become food conditioned. The Lincoln Ranger District has been covered under Forest Order H-05-01 for food storage since 2005, which addresses food and garbage storage. A clause is included in all contracts that require the contractor adhere to this order. As a result, it is unlikely that effects associated with inadequate food storage and increased risks to bear or people would occur under either action alternative. Cover and Forage Effects of individual treatments are discussed under section 4.3. The following is a discussion of effects to cover and forage conditions related to grizzly bear habitat. Anticipated effects are based on implementation of PDFs including riparian or INFISH buffers. Riparian buffers which include 150 feet on either side of perennial streams and 50 feet on either side of intermittent streams occur on over 500 acres proposed for treatment. Of this 300 acres are in prescribed burn units, 170 acres are in intermediate treatment units and 50 acres are within regeneration harvest units. Because few trees are harvested in these areas and burning is minimized or does not occur, cover in these buffers would be largely unchanged. As a result these areas would continue to provide both cover and travel corridors that would help facilitate bear use within many of the treatments sites. Alternatives 2 and 3 Changes in grizzly cover and foraging habitat resulting from the proposed treatments are summarized by alternative in table 97 including changes within and outside the recovery area. Effects to cover and forage are discussed by treatment below. Table 97. Grizzly bear habitat changes Treatment/Habitat Change Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Outside Recovery Area Acres % Acres % Acres % Alternative 2 Long-term Reduction of Forest Cover1 1,431 8 756 13 95 17 Timber Harvest 764 4 108 2 95 17 Burning 667 4 656 11 0 0 Reduction in Denning Habitat1 128 56 122 96 0 0 Reduced Cover2 3,509 20 1,457 25 219 40 Timber Harvest 1,832 10 197 3 102 19 Burning3 1,677 10 1,260 22 117 21 Increase in Forage 4,940 28 2,214 38 314 57 Remote Habitat 3,4 2,568 15 1,221 21 0 0 Habitat Close to Human Activity3,5 2,372 13 993 17 314 57 Alternative 3 Long-term Reduction of Forest Cover1 1,085 6 460 8 96 18 Timber Harvest 612 3 108 2 96 18 Burning 473 3 352 6 0 0 Reduction in Denning Habitat1 116 46 114 96 0 0 Reduced Cover2 3,092 18 1,584 28 217 39 Timber Harvest 1,191 7 197 3 94 17 Treatment/Habitat Change Arrastra Mountain Red Mountain Outside Recovery Area Acres % Acres % Acres % Burning3 1,901 11 1,387 24 123 22 Increase in Forage 4,177 24 2,044 35 313 56 Remote Habitat 3,4 2,063 12 1,113 19 0 0 Habitat Close to Human Activity3,5 2,114 12 931 16 313 56 1 –loss of overhead cover due to regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed severity burning 2 – reduction in cover due to intermediate timber harvest and low severity burning 3 – only includes 80 percent of each burn unit 4 – includes treatment units beyond 0.25 mile from an open road 5 – includes treatment units within 0.25 mile of an open road 6 – percent of modeled den habitat Timber Harvest Under alternative 2, proposed timber harvest would affect 14 percent and 5 percent of the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units respectively, whereas 36 percent of the lands outside the recovery area would be affected. Under alternative 3, the same amount of harvest would occur within Red Mountain (5 percent), although proposed harvest would be reduced to 10 percent of the Arrastra sub-unit. Grizzly bear response to logging and logged areas is mixed and complex (Zager et al. 1983, Waller and Mace 1997a). Bear use can be affected by changes in the quality and quantity of forage and cover and by changes in human use patterns. Some studies documented reduced bear use while others found no evidence that logging impacted grizzly bears (MDNRC 2010). Areas most likely to be used are those that produce crops of preferred foods (typically soft mast) and/or those that are relatively free from human disturbance (MDNRC 2010). As a result treatments were evaluated in terms of changes in cover and forage, as well as their proximity to human activity (table 97). All harvest would result in a reduction in cover on the site, with regeneration harvest resulting in a long-term loss of overhead forested cover. As a result bear use of regenerated sites would be reduced and most use within the next 10 years would be expected to occur largely near edges of treatment areas or riparian buffers. Cover would also be reduced on partial or intermediate harvest units, although residual overstory cover (25 to 60 percent canopy closure) would be maintained on sites treated. Riparian buffers would be maintained and interspersed throughout many units, further limiting sight distances. Intermediate harvest prescriptions are expected to provide adequate cover to provide for bear security. The likelihood that a harvest site would be utilized would also be determined by the amount of human activity and access. While there would be no change in public access, approximately 80 percent of all timber harvest occurs within 0.25 mile of an open road and close to private land with more concentrated human activity. As a result, existing as well as future use of these areas would be expected to be reduced somewhat and benefits to grizzly in terms of increased forage would be greatest in areas greater than 0.25 mile from an open road (table 97). Overall treatment would result in a long-term reduction in forested cover on the acreage affected (6 percent of the recovery area), including up to a 16 acre reduction in modeled den habitat. Conversely available forage would increase. For example Nielson et al. (2004) found the occurrence of critical grizzly bear foods, including roots and tubers, herbaceous vegetation and ants were more common in clearcuts than the surrounding forest. Also shrubs including huckleberry and buffalo berry were found to increase, although this varied by site (Martin 1980, Zager et al. 1983). Bear use also varies over time. Some research indicates that grizzly don’t utilize harvest units until 10 years after treatment (MDNRC 2010), whereas other research found that grizzly utilized recent clearcuts (Nielson et al. 2004, Wielgus and Vernier 2003). Also intermediate aged clearcuts (approximately 30 years of age) were selected throughout the year, whereas recent and old clearcuts were utilized largely early in the year and again between early August and denning (Nielson et al. 2004). While grasses and forbs would be expected to increase on all sites, increases in shrubs (e.g., huckleberries) were found to be greatest on moist sites with northern and easterly aspects (Martin 1980). Consequently cover and forage availability as well as bear use would vary over time and by site. Prescribed Burning Prescribed burning proposed under alternative 2 would affect 17 percent and 41 percent of the Arrastra Mountain and Red Mountain sub-units respectively, whereas burning under alternative 3 would affect 10 and 30 percent of these sub-units. Most of the mixed severity burning includes high intensity burning that would create openings and result in a long-term loss of forest cover on 25 to 30 percent of the site. These openings would vary in size, would be widely scattered and , interspersed with riparian buffers, untreated areas and low severity burn areas. Consequently some bear cover would be retained on all sites. As a result, it is expected that bears would continue to utilize these fire created openings for forging following treatment. While there would be little change in overstory on areas affected by low severity burning (50 to 55 percent of the site), understory cover would be reduced. Riparian buffers and untreated areas (at least 20 percent of the unit) would also provide intact cover interspersed throughout the burn unit. Proposed burning would result in a flush of herbaceous vegetation (grasses and forbs) and it is expected that spring forage would increase within a year of the burn and would be maintained at levels above current conditions well into the future (greater than 20 years). Similarly, production of shrubs such as huckleberry and buffalo berry would increase both in the short (5 years) and long-term (greater than 50 years) (Martin 1980). Finally burning in combination with thinning would maintain whitebark pine on over 900 acres under both alternatives. As a result it is expected that proposed burning would maintain security cover, while increasing the diversity and distribution of grizzly bear foraging habitat across the landscape. Like timber harvest, use of burn areas where forage is created would be greatest in more remote areas. Landscape Considerations Landscape conditions have been shown to influence bear use of managed forests. For example in areas where natural openings or disturbed areas (e.g. fire) were available, bears have been found to avoid clearcuts. However, where fire suppression and succession has led to little if any forest openings, grizzly have adapted to utilizing closely related anthropogenic sites such as clearcuts. Also decades of fires suppression have resulted in conifer encroachment that has further reduced natural openings and meadows (Nielson et al. 2004). This is a consideration for the Stonewall project area because less than 4 percent of the project area occurs in meadow/shrub habitat. Proposed mixed severity burning would help restore fire to the landscape as well as increase the availability of openings/meadows in remote areas preferred by grizzly. As a result both alternatives are expected to create landscape level conditions preferred by grizzly (Nielson et al. 2004, Herrero 1972) while promoting the sustainability of whitebark pine and maintaining existing core/remote habitat. Alternative 3 In an effort to reduce short-term impacts to cover, alternative 3 reduces proposed harvest and burning. Within Arrastra Mountain, regeneration and intermediate harvest are reduced by 31 percent and 35 percent respectively, whereas total and mixed severity burning within this sub-unit is reduced by 19 percent and 27 percent. Although timber harvest within the Red Mountain unit is the same as that of alternative 2, total burning is reduced by 27 percent and mixed severity burning by 52 percent. Collectively, the reduction in treatments would maintain more cover over the short term than alternative 2, although short- and long-term increases in forage would be reduced. While whitebark pine restoration would be similar and landscape diversity improved, fire risk would be somewhat higher under this alternative. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, activities proposed under the action alternatives that could result in a long-term reduction in forested cover or increase human access include timber harvest on up to 2,901 acres, prescribed burning on up to 5,316 and road construction on up to 2.6 miles. Table 98 displays ongoing and future activities and recent wildfire, as well as the maximum amount of future activities anticipated (alternative 2). Table 98. Action area cumulative effects Activity Area Affected1 Reduction in Cover Acres % Acres % Timber Harvest 3,088 4 872 1 Prescribed Burning 5,573 6 1,315 2 Hazard Tree Removal 481 <1 481 <1 Wildfire 408 <1 245 <1 Total 9,550 11 2,913 3 1 - There are approximately 2,500 acres within the analysis area where R1-Vmap cover data is unavailable and the percent of area affected is based on lands where data is available. Ongoing and future activities under the action alternatives would affect up to 11 percent of the analysis area. Effects include a reduction in overstory cover on approximately 2,900 acres or 3 percent of the analysis area. Proposed treatments would also reduce den habitat on up to 250 acres or 6 percent of the modeled den habitat. While roads to be constructed and obliterated following treatment have the potential to increase access, as described under direct and indirect effects, these occur in areas that are already well roaded. As a result there would be no change in security habitat and potential impacts to be bears would be reduced. While anticipated activities would affect 11 percent of the action area and 24 percent of the modeled den habitat, 70 percent of the anticipated activities would maintain forest cover on the site. Also with implementation of project design features, there are no impacts to denning bears anticipated. Additionally, proposed actions would maintain bear security habitat, while promoting stand and landscape level forage. Although forest cover would be reduced due to proposed regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed severity burning, as described under direct and indirect effect, 80 percent of the harvest would occur close to roads/human activity reducing potential impacts to bears. Also openings created by mixed severity burning are widely scattered and would be expected to promote forage conditions preferred by grizzly, including maintenance of white bark pine. Finally, the action area has recently been affected by past wildfire and the proposed treatments are designed to reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire and a further reduction in grizzly bear cover. Collectively, for these reasons, and considering remote den habitat would remain largely intact and that bear habitat and use outside the Copper Creek (i.e., lands affected by the Snow Talon fire) drainage would be maintained, it is not anticipated that implementation of the treatments under either alternative 2 or 3 would result in significant long-term adverse cumulative effects to the grizzly bear. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments to grizzly anticipated. While proposed activities would reduce cover, they would also improve habitat diversity, promote whitebark pine restoration and reduce the likely hood that stand-replacing wildfire may occur. As a result, habitat within sites affected would be restored. Action Alternatives Determination and Conclusions Both alternatives 2 and 3 would improve landscape level foraging habitat, maintain whitebark pine, result in short and long-term reductions in cover and increase the risk of bear/human interaction. However, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may affect, but not likely to adversely affect grizzly bear. · While TMRD within the Arrastra sub-unit would increase during implementation (up to five years), OMRD would stay below IGBC guidelines. There would be no change in TMRD or OMRD within the Red Mountain sub-unit and there would be no change in Security Core habitat within either sub-unit. · While up to 2.6 miles of roads would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, these segments would be closed to public access during implementation. There would be no change in public motorized access during or post implementation. · Over 94 percent of modeled den habitat would be maintained. With implementation of Project Design Features that restrict activities within suitable habitat during the denning season, no impacts to denning bears are anticipated. · Eighty percent of proposed timber harvest is in close proximity to open roads and concentrated human activity, reducing the likelihood that bears would be affected. Only short-term disturbance is anticipated during implementation and no long-term adverse direct effects to bears are anticipated. · Existing forested cover would be maintained on a minimum of 92 and 87 percent of the Arrastra and Red Mountain sub-units respectively. · Proposed treatments would promote the long-term sustainability of whitebark pine, increase stand and landscape level forage, and restore fire to the landscape while reducing the risk of stand replacing wildfire. · All treatments are consistent with Forest Plan goals, objectives and standards and comply with Interagency Grizzly Bear Recommendations. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Grizzly habitat would be largely unchanged under alternative 1. Action alternatives would reduce grizzly bear habitat; however, all but 81 acres would occur within Management Situation 2 lands. Guidelines for TMRD, OMRD and core would be met or unchanged, and treatments would promote the sustainability of whitebark pine, promote landscape conditions preferred by grizzly and reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire. As a result, all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan direction to maintain or enhance sufficient grizzly bear habitat to meet the population goals established in the Grizzly Bear Recover Plan for the Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 1986 p. II/1), and apply grizzly bear guidelines to essential and occupied habitat and to minimize man-caused mortality by not exceeding designated open road densities (USDA Forest Service 1986 p. II/19). Wolverine Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects Because there are no treatments proposed under this alternative, there would be no direct impacts or mortality to wolverine. In the absence of a disturbance event such as large-scale blowdown or stand replacing wildfire, stands would continue to mature and late successional conditions, including increasing levels of downed wood would develop. While fuel loading and the risk of wildfire would be greatest under this alternative, den and dispersal habitat would be largely unchanged. Similarly, big game forage and cover, deer and elk populations and wolverine foraging habitat would be maintained. The existing road system would be unchanged under this alternative and human access is not expected to increase. As a result, remote and natal den habitat would be maintained and there would be no changes in trapping pressure or increased disturbance to denning habitat anticipated. Cumulative Effects Past, on-going and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. The most far-reaching effect of past management activities has been the development of road systems, recreational trails, and sites that improved access and promoted human use in remote areas. Management activities such as timber harvest and reforestation treatments have altered vegetation and use of the area by big game, reduced overstory snow interception and further increased human access and potential disturbance. Natural disturbances such as the 2003 Snow Talon fire have affected over 23,500 acres within the analysis area, including 3,500 acres of natal den habitat. Past, on-going and future activities that are most likely to affect wolverine or its habitat during the analysis period are summarized in table 46, which includes activities within the analysis area as a whole, as well as those activities that would occur in natal denning habitat. Table 99. Past, ongoing and future activities within the wolverine cumulative effect area Activity Analysis Area Natal Denning Habitat Hazard tree Removal 568 acres None NNIS treatment 4,000 acres None Firewood Collection Within 100 ft. of Open Roads None Past Wildfire 23,000 acres 3,203 acres Recent Wildfire 755 acres 301 acres Trail Maintenance 446 acres (within 100 ft. of trails 35 acres (8 miles of trail) Prescribed Fire 410 acres 210 acres While there would be some modification of the understory and removal of downed wood, activities such as trail maintenance, firewood collection and NNIS treatment would primarily result in short-term disturbance. Also there would be little habitat changes from these activities. Hazard tree removal would modify foraging habitat along open roads but there are no long-term adverse effects to habitat or disturbance related effects anticipated. Trail maintenance, including trails through natal denning habitat would continue. While trail use is not expected to change, disturbance along the trail corridors would continue. Also some dispersed recreation activities occur in areas with persistent snowpack. However because wolverines coexist with some level of human disturbance and habitat modification, and considering use is not expected to change, continued recreational use of the analysis is not expected to adversely affect wolverine. Low intensity prescribed fire would occur on approximately 400 acres and effects would be similar to those described under alternative effects including disturbance during treatment and a short-term reduction in understory vegetation and structure, although both natal denning and foraging habitat would be maintained following treatment. Approximately 23 percent of the cumulative effect area and 28 percent of the natal denning habitat have been recently (since 2003) affected by wildfire. While wildfire can create conditions preferred by big game and other prey species, fire temporarily displaces wolverines, which depend on late successional conditions (Greater Yellowstone Coordinating Committee 1988 in USDA Forest Service 2012e) and generally post-fire habitat is less suitable than unburned habitats (Hayes, 1970 in USDA Forest Service 2012e). As a result, both foraging and den habitat have been reduced. However post-fire conditions can improve habitat for big game (USDA Forest Service 2012e), so effects on foraging habitat would be short term. For example the 2011 wolverine documentation occurred on lands affected by the 2003 Snow Talon fire, indicating that foraging on these lands is occurring. Remote lands within the analysis area and adjacent wilderness would continue to provide abundant, high quality habitat for wolverines in the short term. Climate change would continue to be a threat to wolverine populations in the long-term and is likely to shrink the size of their high quality habitat islands in the future. Although the northern Rocky Mountains would continue to provide some of the largest, most contiguous areas of wolverine habitat in the lower 48 states, serving as a population source area. As a result, and considering the small amount of natal denning or foraging habitat affected by on-going/future activities, and the continued availability of remote habitat within the analysis area, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Determination of Effects and Rationale Although recent fires have reduced wolverine foraging and den habitat, suitable habitat would continue to be available. While the risk of future wildlife is greatest under this alternative, there is no way to predict if or when wildfire would occur. As a result and based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternative 1 would Not Jeopardize the wolverine. · Human access and the availability of remote habitat would be maintained and no increase in trapping pressure is anticipated. · Existing natal den habitat would be maintained. · Big game numbers and use, and wolverine foraging habitat would be largely unchanged. · Late successional forest conditions would be maintained. · The available scientific and commercial information does not indicate that other potential stressors such as land management, recreation, infrastructure development and transportation corridors pose a threat to the DPS (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). · The proposed rule to list the wolverine as threatened (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013) states; “Little scientific or commercial information exists regarding effects to wolverines from development or human disturbances associated with them. What little information does exist suggests that wolverines can adjust to moderate habitat modification and human disturbance. In addition, large amounts of wolverine habitat are protected from human disturbances and developments, either legally through wilderness and National Park designation, or by being located at remote and high elevation sites. Therefore, wolverines are afforded a relatively high degree of protection from effects of human activities by the nature of their habitat”. Action Alternatives Direct and Indirect Effects Treatments under alternatives 2 and 3 would affect 8,562 acres and 6,562 acres of the analysis area under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. Of this both alternatives propose 829 acres of mixed severity burning in natal denning habitat. However because burning would not occur during the denning period, there are no effects to wolverine denning or increased mortality anticipated. Of the natal habitat affected by burning, 207 would be affected by high severity burning, 456 acres would receive a low intensity burn and approximately 166 acres would be unburned. Changes in habitat include a reduction in suitable den habitat on 207 acres and reduced understory structure, including a reduction in down wood on 456 acres. Openings created by fire would be 30 acres in size or less, widely scattered and interspersed with un-burned or lightly burned lands. So while habitat on some of the unit would be reduced, suitable den habitat would be maintained on the site. As a result and considering that approximately 93 percent of the existing natal den habitat would be unaffected, the availability of den habitat would be maintained across the landscape. While proposed treatments have the potential to affect wolverines during dispersal, Schwartz found that wolverines are 20 times more likely to stay in the area of persistent snow cover during dispersal (Schwartz et al. 2009). As a result and considering that timber harvest is proposed in areas of low elevation and that burning would occur after spring snow is gone, it is unlikely that dispersing animals would be affected by treatment. Rather, they are likely to travel high elevation ridges east and north of treatment areas where there is contiguous remote habitat associated with the Scapegoat Wilderness. Timber harvest and burning would affect approximately 8,562 acres of suitable foraging habitat under alternative 2 and 6,562 acres under alternative 3. Effects of these activities on vegetation structure and composition are discussed in detail in section 4.3 and include a reduction in mature forest on 2,221 acres under alternative 2 and 1,641 acres under alternative 3 due to regeneration harvest and openings created during mixed severity burning. Effects also include changes in understory structure and diversity due to intermediate harvest and low intensity burning, which would occur on 5,248 acres under alternative 2 and on 4,618 acres under alternative 3. Also as described in section 4.3, most treatments (intermediate harvest and 75 percent of the burning) would result in short-term changes in vegetation. While these changes in cover and forage would be expected to alter big game use of the project area, considering; that 92 percent or more of the analysis area would be unaffected, that big game security habitat would be maintained, and that the amount and quality of forage would be improved, adequate habitat would continue to be available both in the short and long term to support desired levels of elk. As a result wolverine foraging habitat would be maintained under both alternatives. There would be no changes in road management or public access under either alternative. New roads to be obliterated immediately following harvest are proposed on 2.6 miles under alternative 1 and 0.4 miles under alternative 4. Because these roads occur in areas that are already roaded, they would not further fragment intact forest or reduce connectivity. Also there would be no reduction in remote forest habitat under either alternative. Similarly, because regeneration treatments occur in areas with concentrated MPB mortality, canopy conditions have already been reduced in these areas. These areas are also at low elevation without persistent snow cover. As a result and considering that 92 percent or more of the analysis area would be unaffected by treatment, remote forest habitat, habitat connectivity and wolverine dispersal habitat would be maintained under both alternatives. Cumulative Effects In addition to effects described under alternative 1, up to 3,099 acres of timber harvest and 5,463 acres of burning would occur (under alternative 2). Cumulatively during the analysis period, approximately 37,741 acres would be affected by anticipated activities. However most of this occurs at low elevations without persistent snow cover and treatments are not expected to alter dispersal. Also while on-going/future activities would affect 829 acres of modeled den habitat, treatment would occur outside the denning period and there are no effects to denning animals anticipated. On-going and future activities would reduce mature forest on up to 2,221 acres, although activities would maintain wolverine foraging habitat in the short-term and improve big game and wolverine foraging habitat in the long term (see analysis of commonly hunted species). As a result and considering that over 93 percent of the modeled den habitat would be unaffected by ongoing/future activities, potential impacts to wolverine would be reduced and wolverine den, dispersal and foraging habitat would be maintained across the landscape. In the past, wolverines were subject to overharvest. However more restrictive trapping seasons, restricted public access, and the continued availability of secure habitat would provide protection for wolverine populations under both alternatives. Like alternative 1 dispersed recreation would continue to occur, although use is not expected to change and there is no evidence that activities such as hiking, camping or hunting affect wolverines. As a result and considering that wolverines can coexist with some level of human disturbance and habitat modification (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013), continued recreational use of the analysis is not expected to adversely affect wolverine. Climate change would continue to be a threat to wolverine populations in the long-term and is likely to shrink the size of their high quality habitat islands, although the northern Rocky Mountains would continue to provide some of the largest, most contiguous areas of wolverine habitat in the lower 48 states, serving as a population source area. Also like alternative 1, remote lands within the analysis area and adjacent wilderness would continue to provide abundant, high quality habitat for wolverines. As a result, and considering the large amount of unaffected habitat and the continued availability of natal den and foraging habitat, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated under either alternative. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments to wolverine. While there would be a reduction in suitable habitat due to proposed burning and harvest, conditions on all sites would be restored. Determination of Effects and Conclusions The Stonewall project was analyzed for effects to wolverines based on vegetation changes, movements across the landscape, and the distribution from human activities associated with the project. Based on the analysis provided and the following rationale, it is determined that implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project would Not Jeopardize the wolverine. · Mature forest conditions would be maintained on 75 percent of the acreage treated and over 90 percent of the analysis area would be unaffected by any proposed action. · There are no effects to wolverine denning or dispersal anticipated and 93 percent of the modeled den habitat would be unaffected. · There would be no increase in human access and remote habitat would be maintained. Trapping pressure would remain unchanged. · Big game populations and wolverine foraging habitat would be maintained. · Proposed treatments would reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire. · The available scientific and commercial information does not indicate that other potential stressors such as land management, recreation, infrastructure development and transportation corridors pose a threat to the DPS (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013). · The proposed rule to list the wolverine as threatened (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2013) states; “Little scientific or commercial information exists regarding effects to wolverines from development or human disturbances associated with them. What little information does exist suggests that wolverines can adjust to moderate habitat modification and human disturbance. In addition, large amounts of wolverine habitat are protected from human disturbances and developments, either legally through wilderness and National Park designation, or by being located at remote and high elevation sites. Therefore, wolverines are afforded a relatively high degree of protection from effects of human activities by the nature of their habitat”. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Wolverine habitat would be largely unchanged under alternative 1. While there would be a small reduction in modeled den habitat under the action alternatives, no effects to wolverine denning or dispersal are anticipated and suitable den, foraging and dispersal habitat would be continue to be available. Also landscape connectivity and remote habitat would be maintained under all alternatives. Consequently all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17); to maintain and improve wildlife habitat over time; to support big game and other wildlife species (p. II/1); provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4); and to develop and implement a road management program with road use and travel restrictions that are responsive to resource protection needs (p. II/2). All alternatives are also consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Sensitive and Federal Candidate Species Gray Wolf To ensure the conservation of wolf populations, the Forest Service uses three limiting factors identified in the Gray Wolf Recovery Plan (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1987) to evaluate impacts from forest management including; (1) potential for wolf/human interaction, (2) effects on the wolf prey base, and (3) impacts to the integrity of key wolf habitat (i.e., rendezvous and den sites). The following is a discussion of these factors by alternative. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed for this alternative, so there are no direct effects anticipated to the gray wolf. Landscape-level habitat is displayed in table 67 and alternative treatment effects discussed in the Alternative Effects section. As described, there would be little change in forest structure and diversity under alternative 1, although increased levels of DWD would occur. Mature forest conditions would continue to predominate across the project area. While forage for big game may continue to decline in some areas, due to MPB mortality, it is expected that localized increases in big game forage would occur and cover would continue to be available within all drainages. There are no anticipated increases in human activity or access and livestock grazing would be unchanged. Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and anticipated future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Anticipated effects are summarized in table 85 and include hazard tree removal, NNIS treatment, road and trail maintenance, trail reconstruction, campground use and improvement, firewood collection, livestock grazing, wildfire, off-forest harvest, ongoing dispersed use and approved prescribed burning. As described in the Cumulative Effect for All Alternatives section, very little change in existing uses, including livestock grazing and dispersed recreational use, are expected. Also much of this activity would continue to occur along roads or in areas that already receive more concentrated human use (e.g., trails and campground) where wolves are less likely to occur. Wildfire, hazard tree removal, timber harvest and prescribed burning are the anticipated treatments that would result in possible long-term changes in wolf cover and forage conditions and cumulatively, approximately 1,500 acres (2 percent) of the analysis area would be affected. Additionally MPB mortality would continue with some areas of concentrated mortality. However, considering that human access would not increase, that big game populations and use within the analysis area would remain relatively unchanged and that landscape level cover and forage would continue to be available, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated to gray wolf or its habitat anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments Habitat for wolves would remain largely unchanged under this alternative and there are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments to wolves. Determination and Conclusions Suitable wolf habitat, including remote areas for denning and big game populations would remain largely unchanged. As a result, and considering that human use and access is not expected to increase, implementation of alternative 1 would have No Impact on wolves. Action Alternatives Direct and Indirect Effects While wolves are in the area, there are no known wolf den or rendezvous sites that would be affected. As a result, no mortality or effects to reproduction are anticipated. While both action alternatives would result in some increase in human activity, based on information described under treatment effects, activities would be short term and localized. Also all roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal occur in areas that are already roaded and approximately 70 percent of the proposed harvest areas occur within approximately 0.25 mile of an open road. Consequently proposed treatments largely occur in areas where human access already exists and where wolves are less likely to occur. As a result and considering approximately 65 percent of the area would be untreated, the likelihood of direct effects (disturbance or mortality) is low. While there is no long-term increase in human access anticipated, implementation of proposed treatments would increase human access. Also because much of the proposed burning occurs in more remote areas, it is likely that wolves would be affected. However because burning would be completed within approximately a 2 week period, any disturbance related effects would be short term. Also timber harvest is restricted to a single drainage at a time over a 10-year period. As a result, unaffected habitat would be available to accommodate any displaced animals. Based on the treatment effects discussion in the Alternative 1-No Action section and the analysis presented under deer and elk, habitat for big game species would be maintained in the short term and increased over the long term. As a result, and due to the widespread availability of unaffected habitat (65 percent of the analysis area), big game populations and wolf foraging habitat would be maintained. Cumulative Effects In addition to effects described under alternative 1, up to 3,099 acres of timber harvest and 5,463 acres of burning would occur (under alternative 2). Specific activities and their effects to wildlife habitat are discussed in the Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives section and in appendix C, and as described, treatment related disturbance would be short term. Also, access into remote areas would not be changed, and treatments are expected to maintain big game and wolf foraging habitat within affected drainages and across the landscape. As a result and considering that over 70 percent of the analysis area would not be affected, and that there are no known den or rendezvous sites affected, there are no significant cumulative effects to wolves anticipated. Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments While there would be a short-term decrease in cover, this would be restored and foraging habitat would be maintained or improved. There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments to wolves. Action Alternative Determination and Conclusions Alternatives 2 and 3 have potential for short-term impacts to foraging or dispersing wolves. However, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for the gray wolf. · No den or rendezvous sites are known to occur. · Any increases in human activity would be short term and the availability of unaffected foraging habitat is available within all drainages. · There are no anticipated increases in livestock use and any increased human activity would be associated primarily with existing trails and use areas. · Big game populations are expected to be maintained over the short term and increased in the future. · Treatments would reduce the risk of stand-replacing wildfire. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans There are no den or rendezvous sites affected under any alternative. Foraging habitat would be largely unchanged under alternative 1. While the action alternatives would affect suitable foraging habitat, big game populations would be maintained or improved. Long-term human access would not be increased and remote habitat would be maintained, no new system roads would be constructed and all roads built would be obliterated immediately following timber removal and would be closed to public access during implementation. Risks of large-scale wildfire would be reduced. As a result, all alternatives comply with Forest Plan direction to maintain or improve wildlife habitat over time to support big game and other wildlife species and to maintain, enhance gray wolf habitat to facilitate recovery (USDA Forest Service 1986 p. II/1) and to develop and implement a road management program with road use and travel restrictions that are responsive to resource protection needs (p. II/2). All alternatives are also consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Fisher Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there would be no direct impacts to fisher. Also, in the absence of large-scale blowdown or stand-replacing wildfire, over the short term (less than10 years), habitat conditions would be largely unchanged. However as described under affected environment, ongoing and anticipated future MPB mortality is expected to further reduce suitable habitat due to a continued reduction in canopy closure. This reduction is expected to be greatest in lower elevation stands that currently have concentrated mortality and in high density stands that are at greater risk from competition and insect and disease. Conversely, the availability of large diameter snags and DWD would increase in the next 15 to 20 years. The overall effect on fisher habitat would be that while den, rest and foraging habitat would be available, it would continue to be widely scattered across the project area. Also due to elevated fuel conditions, the risk of stand replacing wildfire and a long-term loss of habitat are greatest under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Past, present and future cumulative effects evaluated are in volume 2, appendix C. Cumulative effects are evaluated across the 101,977-acre-combined boundary described previously and ongoing and future activities likely to affect fisher are displayed in table 100. Table 100. Fisher cumulative effect summary Activity Foraging Habitat Den Rest Habitat Grazing 819 acres 2,108 acres NNIS 64 acres 442 acres Trail Work (within 100 ft. of trail) 14 acres 22 acres Prescribed Fire 8 acres 40 acres Hazard Tree Removal 27 acres 118 acres Stream Improvement 4 acres 3 acres Recent (since 2011) Wildfire 2 acres 39 acres Firewood collection Within 100 ft. of open roads Within 100 ft. of open roads While all of the activities could result in short-term disturbance to fisher, of the treatments identified in table 100, activities that could result in habitat changes include prescribed fire, hazard tree removal, firewood collection and wildfire. Suitable fisher habitat currently occurs on approximately 9,500 acres or 9 percent of the analysis area. Of this, approximately 6,500 acres occur as den/rest habitat and 3,000 acres as foraging habitat. While these activities would reduce snags and downed woody debris and result in some reduction mature forest, considering that over 97 percent of the suitable foraging and den/rest habitat would be unaffected, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated for fisher. While implementation of alternative 1 may increase the risk of stand-replacing wildfire, there are no predictable irretrievable commitments. Determination and Conclusions Because there are no direct effects anticipated and considering suitable fisher habitat would remain relatively unchanged, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on fisher. Action Alternatives Table 101 displays fisher den/rest and foraging habitat proposed for treatment. Table 101. Fisher habitat proposed for treatment Treatment Den/Rest-Acres (3,042 acres total) Foraging Acres (4,412 acres total) Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Intermediate Harvest 620 (20) 3 396 (13) 3 767 (17) 3 487 (11) 3 Regeneration Harvest 229 (8) 3 197 (6) 3 277 (6) 3 243 (6) 3 Jackpot Burning1 0 99 (3) 3 0 179 (4) 3 Low Severity Burning1 79 (3) 3 182 (6) 3 121 (3) 3 252 (6) 3 Mixed Severity Burning1 610 (20) 3 183 (6) 3 1,006 (23) 298 (7) 3 Total Acres Treated 1,538 (50) 4 1,057 (35) 4 2,171 (49) 4 1,459 (33) 4 Suitable Habitat Reduced2 367 (12) 4 290 (10) 4 502 (11) 4 389 (9) 4 Habitat Structure Reduced5 1,171 (38) 4 767 (25) 4 1,669 (38) 4 1,070 (24) 4 1 – Does not include 20 percent of the site that remains unburned 2 – Due to regeneration harvest and 20 percent of burn units 3 – Numbers in parenthesis are percent of category 4 – Percent of total 5 – Partial harvest and 60 percent of burn units Direct and Indirect Effects Changes in Suitable Habitat As described previously, project area fisher habitat has been recently reduced due to MPB mortality and occurs on approximately 4,400 acres or 48 percent of the project area. Alternative 2 would treat approximately 50 percent of the project area den/rest and foraging habitat, whereas alternative 3 would affect 33 to 35 percent. Of this 50 to 60 percent is proposed for timber harvest in stands that have concentrated MPB mortality. While these stands met the 40 percent canopy closure requirement at the time the model was developed, most of these sites currently only provide marginal habitat conditions. As a result, even though the model identifies some of these lands as den/rest, it is unlikely they would be utilized for denning and direct impacts are expected to consist primarily avoidance of foraging individuals during treatment. However because regeneration harvest would reduce canopy closure below 40 percent, existing den/rest habitat would be reduced by 8 percent under alternative 2 and 6 percent under alternative 3, whereas foraging habitat would be reduced by approximately 6 percent under both alternatives. While sites proposed for burning have experienced some mortality, many of these areas have experienced less mortality and are expected to continue to provide both den/rest and foraging habitat. As a result, direct impacts in the form of harassment, mortality or displacement could occur. However because the project area landscape currently provides marginal habitat conditions due to past and ongoing MPB mortality, the likelihood that an active den would be affected is reduced and considered low. As a result direct effects are expected to consist largely of short-term (1 year) behavioral avoidance of the treatment areas. Also all affected watersheds would continue to contain suitable habitat to accommodate any displaced foraging individuals. Burning under alternatives 2 would affect 1,127 acres of existing forging habitat (26 percent), and 689 acres (23 percent) of the available den/rest habitat. While burning is reduced under alternative 3, mixed severity burning proposed under both alternatives would result in a long-term reduction in suitable habitat due to openings created in portions of the units. As a result, it is estimated that mixed severity burning would reduce existing habitat on approximately 20 percent of the entire suitable habitat treated. The total amount of habitat reduced from regeneration harvest and mixed severity burning is displayed in table 101. The remainder of the acres treated which include partial harvest activities and portions of burn units that receive a low intensity underburn are expected to largely maintain canopy closure on the site. Additionally implementation of PDFs that maintain downed woody debris and other structural components (e.g., large snags, shrubs and pockets with understory structure) preferred by fisher would be retained on site. So while habitat structure would be reduced on this acreage, these areas would continue to provide suitable fisher habitat. Riparian Habitat As described under affected environment, riparian areas are preferred by fisher for foraging and den rest habitat, as well as for travel corridors. Approximately 5 percent of the proposed treatments or up to 155 acres occur within 300 ft. of a stream. However these areas are protected through implementation of INFISH buffers, which have restrictions on both burning and harvest. As a result riparian habitat would essentially be unchanged and maintained under both alternatives. Access While some roads would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal under both alternatives, these would be closed to the public and there is no change in public access anticipated. As a result existing remote habitat and lands that afford fisher security would be maintained. Also trapping pressure is not expected to change. Landscape Conditions As described under affected environment, MPB mortality has altered landscape conditions across the project area, reducing canopy closure and creating scattered patches of fisher habitat. While regeneration harvest would create an early seral habitat component (3 and 4 percent under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively), this is restricted to the southern portion of the project area in close proximity to private land and occurs in areas where there had been concentrated MPB mortality Also while mixed severity burning would create openings of variable size, these are widely scattered and occur as inclusions within the larger forested stand. As a result existing connectivity would be largely maintained under both alternatives. Additionally early seral stands or habitat patches created by logging or prescribed burning provide habitat for some fisher prey species, and research indicates that fisher home ranges include or are positively associated with younger successional stages (Lofroth et al. 2010). As a result proposed treatments would create a greater diversity of stand conditions and a more heterogeneous landscape than currently exists. While dead wood would be reduced, with implementation of PDFs all treatment units would maintain a snag and DWD component. As a result and considering the elevated levels of dead wood (See section 3.18) that would occur across the landscape, which include large snag component, standing and downed woody debris would continue to be widely available across the landscape. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, the action alternatives would result in the following (alternative 2) · Prescribed burning on 534 acres of foraging habitat and 847 acres of den/rest habitat · Regeneration harvest on 42 acres and 142 acres of foraging and den/rest habitat respectively. · Partial harvest on up to 128 acres and 542 acres of foraging and den/rest habitat respectively. Cumulatively during the analysis period, up to 711 acres or 24 percent of the available foraging habitat would be affected and up to 1,728 acres or 26 percent of the available den/rest habitat would be affected. However, the existing overstory would be maintained on 75 percent of the burning and almost 80 percent of the proposed harvest. Also downed woody debris would be retained on all units. As a result suitable foraging and den/rest habitat would only be reduced on approximately 700 acres due to regeneration harvest, openings created by mixed severity burning, wildfire and hazard tree removal. Additionally, 76 percent of the foraging habitat and 74 percent of the den/rest habitat would be unaffected. As a result and considering that preferred riparian habitat would be maintained under both alternatives there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. . Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated for fisher. While both action alternatives would reduce suitable habitat on areas affected by regeneration harvest and alter structural diversity on fisher habitat, suitable habitat conditions would be restored on all sites. Determination and Conclusions The action alternatives would reduce fisher habitat by 9 to 12 percent and alter the structural conditions on approximately 25 to 38 percent of the existing fisher habitat. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to cause a trend toward federal listing for fisher. · Due to widespread mountain pine beetle mortality, available fisher habitat has been reduced, and much of the project area does not provide the overstory or landscape conditions preferred by fisher. As a result, the likelihood that an active den would be affected is low and direct effects are expected to consist largely of short-term avoidance of the treatment sites by foraging or dispersing individuals. · While suitable habitat would be reduced under both alternatives, 88 percent or more of the exiting suitable habitat would be maintained. As a result and considering that preferred riparian habitat would be largely unchanged and that designated old growth habitat would be maintained, suitable fisher habitat would continue to be available. · There would be no increase in open roads and fisher security habitat would be unchanged. Also there is no anticipated increase in trapping pressure. · Proposed treatments are designed to reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire and a possible long-term loss of fisher habitat. · Fisher habitat is well distributed across the Forest and the Northern Region (Samson 2006b). Distances between areas of suitable habitat are within dispersal distance characteristic of this species. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Fisher habitat would be maintained under alternative 1. While both action alternatives would reduce suitable fisher habitat by up to 12 percent, and alter structural conditions, there is no mortality anticipated. In addition, any disturbance would be short term, preferred riparian habitat would be protected, roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be closed to public access; therefore, no increase in trapping pressure is anticipated. As a result, all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17), to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4), to manage riparian areas to be compatible with dependent wildlife species (II-35) and to develop and implement a road management program with road use and travel restrictions that are responsive to resource protection needs (p. II/2). All alternatives are also consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12 Townsend’s big-eared bat Alternative 1 Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects, and Determination There are no treatments proposed under this alternative and suitable foraging habitat would remain largely unchanged. As a result, there are no direct or indirect effects. Project area cumulative effects are identified in volume 2, appendix C. Activities that are most likely to alter foraging habitat are displayed below. · Campground rehabilitation – 5 acres · Grazing – 5,977 acres · NNIS treatment – 312 acres · Hazard tree removal – 318 acres · Stream rehabilitation – 15 acres · Trail work – 5 acres · Recent wildfire – 10 acres · Firewood collection within 100 feet of open roads · Continued MPB mortality While these activities may alter habitat conditions on a localized basis, landscape-level foraging habitat would be largely unchanged and there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. As a result, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on the Townsend’s big-eared bat. Action Alternatives Direct Effects The project area does not provide suitable hibernacula or roost sites and only foraging bats would be affected. Because bat activity occurs at night or at dawn/dusk, it is unlikely timber harvest would result in direct effects (harm or harassment). While it is possible that smoke from prescribed burning could occur on a site when bats are actively foraging, all burning must adhere to state air quality standards and prior to implementation a prescribed burn plan would be developed. Smoke management is an important part of the burn plan and adherence to atmospheric guidelines helps to ensure that smoke is quickly dispersed. As a result, any smoke related impacts would be short term. Indirect Effects Proposed treatments would affect 8,562 and 6,562 acres of forested habitat under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. Increased structural diversity would result from burning and bat prey diversity and foraging habitat would be maintained or improved on sites burned. The remaining treatments would involve partial or intermediate harvest (1,079-2,131 acres) and regeneration harvest (816-968 acres) activities. Because this species typically does not use regenerating forest (Gruver and Keinath 2006), suitable foraging habitat would be reduced on 4 and 3 percent of the project area under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. Because partial harvest would maintain a mature overstory while increasing understory development, treatments would likely improve habitat by increasing prey diversity and reducing forest “clutter” which would improve maneuverability. Due to the variety of treatments proposed, considering over 60 percent of the project area would not be treated, and that foraging habitat would be improved on most of the acres affected by treatment, the project area would continue to provide a structurally diverse forest to support a diversity of prey for foraging. Cumulative Effects As described under methodology, cumulative effects are evaluated across the project area. A complete list of activities found within the project area can be found in volume 2, appendix C. In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, foraging habitat would be affected on up to 5,463 acres of prescribed fire, 968 acres of regeneration harvest and 2,131 acres of partial harvest. Of these activities, only regeneration harvest would likely modify the overstory to a level that would affect bat foraging habitat. Also, because treatments would increase landscape diversity, it is likely that invertebrate diversity or bat foraging habitat would be maintained or improved. As a result, and due to the widespread availability of suitable foraging habitat, there are no significant cumulative effects under either alternative anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments anticipated for Townsend’s big-eared bat. The action alternatives would reduce suitable habitat on areas affected by regeneration harvest and alter structural diversity on sites proposed for partial harvest or burning; however, suitable habitat conditions would be maintained or restored on all sites. Determination The action alternatives would affect suitable habitat on 27 to 35 percent of the project area. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend towards federal listing for the Townsend’s big-eared bat.: · The project area does not provide suitable hibernacula or roost sites and the closest known hibernacula is over 30 miles from the project area, minimizing use of the area by foraging bats. · Over sixty percent of the project area would not be treated. Also a diversity of habitat conditions would occur and suitable foraging habitat would continue to be available under both alternatives. · While suitable foraging habitat would be affected on up to 4 percent due to proposed regeneration harvest, proposed burning and partial harvest activities would be expected to improve foraging habitat. · Proposed treatments would reduce risk of wildfire and insect- and disease-related mortality and increase the likelihood that habitat would be sustained over the long term. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The action alternatives would reduce suitable Townsend’s big-eared bat foraging habitat. No hibernacula or roost sites would be affected and suitable foraging habitat would be maintained or improved. As a result all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to; provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife and fish species (p. II/4) and to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17). Also all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Bald Eagle Alternative 1 Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects and Determination There are no treatments proposed, so there are no direct or indirect effects anticipated. Cumulative effects are summarized in volume 2, appendix C. Cumulative effects likely to affect eagle during the analysis period include off-forest timber harvest and private land development, continued use along the Blackfoot River and a possible loss of future nest trees due to MPB mortality. However available nest, foraging and roost habitat would remain largely unchanged and there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated for the bald eagle. As a result, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on the bald eagle. Action Alternatives Direct and Indirect Effects The nearest known existing eagle nest is approximately 1.5 miles from proposed treatment. With implementation of PDFs to restrict aircraft during the breeding season and which require dispersal of smoke away from the nest, there are no direct effects to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Disturbance and disruption of roosting/foraging birds can adversely interfere with feeding and affect productivity or survival of young (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007a). Disturbance to foraging birds could occur because some burning and timber harvest is proposed within approximately 350 feet of suitable foraging habitat along the Blackfoot River. However, there are no communal roost sites or established foraging areas affected. As a result, and considering the small portion of the river affected (1.5 miles within 0.25 mile of a treatment) and widespread availability of unaffected foraging/roosting habitat, any adverse effects associated with smoke or disturbance are expected to be short term. Proposed regeneration harvest would remove approximately 100 acres of potential bald eagle nest habitat within 1 mile of the Blackfoot River. These lands are immediately adjacent to Highway 200 and existing private land development. As a result they do not provide preferred bald eagle nest habitat. Further, unaffected nest habitat would continue to be widely available Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects discussed under alternative 1, implementation of treatments under the action would reduce potential nest trees on lands adjacent to the Blackfoot River. Also, birds foraging along the river may be disturbed during treatment. However, any disturbance effects would be short term. Bald eagle nest, foraging and roost habitat would remain largely unchanged and implementation of project design features would protect existing and future nests. As a result, and considering future uses are not expected to change and that eagles have successfully nested in this area with ongoing uses, there no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments There are no irretrievable or irreversible commitments anticipated for the bald eagle under this alternative. Determination and Conclusions Proposed activities have the potential to result in short-term disturbance to foraging eagles, although with implementation of project design features, there would be no impacts to nesting birds. Existing habitat in the project area habitat would be largely unaffected. As a result alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals, but are not likely to result in a trend toward federal listing for the bald eagle. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans There would be no effects to eagles under alternative 1, while alternatives 2 and 3 propose treatment within suitable eagle nesting and foraging habitat, with implementation of PDFs the likelihood of impacts to nesting birds is low. As a result and because of the small amount of habitat treated and availability of unaffected nesting and foraging habitat along the Blackfoot River corridor, both alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to; provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4) and to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17). Also all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Additionally, both alternatives comply with the Bald and Golden Eagle Management Act and are consistent with direction provided in the 2007 National Bald Eagle Management Guidelines (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2007a). 4.6.8 Black-backed Woodpecker Alternative 1 Direct, Indirect, Cumulative Effects and Determination Suitable post-fire black-backed woodpecker (BBW) habitat currently occurs on over 200,000 acres of the HNF. Of this, almost 23,000 acres occur within or immediately adjacent to the Stonewall project area. Consequently suitable BBW habitat across the Forest and in the vicinity of the project area is widely available on areas that have recently burned. As a result and considering the availability of burned habitat region-wide, adequate habitat exists across the landscape to maintain viable BBW populations (Samson 2006a). There are no treatments proposed, so there would be no direct effects and the existing vegetation condition and BBW habitat would remain largely unchanged. Insect-infested trees would likely continue to provide limited foraging opportunities and suitable post-fire habitat would continue to be available northeast of the project area. The likelihood of stand replacing wildfire would remain high and this alternative is most likely to result in development of high quality BBW habitat in the future. Anticipated cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Activities that have affected BBW habitat has included past and recent wildfire, as well as harvest and hazard tree removal activities that have removed dead trees and suitable habitat. However, most lands affected by wildfire would not harvested and these lands contain high densities of dead trees. Additionally, MPB mortality has created low quality habitat across much of the lower elevation lands within the analysis area. While habitat quality associated with the Snow Talon fire has declined, suitable habitat from these activities would continue to be available and there are no significant cumulative effects to the BBW anticipated. Additionally, the risks of future wildfire, which would create future BBW habitat is greatest under this alternative, although there is no way to predict when or if this would occur. As a result implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on the black-backed woodpecker. Action Alternatives Direct Effects Recently burned lands within the project area that provide preferred BBW habitat would not be treated. As a result, and considering that insect-infested areas affected by treatment only provide low-quality habitat, the likelihood that direct effects in the form of mortality or disturbance would occur is low. Indirect Effects Because black-backed woodpeckers are strongly tied to burned forests, and considering both alternatives reduce the risk of wildfire, the likelihood that high-quality woodpecker habitat would be created in the future is reduced. Alternative 2 Indirect Effects As described under the section on snags and dead wood, effects of treatment include a reduction in snags and potential BBW habitat, and treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce BBW habitat on approximately 3,100 acres receiving a timber harvest treatment. Conversely, because proposed mixed severity burning would result in recruitment of new snags including some large patches with higher snag density, BBW foraging habitat would be improved on approximately 1,200 acres affected by high intensity burning. Lands proposed for low intensity burning would remain largely unchanged. Alternative 3 Indirect Effects Alternative 3 would reduce snags and low quality BBW foraging habitat on 1,895 acres proposed for timber harvest, whereas lands proposed for low intensity burning would remain relatively unchanged. Like alternative 2, proposed mixed severity burning would increase snags and potential high quality BBW foraging habitat on approximately 800 acres. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects include extensive MPB mortality that has created low quality BBW foraging habitat across the analysis area, as well as recent wildfires that have created over 23,000 acres of high quality habitat since 2003. In addition to cumulative effects under alternative 1, there would be a reduction in snags and low-quality habitat on up to approximately 3,100 acres (alternative 2), whereas high-quality habitat would be increased in high intensity burned areas. However, suitable habitat within lands affected by MPB mortality, as well as recent wildfire would continue to be available. As a result, and considering the widespread availability of BBW habitat across the Forest and Region (Samson 2006a), there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments There are no irretrievable or irreversible commitments. Both alternatives would result in a decrease in low-quality habitat and an increase in high-quality habitat for the black-backed woodpecker. Action Alternatives Determination Although proposed activities would reduce suitable habitat for this species and increase the risk of disturbance or mortality, based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the black-backed woodpecker. · Implementation of project design features would retain some snags within all treatment sites. Proposed mixed-severity burning would be expected to create high quality habitat on over 800 acres. · Because only low-quality habitat is affected, and considering existing high-quality habitat would not be treated, the likelihood of direct mortality or disturbance from treatment is low. · Evidence suggests that the black-backed woodpecker is increasing in the United States (Dixon and Saab 2000). No demographic information exists to suggest a decline in BBW numbers. · Black-backed woodpecker habitat is abundant and well distributed across the Forest and the Northern Region. Distances between areas of suitable habitat are within dispersal distance characteristic of this species. · Habitat for the black-backed woodpecker has recently increased, and amounts are expected to increase as fires and bark beetle outbreaks continue to increase in size (Samson 2006b). · A comparison of habitat required for a minimum viable population to that available indicates well-distributed habitat greatly exceeds that needed, given the natural distribution of species and their habitats as mapped and according to available scientific literature (Samson 2006b). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Black-backed woodpecker habitat would be unchanged under alternative 1. Because high- quality BBW habitat would not be treated under the action alternatives, and considering that all sites proposed for treatment would meet or exceed levels of snags and downed woody debris recommended in the Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986 p. II/20-21), all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan direction to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4) and to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17). Also all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Flammulated Owl Effects to flammulated owls are evaluated by looking at the amount of available Dry Forest habitat by alternative and by looking at the amount and distribution of large-diameter snags. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects No treatments are proposed under this alternative, so there are no direct effects to the flammulated owl anticipated. As described under the biophysical setting discussion (section 3.1), in the absence of fire and restoration treatments, the open-canopy dry forest and ponderosa pine component, as well as suitable flammulated owl habitat would continue to decline. Although MPB post-kill stands would be more open within the next 10 to 20 years and may provide suitable foraging habitat, most large-diameter ponderosa pine snags are anticipated to fall to the ground and nest habitat availability would decrease. There may be a long-term reduction of suitable flammulated owl habitat under this alternative as preferred open-canopy habitat and ponderosa pine continue to decline. Cumulative Effects As described under methodology, cumulative effects are evaluated across the combined boundary. Anticipated cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Of these activities, the following occur in suitable flammulated owl habitat and have the potential to affect the owl or its habitat. · Off-forest timber harvest – 27 acres · Hazard tree removal – 13 acres · Recent wildfire – 20 acres · Prescribed fire – 8 acres While there would be some reduction in suitable nest trees and a likely continued decline in open canopy habitat, existing flammulated owl habitat within the analysis area would remain largely unchanged and no significant cumulative effects are anticipated. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Due to the continued decline in open canopy dry forest habitat and large diameter ponderosa pine, implementation of alternative 1 is expected to result in a long-term irretrievable reduction in habitat for the flammulated owl. Alternative 1 Determination While there are no direct effects and existing habitat would remain largely unchanged, fire suppression would continue to reduce suitable flammulated owl habitat over the long term. As a result implementation of alternative 1 may impact individuals, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing or cause a loss of viability. Action Alternatives A total of 1,456 acres of existing flammulated owl habitat currently exists within the project area. Table 102 displays treatments within suitable habitat proposed under the two action alternatives. Data displayed includes existing habitat treated, as well as the amount of currently unsuitable dry forest habitat where preferred habitat conditions are restored or created. Table 102. Alternative Treatment of Flammulated Owl Habitat Treatment Alt 2 Alt 3 Acres % Acres %1 Existing Habitat Intermediate Harvest 162 111 13 11 Regeneration Harvest 15 11 14 11 Low Severity Fire 37 31 180 121 Mixed Severity Fire 445 311 228 161 Unsuitable Dry Forest Habitat (Habitat Created) Intermediate Harvest 1,874 142 998 72 Low Severity Fire 324 22 825 62 Mixed Severity Fire 1,982 152 964 72 Total 4,180 312 2,787 212 1-percent of suitable habitat 2-percent of project area Dry forest habitat Direct and Indirect Effects While proposed treatments have the potential to result in direct mortality, as well as short-term disturbance, because this species has not been documented within the project area, the likelihood of mortality is low. Flammulated owls appear tolerant of some human disturbances, as this species has been known to nest in campgrounds and other areas of human activity with no apparent adverse effects (Hayward and Verner 1994). Consequently there is no direct mortality anticipated and disturbance related effects are expected to be short term (less than1 year) during treatment. Regeneration treatments within existing habitat would reduce flammulated owl habitat on the acres treated because mature forest would be lost, although within a few years regeneration would provide roosting habitat. Owl foraging habitat would be reduced on early seral openings created during mixed-severity fire treatments, whereas open-canopy foraging habitat would be improved on much of the acreage affected by proposed mixed-severity burning. As a result, and when viewed across the landscape, the mix of treatments would be expected to improve flammulated owl nesting, roosting and foraging habitat. While proposed thinning would improve habitat for some predators such as the great-horned owl, preferred habitat for other predators such as the northern goshawk would be reduced (Hayward and Verner 1994). Treatments would create protective roosting cover in close proximity to nesting and foraging habitat and risks from predation are expected to remain unchanged. Proposed intermediate harvest and prescribed fire are designed to create the open-stand structure characteristic of flammulated owl habitat (Hayward and Verner 1994). The action alternatives would retain large diameter snags in treated areas and improve the quality of existing flammulated owl habitat, as well as create suitable habitat within dry forest stands that are currently considered unsuitable. Alternative 2 Indirect Effects Existing flammulated owl habitat would be reduced by approximately 1 percent because regeneration harvest would create early seral conditions within suitable habitat. Proposed intermediate harvest and low to and mixed-severity burning would improve the open-canopy conditions preferred for foraging on 45 percent of the existing habitat. Intermediate harvest and burning treatments within dry forest stands that are not currently considered suitable would create or restore flammulated owl habitat on almost 4,200 acres, or 31 percent of the dry forest habitat within the project area. Alternative 3 Indirect Effects Like alternative 2, existing flammulated owl habitat would be reduced by approximately 1 percent due to proposed regeneration harvest, whereas the quality of open-canopy foraging habitat would be improved on 29 percent of existing habitat (sites receiving intermediate harvest and prescribed burning). Proposed burning and intermediate harvest would restore or create new flammulated owl habitat on almost 2,800 acres or 21 percent of the dry forest habitat within the project area. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, flammulated owl habitat would be affected by the following activities proposed under the action alternatives. The acres displayed would be the maximum treatment proposed (alternative 2). · Partial Harvest – 162 acres · Regeneration Harvest – 151 acres · Prescribed Burning – 482 acres While a live overstory would be reduced on up to 151 acres due to regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed severity burning and wildfire, habitat would be improved on lands affected by partial harvest and most of the prescribed burning. Also all sites treated would retain large diameter snags. As a result and due to the small amount of habitat affected (5 percent of available habitat) and considering proposed treatments would create open understory conditions preferred by this species on over 4,000 acres that are currently not considered suitable, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments There are no irretrievable commitments anticipated. While there may be some reduction in nest habitat through cutting of hazard large-diameter snags and a small reduction in foraging habitat, proposed treatments would promote restoration of dry forest community that is required by the flammulated owl. Action Alternative Determination While both action alternatives would reduce suitable owl habitat and result in possible short-term disturbance, long-term habitat conditions would be improved. Based on the above analysis, and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the flammulated owl. · With implementation of PDFs that retain large diameter snags during treatment, the likelihood of direct mortality is greatly reduced. · While there would be a small reduction of suitable habitat, both alternatives would improve existing habitat as well as create new habitat on over 20 percent of the ponderosa pine/dry Douglas-fir biophysical setting. · The level of timber harvest in the Northern Region is in-significant in relation to this species’ habitat needs, and suitable habitat is well distributed across the Region (Samson 2006b). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Suitable owl habitat would be maintained in the short term under alternative 1. While the action alternatives would reduce suitable habitat, the likelihood of mortality or disturbance is low. Also, the action alternatives would meet or exceed Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) and regional snag guidelines (USDA Forest Service 2000a, 2008b) and ensure that large-diameter snags and nest trees are available in the future. Treatments would also increase available habitat over the long term and reduce the risk of catastrophic fire and a possible long-term loss of habitat. As a result, all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (p. II/20-21), and regional guidelines related to snags, direction to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4) and to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17). Also all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. 4.6.10 Western Boreal Toad Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there are no direct effects anticipated for the western boreal toad. With continued fire suppression and high levels of fuel loading, the likelihood that suitable upland and riparian habitat would be reduced through severe wildfire would increase under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Anticipated cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. As described under methodology, cumulative effects are evaluated across the project area and anticipated activities are the same as those described under the Townsend’s big eared bat. All activities have potential for disturbance during treatment and activities that would be more likely to affect this species or its habitat include; stream rehabilitation on 15 acres, NNIS treatment on 312 acres, recent wildfire on 10 acres, firewood collection along open roads and cattle grazing on 5,977 acres. A biological evaluation has (in the case of hazard tree removal) or would be completed to assess any future in-stream work or NNIS treatment; thereby, potential impacts to this species would be reduced through that process. Because of potential impacts to riparian vegetation and breeding habitat, grazing has the potential to directly affect this species or its habitat. However, range monitoring is in place to identify and mitigate riparian concerns so that long-term effects from grazing on riparian habitat are not anticipated. As a result and considering the likelihood that a toad would be affected by activities during dispersal is low, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Alternative 1 Determination There are no treatments proposed and considering it is not possible to predict when wildfire would occur, implementation of alternative 1 would have no impact on the western boreal toad. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct Effects Direct effects include possible mortality because this species can be found in riparian areas as well as uplands. While mortality from burning, harvest and mechanical treatments could occur to individuals dispersing or foraging on upland sites, potential mortality to breeding individuals and reproduction would be reduced through implementation of PDFs and INFISH buffers both of which reduce harvest and burning effects within riparian areas. Some direct mortality to individuals is possible; however, based on the information provided under the treatment effect section, the likelihood of mortality is low. Indirect Effects Potential indirect effects to breeding habitat are greatly reduced with implementation of PDFs and streamside management zones that protect these areas and also reduced the level of burning would occur in these areas. While overstory and understory conditions on over 8,000 acres of upland habitat would be affected, suitable mid- to late-seral forested habitat would be maintained on most of this acreage and would be interspersed with unaffected habitat (over 60 percent of the project area). Boreal toads appear to be attracted to recently disturbed areas and may benefit from fuel reduction treatments (USDA Forest Service 2006b). For example, toads colonized and bred in dozens of shallow ponds in burned lodgepole pine forests in Glacier National Park but not in adjacent unburned areas. Similarly, diet samples from boreal toads in burned subalpine fir and lodgepole pine forests contained higher numbers of prey items than samples from unburned forests (USDA Forest Service 2006b). While approximately 33 percent (alternative 2) to 25 percent (alternative 3) of the project area habitat would be affected, potential effects are expected to be short term. Proposed treatment under both alternatives is likely to result in both short-term benefits in terms of increased foraging, as well as long-term benefits associated with improved structural and species diversity and a reduction in wildfire risk. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects discussed under alternative 1, up to 8,562 acres of project area habitat would be affected under alternative 2. However with implementation of INFISH buffers, suitable breeding habitat would be maintained. As a result, and considering that proposed fuel treatment activities are likely to improve boreal toad habitat in upland areas (USDA Forest Service 2006b), and that most of the project area would be unaffected and that landscape connectivity would be maintained, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated under either action alternative. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments Although there would be short-term structural changes to upland foraging and dispersal habitat, breeding habitat would remain largely unchanged and there are no irretrievable or irreversible commitments anticipated for the boreal toad. Alternative 2 and 3 Determination Implementation would likely result in some localized mortality and short-term effects to habitat. Western boreal toad habitat would be maintained or improved over the long term. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 may impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute towards a trend in federal listing for the western boreal toad. · Potential impacts to breeding habitat would be greatly reduced through implementation of PDFs, INFISH buffers and reduced burning intensity within riparian areas and potential breeding habitat. · Anticipated effects are expected to be short term, and habitat would be maintained or improved on over 85 percent of the sites proposed for treatment (i.e. intermediate harvest and burning treatments). · Over 60 percent of the project area would be unaffected. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Western boreal toad habitat would be largely unchanged under alternative 1. While the action alternatives may result in short-term structural changes to upland foraging and dispersal habitat, the likelihood of mortality is low; breeding habitat would not be maintained, and treatments are expected to improve upland foraging habitat. As a result, all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4), to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17) and to manage riparian areas to be compatible with dependent wildlife species (II-35). Also all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Management Indicator Species 4.6.11 Northern Goshawk Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there would be no direct impacts to the northern goshawk. Designated old-growth habitat would remain largely unchanged including; structural conditions such as large-diameter trees and increased levels of snags and DWD would continue to occur both in the short and long term. Mountain pine beetle mortality has and would continue to affect canopy gaps and understory development. Continued fire suppression may affect species composition from what occurred historically due to a decline in ponderosa pine and western larch. This change in species composition may occur during stand development in designated old growth as well as affect the composition of potential old- growth stands across the project area. Over the long term (greater than 20 years) stands would continue to mature, late-successional habitat would develop and stand density and goshawk nest habitat would likely increase. While the quality of goshawk foraging habitat may decrease somewhat due to the more closed stand conditions, because they utilize a wide range of habitat conditions for foraging (Squires and Ruggiero 1996) suitable goshawk habitat would continue to be widely available under this alternative. The current trends in species composition would continue, with a decrease in ponderosa pine, early seral and fire-tolerant species and a continued increase in climax and fire-intolerant species. Insect and disease-related mortality may increase. Fuel loading and stand structure (i.e. ladder fuels) would not be modified. The risk of wildfire and a possible long-term reduction in goshawk nest habitat is greatest under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Anticipated cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Work such as trail maintenance and reconstruction, stream restoration, NNIS treatment and campground work would result in small localized changes to habitat or occur in areas less likely to be used (e.g., along open roads and areas of concentrated human use). As a result any effects would be short term. Activities under alternative 1 that could result in possible long-term cumulative effects to nesting or foraging habitat include firewood cutting, hazard tree removal, wildfire and prescribed burning. The following is a summary of these effects on goshawk. Prescribed Burning Effects for prescribed burning would be similar to those described under low intensity burning in section 4.3 and consist primarily of changes to understory vegetation, although some individual tree mortality may occur. Nesting habitat affected would be maintained and although there would be a short-term reduction in understory prey diversity, over the long-term understory structure and prey diversity would increase. A total of 46 and 11 acres of nesting and foraging habitat respectively would be affected. Hazard Tree Removal Approximately 167 acres of goshawk nest habitat and 21 acres of goshawk foraging habitat would be affected by hazard tree removal. Effects include short-term displacement during treatment and a long-term reduction in nest habitat. Understory vegetation would increase and prey availability would be maintained. Recent Wildfire (since 2011) These wildfires have affected 153 and 116 acres of nesting and foraging habitat respectively. Effects vary depending on the intensity of burning. In areas with low to moderate intensity burning (40 percent of the area burned), understory diversity would be reduced in the short term and increase over the long term. More intensively burned areas (60 percent of the area burned) would result in overstory mortality and a reduction in nesting and foraging habitat. While suitable habitat would be reduced on some acres, because the fires burned in a mosaic and considering understory diversity would increase, the area affected would continue to provide foraging and PFA habitat both in the short and long term. Effects of past wildfire were included in the modeled habitat for this species. Personal use Firewood Cutting Firewood collection would reduce snags and downed woody debris along open roads. Goshawk nesting and foraging habitat would be largely unchanged because of the widespread availability of downed wood. Conclusion Human access and use of the area would be largely unchanged under this alternative, and there are no long-term disturbance related effects anticipated. While ongoing and future activities would reduce goshawk nesting and foraging habitat on approximately 350 acres, nesting and foraging habitat would continue to be available across the landscape. Also existing nests and PFA habitat would be maintained and adequate nest habitat would continue to be available to support goshawk. As a result there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments While there may be changes to vegetation structure and composition, there are no irretrievable or irreversible commitments to the northern goshawk anticipated. Alternative 1 Determination and Conclusions Although mountain pine beetle mortality would continue to reduce nest habitat, suitable goshawk habitat would be largely maintained under this alternative. While alternative 1 would not result in direct impacts to the northern goshawk, it may result in an increased risk of catastrophic wildfire and a possible long-term loss of nest habitat for this species. There is no way to accurately predict when such an event would occur. As a result, implementation of alternative 1 is not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. Action Alternatives Since no designated old growth would be treated, there would be no effects to existing designated old growth habitat. However, because fire would be restored on the landscape, species composition of future old growth would be more diverse (i.e., contain ponderosa pine and western larch) and better mimic historic old- growth conditions on lower elevation sites that had more frequent fire intervals. Treatments within existing goshawk habitat are displayed in table 103 and effects of individual treatments on stand structure, species composition and fire risk are discussed in section 4.3. The following is a discussion of direct and indirect effects of proposed actions on goshawk habitat. Table 103. Goshawk habitat proposed for treatment Treatment Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Nest Habitat Foraging Habitat Nest Habitat Foraging Habitat Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent Intermediate Harvest 910 14 346 8 331 5 93 2 Regeneration Harvest 142 2 82 2 132 2 79 2 Low Severity/Jackpot Fire 143 2 156 4 651 15 532 12 Mixed Severity Fire 1,207 19 1,033 23 571 9 361 8 Total 2,402 38 1,617 36 1,685 27 1,065 24 Construction of roads that would be used and then obliterated after timber removal 1.4 mi. 1.0 mi. 0.1 mi 0.1 mi. Regeneration Harvest – Sites proposed for treatment would no longer provide goshawk nesting and foraging habitat and alternative 2 would reduce nesting and foraging habitat by 142 acres and 132 acres respectively. Under alternative 3, nest habitat would be reduced by 132 acres and foraging habitat would be reduced by 79 acres. While there would be a stand level reduction in habitat, because an early successional and young forest component would be maintained within affected watersheds, landscape diversity characteristic of documented use by goshawk (Reynolds et al 1992, Clough 2000) would continue. Intermediate Harvest Treatments – Stands proposed for harvest would retain adequate canopy closure and would continue to provide key structural components important to goshawk nesting (e.g. large diameter trees and snags). As a result stands proposed for intermediate treatment would continue to provide nest habitat both in the short and long-term. Suitable foraging habitat requires a minimum of 40 percent canopy closure. While greater than 40 percent canopy closure would be maintained on most of the foraging habitat, both alternatives would reduce suitable goshawk foraging habitat by 90 acres, or 2 percent of the foraging habitat available. While suitable canopy cover would be maintained on all of the nest habitat and 98 percent of the foraging habitat treated, in the short term all intermediate harvest treatments would result in more open understory conditions due to a reduction in small or co-dominant trees. While the reduced canopy and open understory conditions that result from treatment would improve maneuverability for goshawks on these sites, prey availability would likely change. For example, the abundance of some small mammals such as red squirrels and snowshoe hare have been shown to decline following partial harvest and there would be a short-term reduction for these prey species on sites treated (USDA Forest Service 2009b). However, some goshawk prey species have been shown to increase in abundance following partial harvest (USDA Forest Service 2009b). Also implementation of PDFs that retain snags and DWD ensures suitable habitat for goshawk prey would continue to be provided on treated sites. While canopy closure would be reduced below 40 percent on some sites, research suggests that despite preferences for high canopy closure, basal area, and open understories in which to hunt, goshawks tolerate a broad range of forest structures (Boal et al. 2002 in Kennedy 2003), suggesting that the diversity of conditions provided by treatment would continue to provide suitable foraging habitat on much of the acreage treated. Over the long term, stand diameter would increase due to the reduction in inter-tree completion and increased height and growth of remaining trees. Similarly, due to the increased crown diameter, canopy closure would continue to increase. Some layering would also develop over time as conifer seedlings, shrubs and hardwood sprouts become established in the canopy openings. Collectively, over the long-term (greater than 10 years) the increased canopy closure, increase in stand diameter, and improved understory and overstory diversity would result in improved northern goshawk nesting and foraging habitat. Finally, the combination of reducing tree densities by thinning from below before prescribed fire is applied, would reduce forest fuels, while simultaneously creating stand conditions that are favorable for goshawk nesting and foraging (Reynolds et al. 1992; Squires and Kennedy 2006). Prescribed Burning – Effects on stand structure of both low intensity and mixed severity fire are described under treatment effects in section 4.3.2. Because low-severity fire would result in open understory conditions, like partial harvest activities, there would be a shift in prey species abundance and diversity following fire. Generally, small mammal habitat specialists such as red-backed vole, flying squirrels and shrews decrease, whereas increases occur in habitat generalists such as mice and chipmunks (Zwolak and Foresman 2007). A mature overstory would be maintained, as well as snags, large diameter wood and a mosaic of understory conditions. Consequently all sites would continue to provide suitable nesting and foraging habitat. There would be a reduction in nest and foraging habitat on a portion of the mixed severity sites treated where more intense burning creates canopy openings. Under alternative 2 openings created by mixed severity burning would reduce nesting and foraging habitat by 302 and 258 acres respectively, whereas alternative 3 would reduce nesting and foraging habitat by 143 and 90 acres respectively. These canopy openings would be widely dispersed with areas affected by low-severity burning, and unburned areas resulting in a mosaic of age classes and structural diversity characteristic of landscape-level goshawk habitat. As a result 75 percent of the total acres affected by mixed severity burning would continue to provide suitable nest habitat, as well as abundant prey diversity and suitable foraging habitat. Finally, because many western conifer forests were historically affected by frequent, low- to mixed-severity burning and native species are adapted to historical fire regimes and resulting habitats (Saab and Powell 2005), goshawk use would continue over the long term. Landscape Considerations Landscape conditions in terms of age and size-class diversity are displayed by alternative in table 104. Anticipated changes occur largely due to the amount of regeneration harvest proposed under each alternative. Both action alternatives would result in a 3 percent increase in seeding forest, a 2 percent decrease in young forest, and a 1 percent decrease in mature and closed canopy mature forest. While the amount of seedling habitat and closed canopy mature forest would continue to be outside recommended amounts (Clough 2000; Reynolds et al. 2006) under all alternatives (including no action), diversity would be largely unchanged and all alternatives would result in landscape conditions consistent with goshawk use within the project area. Table 104. Project area foraging diversity by alternative Size Class/Habitat Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 21 Alternative 31 Reynolds (et al 1992) Clough (2000) Acres % Acres % Acres % % % Seedling 0-4.9 inches d.b.h. 3,960 16 4,597 19 4,476 19 10 (0-5 inches d.b.h.) 9 Young Forest 5.9-9 inches d.b.h. 10,610 44 10,048 42 10,141 42 20 (5-12 inches d.b.h.) 66 Mature Forest >10 inches d.b.h. 8,433 35 8,241 34 8,270 34 60 (>12 inches d.b.h.) 11 Mature Forest >50% CC and >5 inches d.b.h. 4,338 18 4,173 17 4,174 17 60 (>12 inches d.b.h.) 69 Grass/Forb/Shrub 911 4 911 4 911 4 10 7 1Does not include openings created by mixed severity fire because they would be variable in size, distribution and canopy changes. The mixture of treatments proposed under the action alternatives would provide habitat for many goshawk prey species by creating a mosaic of interspersed vegetative structural stages in large landscape units. Over time as the various structural stages mature, a constant redistribution of habitats for goshawk and their prey may occur, which would help provide a long-term, sustainable mix of forest age classes and help ensure that goshawk habitat is maintained (Reynolds et al. 1992). Additionally, the mix of treatments proposed is anticipated to reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire and a possible long-term reduction in northern goshawk nest habitat. Post-fledgling Habitat Post-fledgling habitat is analyzed for the Stonewall east and Stonewall west post-fledging areas (PFA) according to the guidelines identified in the Northern Goshawk Northern Region Overview: Key findings and project Considerations (USDA Forest Service 2009c). Table 105 displays treatments proposed under each of the action alternatives in the Stonewall East and Stonewall West PFA, whereas table 106 and table 107 display habitat conditions within the respective PFAs. For comparison, habitat conditions for alternative 1 are displayed also. Table 105. Active nest PFA habitat treated Size Class/Habitat Condition Stonewall East Stonewall West Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres % Acres % Acres % Acres % Prescribed Fire 126 30 126 30 0 0 0 0 Intermediate Harvest 0 0 0 0 8 2 8 2 Regeneration Harvest 12 3 12 3 20 5 20 5  Table 106. Stonewall east PFA conditions by alternative Size Class/Habitat Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 21 Alternative 31 Reynolds (et al. 1992) Clough (2000) Ac % Ac % Ac % % % Seedling 0-4.9 inches d.b.h. 78 19 106 25 106 25 10 (0-5 inches d.b.h.) 9 Young Forest 5.9-9 inches d.b.h. 223 53 202 49 202 49 20 (5-12 inches d.b.h.) 66 Mature Forest >10 inches d.b.h. 118 28 111 26 111 26 60 (>12 inches d.b.h.) 11 Mature Forest >50% CC and >5 inches d.b.h. 99 24 80 19 80 19 60 (>12 inches d.b.h.) 69 Grass/Forb/Shrub 1 0 0 0 0 0 10 7 Table 107. Stonewall west PFA conditions by alternative Size Class/Habitat Condition Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Reynolds (et al 1992) Clough (2000) Ac % Ac % Ac % % % Seedling 0-4.9 inches d.b.h. 52 12 66 16 66 16 10 (0-5 inches d.b.h.) 9 Young Forest 5.9-9 inches d.b.h. 156 37 201 48 201 48 20 (5-12 inches d.b.h.) 66 Mature Forest >10 inches d.b.h. 212 51 153 36 153 36 60 (>12 inches d.b.h.) 11 Mature Forest >50% CC and >5 inches d.b.h. 132 31 130 31 130 31 60 (>12 inches d.b.h.) 69 Grass/Forb/Shrub 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 7 Currently, neither of the existing PFAs meet the recommended amount of habitat within any category and the relatively small amount of closed canopy forest within both PFA’s is due to recent MPB mortality. Effects under the action alternatives include reduction in mature and young forest due to proposed regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed severity burning. There would also be a five percent reduction in closed canopy forest in the Stonewall East PFA. While the action alternatives would reduce young and mature forest by 28 acres and 14 acres in the Stonewall East and West PFAs respectively, treatments would accelerate tree growth and increase understory diversity and composition. Also both alternatives would reduce risks associated with future wildfire and insect and disease related mortality. Consequently, over the long-term the action alternatives would result in a diverse mix of forest age classes and structure that would provide both cover and prey for immature and adult birds. Direct Effects Direct effects include possible mortality or a loss of reproduction associated with proposed harvest, burning or project road construction. Under alternative 2 a total of 1.4 miles and 1.0 miles of roads to be constructed then obliterated following implementation would traverse goshawk nesting and foraging habitat respectively, whereas less than 0.1 miles would be affected under alternative 3. However all road construction is over 1 mile from an active nest and it is unlikely a bird would be affected. As a result, and considering roads would be closed to public access during implementation, and permanently closed when treatments are completed, potential direct impacts from project road construction would be limited to short-term avoidance (5 years) of foraging birds. Samson (2006a) summarized recent research related to effects of vegetation treatments on goshawk, which indicates the following: (1) the majority of goshawk pairs move from nest stands when the stand structure is modified by more than 30 percent; (2) human disturbance is not a factor if 70 percent of the nest stand structure is maintained and timber management operations are restricted during the nesting period (April 15th to August 15th) at the nest site and within the PFA; (3) treatments have no effect on goshawk breeding occupancy, nest success, or productivity 1 to 2 years after treatment; and (4) there is no difference in productivity of northern goshawks in logged versus unlogged areas. The result of this research was considered while designing the project and the project design features (PDFs) (see section 4.2), including a minimum 40-acre no-activity buffer around active nests, a seasonal restriction on all ground activities within the PFA of active nests, and establishment of buffers and seasonal restrictions should a new nest be identified. Considering these PDFs, and based on information provided in Samson (2006b), potential impacts to nesting birds and fledglings would be greatly reduced. As a result there would be no direct mortality to breeding birds or a loss of reproduction anticipated under either action alternative. While mortality to nesting birds is not expected to occur, activities would result in avoidance of the areas treated by foraging birds. Disturbance-related effects would be short term considering burning would be completed within 2 weeks, and harvest treatments within any affected drainage would likely be completed in a single season. The extent to which species co-exist with goshawks and likelihood of competition with other raptors depend on the openness of the habitat (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1998). Natural and man-made changes that result in reduced forest canopy may favor the habitat needs of more open-forested competitors, such as red-tailed hawks, thereby decreasing the amount of habitat available to goshawks (ibid). However the nest site selected by these two species varies, with goshawk selecting continuous mature forest with open understories, whereas red-tail nesting territories are often comprised of large open patches with dense understories and scattered trees (La Sorte et al. 2004 in USDA Forest Service 2009c). Whether some threshold level of fragmentation exists, beyond which red-tailed hawks completely replace goshawks is unknown and to date no scientific studies have conclusively documented such a replacement. Reynolds et al. (1992) recommend vegetation management treatments that maintain habitat at a home range scale to sustain goshawks across landscapes. While proposed regeneration harvest would reduce mature forest on approximately 4 percent of the project area, treatment would occur in stands that have already experienced concentrated MPB mortality. Consequently the mature forest conditions that characterize the project area would be maintained under both alternatives and the likelihood that management actions would create conditions that would promote use of the area by red-tailed hawks or other competitors and increase the competition with goshawks is low. Alternative 2 Indirect Effects Nest and Foraging Habitat - Under alternative 2, 66 percent of existing nest habitat and 63 percent of existing foraging habitat would not be treated, and effects would be the same as those described under alternative 1. Proposed regeneration harvest and some intermediate harvest treatments that reduce canopy closure below 40 percent, would reduce existing goshawk nesting habitat by 438 acres and foraging habitat by 172 acres. Of this, patches of nest habitat that are greater than 40 acres would be reduced on up to 312 acres (depending on the residual overstory in intermediate treatments). Effects on remaining habitat would be the same as described under effects common to both alternatives. Alternative 3 Indirect Effects Nest and Foraging Habitat – Under alternative 3, 75 percent of the existing nest habitat and 80 percent of existing foraging habitat would not be treated, and effects would be the same as those described under alternative 1. Due to proposed regeneration harvest and intermediate harvest treatments, this alternative would reduce existing goshawk nesting habitat by 413 acres and foraging habitat by 171 acres. Of this, patches of nest habitat that are greater than 40 acres would be reduced on up to 274 acres. Effects on remaining habitat would be the same as described under effects common to both alternatives. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects Effects of past, ongoing and future activities would be similar to those described under alternative 1. While most activities would result in short-term effects with little change in goshawk habitat, anticipated activities would reduce goshawk nesting and foraging habitat on 259 and 91 acres respectively due to hazard tree removal and wildfire. In addition to these effects, future activities would affect another 2,402 acres of nest habitat and 1,617 acres of foraging habitat, including a 438 acre reduction in nest habitat and a 172 acres reduction in foraging habitat. Cumulatively during the analysis period, up to 2,768 acres (15 Percent) of the nest habitat and 1,765 acres (18 Percent) of foraging habitat would be affected. However considering that suitable foraging and nest habitat would be maintained on 85 percent of the acres treated, that over 80 percent of the existing nesting and foraging habitat would be unaffected, and that adequate habitat would continue to exist to support four nesting pairs of goshawk, there are no significant cumulative effects to the northern goshawk anticipated under either of the action alternatives. Irretrievable and Irreversible Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a reduction in nest habitat, and altered structure and quality of foraging habitat (described above), although habitat conditions would be restored on all sites treated. Alternative 2 and 3 Determination Implementation of the action alternatives would reduce existing nesting and foraging habitat and may result in possible disturbance to northern goshawk. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, particularly the continued availability of suitable nest and foraging habitat, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 is not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status. · Implementation of PDFs that protect existing nests and minimize disturbance to post-fledgling habitat, greatly reduce the potential for mortality and impacts to nest production. · While up to 438 acres of nest habitat would be reduced, including up to 312 acres in patches of 40 acres or more, approximately 80 percent of the project area nest habitat in patches of greater than 40 acres would be unaffected. Also, habitat would continue to be well distributed and occur within all drainages where it currently exists. As a result adequate habitat exists to continue to support up to four nesting pairs of goshawks. · Implementation of treatments may reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire and a possible long-term loss of goshawk habitat. A Regionwide assessment (Samson 2006b, USDA Forest Service 2009c) of goshawk habitat has indicated the following: · Goshawk habitat in Region 1 (R1) is abundant and well distributed where it occurs naturally; more forest and therefore nesting habitat exists on today’s landscape than occurred historically. · There have been substantial increases in connectivity for forested habitat since Euro-American settlement. · The level of timber harvest of the forested landscape in R1 is insignificant in regard to altering goshawk habitat at the population scale. · Not a single known nest in R1 is isolated from other known nests by more than the goshawk’s estimated dispersal distance. · A comparison of habitat estimates for maintaining viable populations indicates that given the natural distribution of habitat, each Forest in R1 has an excess of available goshawk habitat. · Below (and not above) a threshold of 20 to 30 percent of historical habitat amounts, the effects of fragmentation (i.e. patch size and isolation) are suggested to have a negative impact on species persistence. No indication exists that forested ecosystems in Region 1 have reached the 20 to 30 percent threshold. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Goshawk habitat would be largely unchanged under alternative 1. While the action alternatives would reduce suitable habitat, there are no impacts to nesting birds or reproduction anticipated. Over 80 percent of the existing nesting and foraging habitat would be maintained, post-fledgling habitat associated with existing nests would be maintained, long-term human access would not be increased, designated old growth would not be treated, and treatments would reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire and a possible long-term reduction in nest habitat. As a result, all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4), to develop and implement a road management program with road use and travel restrictions that are responsive to resource protection needs (p. II/2), to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17) and to manage 5 percent of each 3rd order drainage for old growth (p. II/20). Also all alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12 and Forest Plan standards related to snags and downed woody debris. Pileated Woodpecker Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there would be no direct effects to the pileated woodpecker. Effects on old-growth structure and composition would be the same as described under northern goshawk. Although not an old growth obligate (Samson 2006a), because old growth stands are characterized by a greater density of large-diameter trees and downed woody debris, the pileated woodpecker has the potential to occur in greatest density (smaller home range) within old growth. As a result, it is likely that greater densities of woodpeckers would occur on the 2-3 percent of the project area that is currently considered old growth. As described under the affected environment, due to decades of overstocking and widespread MPB mortality, snags and coarse woody debris have increased in the last 10 years (table 75). Also mortality to large diameter ponderosa pine snags has been high and the availability of snags and DWD would continue to increase for the next 10 to 20 years as trees die and fall to the ground. Due to the mortality of existing large diameter ponderosa pine trees, the availability of future large diameter ponderosa pine trees (and snags) would be reduced over the long-term. Additionally due to decades of fire suppression, project area stands have become overstocked with small diameter trees. This would be expected to further reduce the availability of large diameter trees over the long-term. Also continued MPB mortality would further reduce canopy cover in stands with concentrated mortality. So while pileated woodpecker habitat would be maintained under this alternative for the next 10 to 20 years, over the long term habitat would be reduced. In the absence of fire, late-successional forest conditions, including elevated levels of small- diameter snags and DWD would continue to develop across the project area, and pileated woodpecker habitat would increase both in the short and long term. However, because of continued fire suppression and increases in fuel loading, the risk of large-scale wildfire and therefore a long-term reduction in suitable pileated woodpecker habitat is highest under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects to the pileated woodpecker are evaluated across the combined boundary, as this area is large enough to evaluate landscape level effects and includes lands recently affected by wildfire. Past, ongoing and future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Of the anticipated activities, trail construction (58 acres of suitable habitat affected), stream restoration work (8 acres of affected habitat) and campground use (2 acres of habitat) would result in small localized changes in habitat and short-term disturbance during treatment. However because of the small changes the overstory and future snag recruitment, overall nesting and foraging habitat would be maintained. Ongoing and future activities that could affect the availability of suitable habitat include prescribed burning, hazard tree removal, wildfire, off-forest harvest and firewood collection. The following is a summary of effects to the pileated woodpecker. Prescribed burns Prescribed burning would occur on 103 acres. Effects would consist primarily of changes to understory vegetation, although some individual tree mortality may occur. There would be localized reductions in canopy cover and an increase in primarily small diameter snags. While stands would continue to provide suitable habitat, because treatment would reduce downed wood and substrate for ants, on which pileated woodpeckers primarily forage, the quality of foraging habitat would be reduced on the acreage burned (Bull et al. 2005). Considering that all burned lands are interspersed with un-burned lands, unaffected foraging habitat would continue to be available in all treatment units. Hazard tree removal Approximately 250 acres of pileated woodpecker habitat would be affected by hazard tree removal. Effects include a long-term reduction in large diameter snags and DWD on the acreage treated. Because forest-plan levels of snags are being retained, impacts to this species would be reduced. Recent wildfire These wildfires have affected 219 acres of suitable pileated woodpecker habitat. Effects vary depending on the intensity of burning. In areas with low to moderate intensity burning (approximately 40 percent of the acres burned), understory diversity would be reduced in the short term and increase over the long term. More intensively burned areas (60 percent of the acres burned) would result in overstory mortality and a reduction in nesting and foraging habitat on approximately 130 acres. Areas that burned with moderate intensity would result in pockets of reduced canopy cover, as well as an increase in snags (including large diameter), although suitable habitat would be maintained on 89 acres. Effects of past wildfire are included in the modeled habitat for this species. Off-forest timber harvest Off-forest timber harvest would occur on 75 acres of existing habitat. While the type of harvest may vary, it is assumed that pileated woodpecker habitat would be reduced on this acreage. Personal use firewood cutting Firewood collection would reduce snags and downed woody debris along roads, reducing snag availability for this species. Conclusions Cumulatively a total of approximately 715 acres of pileated woodpecker habitat would be affected, including a reduction in habitat on 455 acres. Also there would be a reduction in downed wood along open road corridors. However snag recruitment would increase due to future MPB mortality. As a result and considering that over 95 percent of the available habitat would be unaffected, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. While habitat would continue to be widespread, the long-term reduction in large-diameter ponderosa pine snags that would occur under this alternative is considered an irretrievable commitment. Alternative 1 Determination Under alternative 1 suitable pileated woodpecker habitat would be maintained and snag availability would increase for the next 10 to 20 years. While the availability of future large diameter snags would be reduced in the future, implementation of alternative 1 is not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated woodpecker. Alternatives 2 and 3 There are no treatments proposed in Forest Plan designated old-growth habitat under the action alternatives and potential old growth would be maintained. As a result effects to old growth would be similar to those described under northern goshawk. Table 108 displays the treatments proposed under each alternative.  Table 108. Alternative treatments within pileated and hairy woodpecker habitat1 Treatments Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres Percent Acres Percent Intermediate Harvest 1,077 14 427 6 Regeneration Harvest 189 2 162 2 Low Severity Fire 182 2 611 8 Mixed Severity Fire 1,407 18 758 10 Jackpot Burn 0 0 124 2 Total 2,855 36 2,082 26 1-because there is only a 17 acres difference in pileated and hairy woodpecker habitat and this acreage is outside any treatment area, the affected habitat for these two species is discussed collectively. Direct and Indirect Effects Direct effects include disturbance during timber harvest and road construction that occurs during the breeding season. However, 84 percent of the suitable habitat would not receive harvest treatments, reducing the likelihood of disturbance. Additionally, this species is usually tolerant of human activity near the nest, and although some birds that are roosting or foraging on a site may move out of the area (Birds of North America 2011), unaffected suitable habitat is well dispersed adjacent to treatment units. Consequently any disturbance would be short term and habitat exists to accommodate any displaced birds. Effects of the individual treatments on species structure and composition are discussed under the treatment effects in section 4.3.2, and proposed harvest would remove snags and DWD on the acreage treated. Although the pileated woodpecker forages and nests in a variety of canopy conditions, the Northern Region habitat model assumes that suitable habitat must have a minimum of 10 percent forested cover (Samson 2006b). Both action alternatives would reduce existing pileated woodpecker habitat by 2 percent through proposed regeneration harvest. The pileated woodpecker is not normally associated with moderately to severely burned forests (Wightman and Saab 2008), therefore openings created by mixed-severity fire would no longer provide suitable pileated woodpecker habitat. However existing habitat within proposed mixed- severity burn units is variable and widely scattered and suitable nest habitat would be interspersed between openings. It is not possible to identify exactly how many acres of suitable habitat would occur in openings created by more intensive fire; therefore, for the purpose of this analysis it is assumed all created openings would occur within suitable pileated woodpecker habitat. Proposed intermediate harvest would reduce small diameter snags, DWD, and pileated woodpecker prey (carpenter ants) (Bull et al. 2005). Short-term effects would occur and the quality of foraging habitat would be reduced on acres treated. With implementation of PDFs a component of existing snags and snag replacements would be retained. Also, all snags greater than 20 inches d.b.h. would be retained unless they pose a safety hazard or operability concern, and snags would be distributed throughout all units. Because low severity burning would reduce downed wood and substrate for ants, on which pileated woodpeckers primarily forage, the quality of foraging habitat would be reduced on the acreage burned (Bull et al. 2005). However, considering that all burned lands are interspersed with un-burned lands, unaffected foraging habitat would continue to be available in all treatment units. Consequently, effects to foraging habitat would be reduced. Sites containing 12 to 30 tons of DWD are typically utilized by the pileated woodpecker (Bull and Holthausen 1993). Because DWD would be retained to meet wildlife, soil and fishery objectives, treated areas would continue to levels of DWD consistent with use. Also, some increase in tree mortality and snags would occur on sites proposed for burning. Consequently treated sites would continue to provide suitable nest and foraging habitat. In upland habitats in the Northern Rockies, pileated woodpeckers nest almost exclusively in large-diameter ponderosa pine and western larch snags (Hills et al. 2001; McClellan and McClellan 1999). Treatments proposed under the action alternatives promote the long-term sustainability of both species across the landscape while maintaining diversity of structural conditions including large-diameter snags, DWD and open grown ponderosa pine communities. Consequently over the long term suitable pileated woodpecker habitat is expected to be maintained or improved under the action alternatives. Finally, late-seral forest conditions are needed to produce large-diameter ponderosa pine snags. For snags to be durable (i.e., capable of standing for long periods following death) they need to be large, old, slow-growing, and exposed to repeated nonlethal fires that scarred substantial portions of the butt log. In considering these factors, USDA Forest Service (2000a) concluded that large snags suitable for pileated woodpecker nesting occurred at the highest sustainable numbers in old ponderosa pine forests that are relatively open as a result of repeated, nonlethal wildfires. Because proposed actions are designed to restore low-severity fire to the landscape, as well as reduce the likelihood of severe wildfire, and promote the development of open grown ponderosa pine habitat preferred by the pileated woodpecker, treatments proposed under both alternatives would help to ensure that pileated woodpecker habitat is sustained over the long term. Alternative 2 Sixty-four percent of the project area would not be treated; effects on untreated areas would be the same as alternative 1. Sites proposed for intermediate harvest or prescribed burn (2,666 acres) would have short-term effects including lower quality foraging habitat and reduced availability of nest sites. There may be a long-term reduction in nesting and foraging habitat, on up to approximately 350 acres, due to openings created by mixed-severity burning in suitable habitat and on 189 acres proposed for regeneration harvest. Approximately 5,700 acres that currently don’t provide suitable pileated woodpecker habitat are proposed for treatment. Activities are designed to restore open-grown ponderosa pine habitat and promote sustainability of large-diameter ponderosa pine and western larch. As a result it is expected that pileated woodpecker habitat would be improved over the long-term on this acreage. Alternative 3 Alternative 3 proposes less harvest and mixed severity fire treatments, so there are fewer short-term effects than those of alternative 2. As a result, 72 percent of the existing habitat within the project area would not be treated, and effects on untreated areas would be the same as those described under alternative 1. Short-term effects to nest and foraging habitat would occur on 1,920 acres or 25 percent of the existing habitat, whereas long-term reduction in suitable habitat due to the openings created by mixed-severity fire would be reduced to less than 200 acres. Like alternative 2, because treatments are designed to restore open, grown ponderosa pine habitat and promote sustainability of large diameter ponderosa pine and western larch, it is expected that pileated woodpecker habitat would be improved on approximately 4,500 acres of currently unsuitable habitat. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and future activities are discussed under alternative 1 and a total 715 acres of suitable habitat would be affected, including a reduction in suitable habitat on 455 acres. In addition to effects described under alternative 1, future activities would affect up to another 2,855 acres of pileated woodpecker habitat (alternative 2). Of this foraging and nest habitat would be maintained on 2,314 acres proposed for intermediate harvest and low severity burning, although there would be a short-term reduction in downed woody debris. Also nesting and foraging habitat would be reduced on 541 acres due to regeneration harvest and opening created by mixed severity fire. Cumulatively during the analysis period, up to 3,570 acres of the existing pileated woodpecker habitat would be affected by some activity. Of this, there would be some short-term effects (less than 10 years) to foraging and nest habitat on 2,574 acres affected by low-severity burning and wildfire, intermediate harvest and campground/trail work/stream restoration treatments. Also nesting and foraging habitat would be reduced on 996 acres due to regeneration harvest, openings created by mixed severity burning, hazard tree removal, high intensity wildfire and off-forest harvest. While pileated woodpecker nesting and foraging habitat would be affected on up to 3,570 acres, considering that existing foraging and nest habitat would only be reduced by 4 percent, that MPB mortality would continue to increase the availability of large diameter snags, and that over 85 percent of the existing habitat would be unaffected, there are no significant cumulative effects to the pileated woodpecker anticipated under either alternative. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a reduction in nest habitat and altered structure and quality of foraging habitat, although habitat conditions would be restored on all sites treated. Like alternative 1, future reduction in large ponderosa pine snags would occur on untreated lands. Alternative 2 and 3 Determination The action alternatives would affect up to 2,855 acres of existing pileated woodpecker habitat including up to a 7 percent reduction in habitat. Suitable habitat would continue to be available within all affected watersheds, and proposed treatments would maintain or improve pileated woodpecker habitat over the long term. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 or 3 are not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the pileated woodpecker. · While habitat would be reduced on up to 540 acres, 93 percent of the existing pileated woodpecker habitat would be maintained. Also because treatments would promote the development of large diameter trees, preferred habitat conditions would be created over the long-term · Both alternatives would maintain suitable pileated woodpecker habitat across the landscape, while providing for the long-term sustainability of preferred nesting and foraging habitat. · No designated old-growth habitat would be affected. · The risk of large stand-replacing wildfire would be reduced. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Suitable habitat would be maintained in the short term under alternative 1 and reduced under alternatives 2 and 3. The likelihood of mortality is low and reproduction is not expected to be affected. Suitable habitat would continue to be available across the landscape in the short term under all alternatives and improved under the action alternatives. No designated old growth would be affected, and the risk of stand-replacing wildfire would be reduced. As a result, all alternatives meet Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4), to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17) and to manage 5 percent of each 3rd order drainage for old growth (p. II/20). All alternatives are also consistent with Forest Plan (p. II/20 to II-21) and regional snag management guidelines (USDA Forest Service 2000a) and with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Hairy Woodpecker Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there would be no direct effects to the hairy woodpecker. Indirect effects would be similar to the pileated woodpecker and both large- and small-diameter snags as well as DWD would increase in the short term, whereas small-diameter snags would increase over the long term. As a result, suitable hairy woodpecker foraging and nesting habitat would continue to increase under this alternative. Due to continued fire suppression and increases in fuel loading, the risk of large scale wildfire is highest under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Anticipated cumulative effects are the same as those described under alternative 1 for the pileated woodpecker. As described, cumulatively during the analysis period a total of approximately 715 acres of hairy woodpecker habitat would be affected, including a reduction in habitat on 455 acres. Also there would be a reduction in downed wood along open road corridors. However snag recruitment would increase due to ongoing and future MPB mortality. As a result and considering that over 90 percent of the available habitat would be unaffected, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Action Alternatives Treatments proposed under each of the alternatives within suitable hairy woodpecker habitat are displayed in Table 108, under the pileated woodpecker analysis. Direct Effects Because both woodpecker species utilize snags and DWD, anticipated direct effects would be similar to those described for the pileated woodpecker. As a result, the likelihood of mortality is considered low and effects associated with disturbance would be short term. Indirect Effects Suitable habitat would be reduced under both action alternatives on the acreage proposed for harvest and prescribed burning because treatments due to removal of snags and DWD on the sites treated. The availability of suitable habitat varies by treatment; for example, Bunnell et al. (2002) found that partial harvest activities did not affect the abundance of primary cavity nesters in most cases, and in some cases the abundance increased due to small openings and creation of edges. In a study of dry forests in Washington, Lyon et al. (2008) found thinning and low-severity burning may enhance foraging habitat for bark gleaning species as a whole. Implementation of PDFs, for intermediate treatments and prescribed burning would be expected to retain the stand structure and prey availability consistent with suitable hairy woodpecker foraging habitat. Regeneration treatments and openings created by mixed-severity burning would reduce suitable hairy woodpecker habitat by approximately 7 percent. Covert (2003) looked at the effect of mixed-severity wildfire on hairy woodpecker foraging in ponderosa pine in northern Arizona. His results indicate that hairy woodpecker relative abundance was greatest in high-severity burns relative to moderate-severity burns and unburned areas, although this preference decreased as burns age. Hairy woodpeckers selected trees and patches with greater tree bole scorch when available. Further, a number of authors suggest that major declines in forest dwelling birds, especially woodpeckers, results from fire suppression (Hutto 1995; Hobson and Sheik 1999, Brawn et al. 2001 in Covert 2003). Covert (2003) also suggests that high-severity burns may be important for resident bark-foraging birds as they provide high concentrations of over-winter prey resources. While short-term effects may occur and pockets of treated areas may become unsuitable, over the long term, it is expected that restoration of historic levels of fire using both mixed- and low-intensity burning would result in the long-term improvement of hairy woodpecker habitat. Alternative 2 Sixty-four percent of the project area would not be treated, and effects on untreated areas would be the same as alternative 1. Short-term effects from intermediate harvest and prescribed burning include a reduction in snags and DWD on 2,668 acres. Regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed-severity burns may result in long-term reductions in nesting and foraging habitat on up to 540 acres. Treatments would improve structural diversity on treated sites, promote development of large-diameter snags and create a mosaic of habitat conditions preferred by the hairy woodpecker. Proposed actions would be expected to improve habitat on approximately 5,700 acres of currently unsuitable habitat, as well as improve landscape-level habitat for the hairy woodpecker. Alternative 3 Sixty-four percent of the project area would not be treated, and effects on untreated areas would be the same as alternative 1. Short-term effects from intermediate harvest and prescribed burning include a reduction in snags and DWD on 1,920 acres. Additionally, there may be a long-term reduction in nesting and foraging habitat on up to 380 acres from regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed-severity burns. Treatments would improve structural diversity on treated sites, promote development of large-diameter snags and create a mosaic of habitat conditions preferred by the hairy woodpecker. Proposed actions would be expected to improve habitat on approximately 4,500 acres of currently unsuitable habitat, as well as improve landscape-level habitat for the hairy woodpecker. Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and future activities are discussed under alternative 1 for the pileated woodpecker and cumulatively during the analysis period, up to 3,570 acres (alternative 2) of the existing hairy woodpecker habitat would be affected by some activity. Of this, there would be some short-term effects (less than 10 years) to foraging and nest habitat on 2,574 acres affected by low-severity burning and wildfire, intermediate harvest and campground/trail work/stream restoration treatments. Also nesting and foraging habitat would be reduced on 996 acres due to regeneration harvest, openings created by mixed severity burning, recent hazard tree removal, high intensity wildfire and off-forest harvest. While hairy woodpecker nesting and foraging habitat would be affected on up to 3,570 acres, considering that existing foraging and nest habitat would only be reduced by approximately 4 percent, that MPB mortality would continue to increase the availability of snags, and that over 85 percent of the existing habitat would be unaffected, there are no significant cumulative effects to the hairy woodpecker anticipated under either alternative. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a reduction in nesting habitat, and altered structure and quality of foraging habitat, although habitat conditions would be restored on all sites treated. Alternative 2 and 3 Determination The action alternatives would affect up to 2,855 acres of existing hairy woodpecker habitat including up to a 7 percent reduction in habitat. Suitable habitat would continue to be available within all affected watersheds, and proposed treatments would maintain or improve hairy woodpecker habitat over the long term. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 or 3 are not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the hairy woodpecker. · While habitat would be reduced on up to 540 acres, 93 percent of the existing habitat would be maintained. · Both alternatives would maintain suitable hairy woodpecker habitat across the landscape, while providing for the long-term sustainability of preferred nesting and foraging habitat. · The risk of large stand-replacing wildfire would be reduced. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Suitable habitat would be maintained in the short term under alternative 1 and reduced under alternatives 2 and 3. The likelihood of mortality is low and reproduction is not expected to be affected. Abundant suitable habitat would continue to be available, and under the action alternatives currently unsuitable habitat would be improved and the risk of stand-replacing wildfire would be reduced. As a result, all alternatives meet Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4), and to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17) . All alternatives are also consistent with Forest Plan (p. II/20 to II-21) and regional snag management guidelines (USDA Forest Service 2008b) and with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. American Marten Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no treatments proposed under this alternative, so there would be no direct effects to the American marten. Marten utilize closed-canopy forests with large amounts of snags and DWD and large- diameter trees, all of which have been modified by recent MPB infestation. While the project area may continue to develop late-successional forest conditions and have an abundance of DWD, canopy mortality has greatly reduced suitable marten habitat. Some stands may continue to contain predominantly closed forest conditions with large amounts of DWD and provide suitable marten habitat, whereas stands with more open-canopy conditions would continue to provide marginal or unsuitable habitat. Research indicates that marten abandon, or fail to colonize home range size landscapes with less than 60 percent mature forest (Powell et al. 2003). Due to MPB mortality more open stand conditions predominate across much of the project area, which does not provide landscape conditions preferred by marten. As a result, use of the project area is more likely to occur by foraging and dispersing individuals. Due to continued fire suppression and increased fuel loading, the risk of large scale wildfire and the associated long-term reduction in marten habitat is anticipated to be greatest under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and future cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. While all activities could result in short-term disturbance during treatment, grazing, and NNIS treatment would not affect marten habitat. Also, while stream restoration and trail work would affect 50 acres, suitable marten habitat would largely unchanged. Ongoing and future activities that could affect marten habitat that could result in long-term changes in habitat include: Prescribed fire A total of 62 acres of low-intensity prescribed fire would occur within suitable marten habitat. Effects would be similar to those described in section 4.3 for low-intensity burning and include a reduction of smaller diameter downed wood and some individual tree mortality. Overall effects to habitat would be short term (less than10 years) and suitable habitat would be maintained. Off-forest harvest A total of 69 acres of off-forest harvest would occur between the project area boundary and Highway 200. While the type of harvest is not known, it is assumed that treatment would reduce marten habitat over the long-term. Hazard tree removal While some snags would be retained, due to the reduction in snags and future downed wood, it is assumed that marten habitat would be reduced on 169 acres of suitable marten habitat affected by hazard tree removal treatment. Recent wildfire Since 2011, a total 183 acres of suitable marten habitat have been affected by wildfire. Effects vary depending on the intensity of burning. Intensively burned areas (60 percent of the acres burned) would result in mortality on much of the overstory, which would reduce marten habitat on approximately 110 acres. Areas that burned with low to moderate intensity would result in pockets of reduced canopy cover, as well as an increase in snags (including large diameter. Firewood collection Firewood collection would generally occur within 100 ft. of open roads and would result in a long-term reduction in large-diameter downed wood along these road corridors, although overstory conditions would be unchanged. Conclusions Collectively, approximately 500 acres of suitable marten habitat would be affected. Effects include a reduction quality on all of the affected acres, as well as along open road corridors affected by firewood collection and a long-term reduction in habitat on approximately 350 acres. However considering that 95 percent of the existing habitat would be unaffected, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Alternative 1 Determination While alternative 1 may increase the risk of catastrophic wildfire, American marten habitat would be largely unchanged in the short and long term, therefore, implementation is not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for this species. Action Alternatives Table 109 displays existing American marten habitat proposed for treatment under the action alternatives. Based on the stand structure effects anticipated (see section 4.3.1), effects of the individual treatments on marten habitat would vary. Following is a description of proposed changes to marten habitat. Effects of these treatments by alternative are summarized in table 110. Table 109. Alternative treatments in American marten habitat Treatments Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres Percent1 Acres Percent1 Intermediate Harvest 914 13 335 5 Regeneration Harvest 143 2 133 2 Low Severity Fire 152 2 531 8 Mixed Severity Fire 1,265 19 598 9 Total 2,474 36 1,597 24 1-Percent of available habitat · Intermediate Harvest and Low Severity Fire – Because sites would maintain adequate canopy closure as well as snags and DWD on the site, they would continue to provide suitable marten habitat. There would be short-term (5-10 years) reductions in snags and DWD, and some increased canopy gaps. As a result, the quality of marten habitat would be reduced. · Mixed Severity Fire – Due to the reduction of snags and DWD, a short-term reduction in habitat quality would occur on portions of those sites that receive a low severity burn. Portions of sites where openings in the overstory are created would no longer be considered suitable habitat; there would be a long-term reduction in suitable habitat on the acres where openings are created. · Regeneration Harvest – Due to the reduction in canopy, there would be a long-term reduction in suitable marten habitat on the acreage treated. The following table summarizes effects to American marten habitat by alternative. Table 110. Post-treatment effects to marten habitat by alternative Treatments Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres Percent1 Acres Percent1 Acres Treated 2,474 36 1,716 25 Habitat Reduced2 459 7 283 4 Suitable Habitat with short-term reduction in habitat quality3 1,731 26 1,088 16 Habitat not Treated 4,313 64 5,071 75 1-Percent of available habitat 2-includes regeneration harvest and acreage of openings created by mixed severity fire 3-includes underburning, intermediate harvest, and lands affected by low severity burning. Direct Effects As described in the Affected Environment section under alternative 1, due to the widespread reduction in canopy closure, more marginal habitat conditions predominate and the project area is utilized primarily for foraging and dispersal habitat. Because marten are largely restricted to higher elevations with deep snow (Ruggiero et al. 1994), and since most of the treatment sites occur at lower elevations with less snowpack, the likelihood of direct effects are reduced. Also because the project area does not provide landscape conditions preferred by marten, and considering 64 to 75 percent of the suitable habitat would not be affected, there is no mortality anticipated. Consequently, potential direct effects would consist largely of short-term (1 year) behavioral avoidance of the treatment areas during implementation under both action alternatives. Alternative 2 Indirect Effects Under alternative 2, suitable marten habitat would be reduced by 7 percent due to proposed regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed-severity burning. Habitat quality would be reduced on approximately 26 percent of the available marten habitat from proposed low-severity burning and intermediate treatments. Currently 85 percent of proposed treatment sites have less than 60 percent canopy closure and provides less desirable marten habitat. As a result proposed treatments would reduce preferred closed-canopy marten habitat by approximately 15 percent. Because proposed treatments are designed to restore historic levels of fire and promote increased structure and diversity on sites treated (see section 4.3.1) over the long term, marten habitat would be maintained or improved across the project area. Due to the reduction in fuels short and long term effects include anticipated reduced risk of stand replacing wildfire. Alternative 3 Indirect Effects Under alternative 3, suitable marten habitat would be reduced by 4 percent due to proposed regeneration harvest and openings created by mixed-severity burning. Habitat quality would be reduced on approximately 16 percent of the available marten habitat from proposed low-severity burning and intermediate treatments. Like alternative 2, most of the acreage proposed for treatment (87 percent) currently has reduced canopy closure conditions (i.e. below 60 percent) and provides less desirable marten habitat. Proposed treatments would reduce preferred marten habitat conditions by approximately 13 percent. Like alternative 2, proposed treatments are designed to restore fire to the landscape and improve stand structure and diversity, as well as reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire, but at a somewhat reduced level from that of alternative 2. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects Past, ongoing and future activities are discussed under alternative 1 and a total 500 acres of suitable marten habitat would be affected, including a reduction in suitable habitat on 350 acres. In addition to this, alternative 2 would affect up to another 2,474 acres. Of this there would be a short-term reduction in habitat quality on 1,731 acres and a long-term reduction in habitat on 459 acres. Cumulatively during the analysis period, a total of 2,974 acres or 31 percent of the available habitat would be affected. Of this, habitat quality would be reduced for approximately 10 years on up to approximately 1,800 acres and there would be a long-term reduction in habitat on 809 acres. Additionally, due to ongoing MPB mortality, landscape level canopy cover and suitable marten habitat would continue to be reduced in portions of the project area. However considering that approximately 70 percent of the existing habitat would be unaffected, and considering proposed treatments are designed to restore historical conditions and reduce the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a reduction in the amount and quality of suitable habitat (as described above). Habitat conditions would be restored on all sites treated in the long term. Alternative 2 and 3 Determination The action alternatives would reduce existing marten habitat within the project area. Suitable habitat would continue to be available within all affected watersheds and proposed treatments would maintain or improve marten habitat over the long term. Based on the above analysis and the following rationale, implementation of alternatives 2 and 3 are not likely to cause a local or regional change in habitat quality or population status for the American marten. · Due to MPB mortality, suitable marten habitat has been greatly reduced. Most proposed treatments occur at lower elevations, which are less likely to be utilized. As a result, the potential for direct effects are reduced. · Sixty-four percent of the existing suitable habitat would not be treated. Snags and DWD would continue to be available across the landscape and in all sites treated. · Over the short term, suitable habitat would be maintained on over 80 percent of the existing habitat treated, whereas habitat structure and diversity would be improved over the long term. · Treatments are designed to reduce the risk of wildfire and maintain marten habitat across the landscape. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Marten habitat would be relatively unchanged under alternative 1. While the action alternatives would reduce suitable marten habitat, there is no mortality anticipated. Roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be used for administrative purposes and remain closed to general use. Habitat would continue to be available within all affected watersheds. As a result, all alternatives are consistent with Plan direction (USDA Forest Service 1986) to provide habitat for small game, furbearers and other wildlife species (p. II/4), to ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17), to develop and implement a road management program with road use and travel restrictions that are responsive to resource protection needs (p. II/2) and to manage 5 percent of each 3rd order drainage for old growth (p. II/20). Also all alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan (p. II/20 to II-21) snag and dead wood management guidelines and with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Commonly Hunted Species Elk Elk are evaluated using the following criteria: · Summer Range Hiding Cover and compliance with Plan standard 3. This requires maintaining 50 percent or more of each elk herd unit as hiding cover (described in section 3.5). · Winter Range Thermal Cover and compliance with Plan standard 3. This requires maintaining 25 percent or more thermal cover (described in section 3.5) on each elk herd unit winter range · Big Game Security and compliance with Plan standard 4a. This requires that that the ratio of hiding cover to open road density be within guidelines identified by the Forest Plan (described in section 3.5). · Habitat Effectiveness and consistency with guidelines in the Montana Elk Logging Study. Specifically this includes maintaining a minimum of 50 percent habitat effectiveness on elk summer range. · Elk Security and consistency with recommendations in Hillis et al. (1991). This includes providing 30 percent of each elk herd unit in patches 250 acres or larger in size that are more than 0.50 mile from an open road. · Elk Forage – this involves a qualitative assessment of changes in elk forage on summer, transition and winter ranges. Effects Common to All Alternatives Untreated portions of the project area would continue to progress through succession. Disturbance processes including climate change, insect and disease and fire would continue to influence the project area. Insect infestations would continue to create snags. Large areas of untreated stands would remain across the landscape where natural snag creation and attrition processes would proceed unabated and would continue to shape elk habitat. Summer Range and Calving Areas Summer range habitat effectiveness measures how much of a given area elk are likely to use during the non-hunting season. It is a function of suitable habitat components (cover, forage, wet sites, and travel routes) and reduced human disturbance (generally measured in terms of open roads and motorized trails) (Christensen et. al. 1993). Timber harvest and burning in all action alternatives would reduce cover while improving forage capability. Because elk numbers have been reduced due to the large amount of wilderness and decades of fire suppression, (MDFWP 2004), the increase in foraging habitat is expected to improve habitat effectiveness to a greater degree than the anticipated cover loss would diminish it. Alternative Evaluation Summary Alternative effects for the criteria evaluated (identified above) are displayed in table 111 and Table 112. Table 111 displays values for hiding cover, thermal cover and big game security and whether the herd unit conditions comply with the Forest Plan. Table 112 displays habitat effectiveness and elk security and whether the herd unit conditions are consistent with recommendations in the Montana Elk Logging Guidelines and those by Hillis et al. (1991).  Table 111. Alternative Elk herd unit summary and Forest Plan compliance Habitat/Plan Compliance Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Elk Hiding Cover Elk Hiding Cover acres (%) 17,701 (55) 15,725 (35) 14,826 (46) 14,994 (34) 16,034 (49) 15,237(34) Meets Plan Standard 3 Yes No No No No No Elk Winter Range Thermal Cover Winter Range Thermal Cover acres (%) 938 (5.3) 527 (3.8) 754 (4.2) 501 (3.6) 754 (4.2) 508 (3.7) Meet Plan Standard 3 No No No No No No Big Game Security Open Road Density mi/mi2 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.3 Percent Hiding Cover 55 35 40 30 43 32 Meets Plan Standard 4a No No No No No No Table 112. Alternative elk herd unit summary of habitat effectiveness and elk security Condition/Compliance with recommendation Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Habitat Effectiveness Road Miles 85.4 120.2 881 120.2 85.81 120.2 Square Miles 50.6 69.3 50.6 69.3 50.6 69.3 Road Density in mi/mi2 1.69 1.74 1.73 1.74 1.70 1.74 Habitat Effectiveness 50 51 50 51 50 51 Meets 50 percent Recommendation (Elk Logging Study) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Elk Security Elk Security Habitat acres (%) 8,463 (26) 11,828 (26) 8,463 (26) 11,828 (26) 8,463 (26) 11,828 (26) Meets 30 percent recommendation (Hillis et al. 1991) No No No No No No 1-road miles would increase for up to 5 years, after which they would be reduced to 85.4 miles. Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects Summer Range Hiding Cover – Hiding cover exists on approximately 55 percent of the Beaver Creek unit, which is in compliance with Plan standard 3. Within the Keep Cool unit hiding cover would remain at 35 percent, which would not comply with Plan standard 3. While hiding cover continues to occur in areas with concentrated MPB mortality, it is expected that existing hiding cover would be reduced within the next 10 to 15 years as dead and dying trees fall to the ground. This would largely occur on low-elevation lands with a large lodgepole component. Habitat Effectiveness – Because there would be no change in road access, habitat effectiveness would be unchanged and both herd units would continue to meet the Montana Logging Study recommendation of 50 percent. Elk Security during Hunting Season Hiding Cover/Open Road Densities – There are no direct effects to hiding cover or open road densities under alternative 1. Neither the Beaver Creek nor Keep Cool herd units currently meet Plan standard 4a. Development of future hiding cover would vary. In stands less affected by MPB mortality, understory and overstory cover would increase over time, whereas cover would decrease as trees fall to the ground. Because MPB mortality is ongoing, overall elk hiding cover would likely decrease over the next 10 to 20 years. Hunting Season Elk Security – Security habitat for elk is important during the hunting season relative to elk vulnerability, population structure, and hunter success. Under alternative 1, elk security would remain at its present level with security areas comprising approximately 26 percent of both the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units. Hillis et al. (1991) recommend that at least 30 percent of a herd unit provide security. Also there are approximately 6,669 acres and 4,755 acres of hiding cover within security blocks in the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool elk herd units respectively. Winter Range Thermal Cover Currently neither herd unit meets Forest Plan standard 3. It is expected that MPB mortality would continue to occur for the next 10 to 15 years, further reducing overstory cover within forested stands, particularly at lower elevations. Consequently, winter range thermal cover would be reduced. Conifer encroachment into grasslands and shrub dominated stands would continue to occur, decreasing forage availability. While understory conifer would develop over time, it would take decades to provide Forest Plan thermal cover and available winter thermal cover would continue to decline under this alternative. Forage Availability Canopy gaps resulting from recent MPB mortality may result in some short-term (a few years) increases in forage. Conifer encroachment would continue into grasslands and shrublands, and forested understories would continue to be dominated by dense seedlings and saplings. Available forage would continue to decline under this alternative and over the long term this is expected to continue to reduce the health of the herd (MFWP 2004 p. 113). Cumulative Effects The combined boundaries of the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek herd units make up the cumulative effects boundary. This area was selected because it includes all areas affected by treatment as well as lands affected by recent wildfires and MPB mortality. As a result both stand and landscape level habitat can be assessed. Past, ongoing and future activities are in volume 2, appendix C. Activities that affect elk include grazing, wildfire, timber harvest, firewood collection and hazard tree removal, as well as recreational activities associated with mining, hunting and other dispersed use. Because there is no change in public access, dispersed recreational use is expected to remain relatively unchanged. Potential ongoing and future long-term effects that could occur during the analysis period and affect elk habitat include grazing, hazard tree removal, firewood collection, NNIS treatment, recent wildfire, prescribed burning and timber harvest, which are summarized by herd unit in table 113 and discussed below. Table 113. Alternative 1 elk cumulative effects Activity Beaver Creek Keep Cool Total Acres Affected Hiding Cover Affected (acres) Thermal Cover1 Affected (acres) Total Acres Affected Hiding Cover Affected (acres) Thermal Cover1 Affected (acres) Grazing 5,945 2,730 294 8,694 5,663 103 Hazard Tree Removal 251 184 82 169 1122 0 NNIS Treatment 2,564 872 4 475 186 3 Timber Harvest 126 962 182 60 432 0 Prescribed Fire 0 0 0 17 13 0 Recent Wildfire 3 33 0 145 213 0 1 – Winter range thermal cover 2 – Results in a reduction in Plan hiding and thermal cover on the acres affected 3 – Reduction in Plan hiding cover on 60 percent of the acres affected. Grazing Grazing occurs on approximately 5,945 acres of the Beaver Creek unit and 8,694 acres of the Keep Cool unit. Effects depend on whether or not the managed grazing system is effective. For example overgrazing can reduce available elk forage, as well as increase the spread of invasive species. Conversely, managed grazing by livestock can increase the productivity, diversity and nutritive quality of forage. Ongoing and continued future effects of grazing are discussed under section 4.4. While some existing impacts to riparian habitat in the Beaver Creek drainage are occurring, this would be corrected with approved fencing in the Pine Grove campground. Also past and continued use is expected to be moderate to light and treatments are expected to improve the amount and distribution of grasses within the Stonewall and Keep Cool allotments. As a result, existing impacts from conifer encroachment that have affected livestock use on transitory range would likely be reduced. Finally, with implementation of PDFs including grazing modifications if necessary to ensure aspen and natural regeneration following burning is maintained, future impacts to elk from grazing would be reduced and there are no significant cumulative effects to elk or big game anticipated. Hazard Tree Removal Roadside salvage would remove 184 acres and 112 acres of hiding cover in the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units respectively, whereas 8 acres of thermal cover in the Beaver Creek herd unit would be affected. While habitat would be reduced along road corridors, the analysis for the hazard tree removal project concluded that even though both herd units were below Forest Plan Standards for hiding and thermal cover, and a site specific amendment was developed, that elk numbers should not be altered. This was disclosed in a site specific Forest Plan amendment for that project. Invasive Weed Treatment Approximately 2,563acres of NNIS treatment are anticipated to occur within Beaver Creek unit and 474 acres in Keep Cool Creek unit. Effects include short-term disturbance during treatment as well as control or containment of invasive plants. As a result over the long term, elk forage would be maintained on sites treated. Timber Harvest A total of 126 acres of off-Forest harvest would occur on the Beaver Creek herd unit and 60 acres would occur on the Keep Cool Unit. A total of 96 acres and 43 acres of elk hiding cover would be affected in the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units respectively, whereas 18 acres of winter range thermal cover would be affected in the Beaver Creek herd unit. Effects include a reduction in cover and increased forage on the acres affected. Cumulatively, approximately 27 percent of the Beaver Creek unit and 21 percent of the Keep Cool unit would be affected by ongoing or future activities. While 435 acres of hiding cover and 18 acres of thermal cover would be removed, landscape level forage and cover conditions would remain largely unchanged. As a result and considering ongoing and future uses are not expected to change, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Prescribed Fire This includes 17 acres of pre-approved prescribed fire within the Keep Cool unit. Effects would be similar to those described under treatment effects. While there would be a reduction in downed wood and understory vegetation, the overstory would remain largely intact and affected stands would continue to meet the Forest Plan definition of hiding and thermal cover. There would also be an increase in future forage on the affected acres. Recent Wildfire This includes 148 acres of wildfire that occurred within the herd units in 2011. It is estimated that high intensity fire with mortality on most of the canopy occurred on approximately 60 percent of the acreage, whereas low severity fire occurred on approximately 40 percent. Effects of low severity fire include a reduction in downed wood and understory vegetation similar to that described under treatment effects. Areas affected by high severity fire would have a reduction in hiding cover due to the loss of overstory, as well as an increase in future forage. Summay Cumulatively, approximately 27 percent of the Beaver Creek unit and 21 percent of the Keep Cool unit would be affected by ongoing or future activities. Approximately 450 acres of hiding cover and 26 acres of thermal cover would be removed. There would be localized reductions in cover due to MPB mortality; although, landscape-level forage and cover conditions would remain largely unchanged. Ongoing and future uses are not expected to change, many activities would result in short-term effects, and human access and elk security would be maintained, therefore, no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a continued reduction in elk forage. Alternative 1 Determination and Conclusions Under alternative 1, Forest Plan hiding cover in the Beaver Creek unit would be maintained, while the Keep Cool unit would continue to fall below Forest Plan direction. Also due to continued MPB mortality, hiding and thermal cover within both units would continue to decline. While forage availability may increase in some areas, due to continued fire suppression and overstocked stand conditions, overall forage availability would continue to be low. Due to the reduced cover conditions, neither herd unit meets Forest Plan direction for big game security. However both units would continue to meet the 50 percent habitat effectiveness rating recommended in the Montana Elk Logging Study. Cover would continue to decline, however, it is expected that available habitat would continue to support desired levels of elk. Finally, due to increased fuel loading, the risk of a long-term loss of cover from stand replacing wildfire is greatest under this alternative. Alternatives 2 and 3 Direct Effects and Indirect Effects Direct effects to wildlife, including elk and other ungulates are discussed under treatment effects in section 4.3.2. Elk are highly mobile, therefore, direct mortality from burning or harvest is unlikely. Effects include largely behavioral avoidance of the site and some elk would be displaced during treatment, although effects would be reduced with implementation of PDFs that limit disturbance to one drainage at a time. Additionally, considering that 20 percent of burned areas would remain un-treated and due to remaining cover adjacent to and within treatment areas, habitat would be available to accommodate any displaced animals. Table 114 displays the type and amount of activity proposed within elk hiding cover in the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool creek herd units under alternatives 2 and 3. Alternative changes in hiding cover, thermal cover, security and habitat effectiveness are displayed in table 111 and table 112, whereas a discussion of the effects of individual treatments is provided below. Table 114. Proposed treatments within project elk hiding cover Treatment Beaver Creek Keep Cool Creek Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres % Acres % Acres % Acres % Intermediate Harvest1 1,545 9 640 4 166 1 166 1 Regeneration Harvest1 775 4 651 4 72 <1 72 <1 Low Severity Burning 393 2 917 5 0 0 0 0 Mixed Severity Burning2 2,219 13 1,498 8 1,970 13 1,001 6 Jackpot Burning 0 0 0 0 0 0 322 2 Total 4,932 28 3,706 20 2,208 14 1,561 9 1 – forest plan hiding and thermal cover reduced on acreage treated 2 – forest plan hiding and thermal cover reduced on lands affected by high severity fire or 25 percent of the acres treated  Intermediate Harvest Harvest in combination with burning would remove live trees, dead and dying trees and smaller diameter downed wood. Treated stands would not meet the definition of Forest Plan hiding or thermal cover. An exception to this would be lands within the INFISH buffer due to the greater levels of DWD retained, and because few overstory trees would be removed in these areas. While hiding cover would be reduced on the acres treated, because both treatments would stimulate understory herbaceous and woody vegetation, forage availability would increase within 1 to 2 years of treatment (Canon et al. 1987 in USDA Forest Service 2006b). Regeneration Harvest Sites treated would no longer meet the definition of forest plan hiding or thermal cover because most live trees, as well as some of the DWD and snags would be removed. This reduction in cover would occur over the long term (greater than 15 years) until understory woody vegetation develops. Like intermediate harvest, the reduction in canopy cover combined with site preparation would result in increased herbaceous and woody vegetation and elk forage, although the amount of available forage would be much greater than in stands receiving an intermediate treatment. Low-Severity Burning and Underburning While few live trees would be removed, low- severity burning would reduce small diameter DWD and some tree seedlings/saplings. However, implementation of PDFs would ensure that a DWD component including large diameter logs and pockets of understory vegetation are retained on all sites. While there is likely to be some overstory mortality, this would be widely scattered and the existing live overstory would remain largely intact. As a result, although understory cover would be reduced where it currently exists, stands would continue to meet the Forest Plan definition of hiding and thermal cover. Additionally, 20 percent of the site would remain unburned and unaffected hiding and thermal cover would be interspersed throughout the site. Prescribed fire is routinely used to create or enhance elk habitat and has been shown to rejuvenate aspen stands, encourage early spring green-up, reduce conifer encroachment, increase palatability, reduce the height of browse species and stimulate regeneration through sprouting of seeds (Leege 1979; Weaver 1987 in USDA Forest Service 2011b; Sachro et al. 2005; Van Dyke and Darragh 2007). Fires have also been found to increase carrying capacity by creating a mosaic of cover and foraging areas (Martinka 1976 in USDA Forest Service 2011b). Burning in coniferous forest stands has been shown to increase herbaceous forage five-fold in high elevation conifer habitat. In this same study, summer elk carrying capacity increased from 8 to 28 elk per 38 square miles, whereas spring grazing potential increased from 13 to 45 elk per 38 square miles (Sachro et al. 2005). Similarly, burning in shrub and grasslands (up to 815 acres under alternatives 2 and 3) also increases both production and nutritional quality that benefit elk. Van Dyke and Darragh (2006) found that changes in plant community structure, composition and diversity, nutritional quality and seasonal availability, all contributed to increased elk use. Finally, because both the amount and the nutritional value of forage created would be increased, prescribed fire would improve spring forage habitat (Long et al. 2008a, Long et al. 2008b) on transition range and benefit elk during calving and nursing periods. Mixed Severity Burning Sites proposed for mixed-severity burning that experience a low- severity burn would be similar to that described previously, and result in a reduction in understory cover, and an increase in forage. Those portions of the site that experience more intense burning, would have a long-term reduction in hiding and thermal cover, due to the overstory mortality and reduction in understory vegetation. Conversely, the amount and quality of elk forage that results would be increased. While there would be a stand level reduction in cover in fire created openings, the interspersion of forage and hiding cover that would develop would enhance landscape level habitat by providing a mosaic of forage and hiding cover (Martinka 1976 in USDA Forest Service 2011b). For summer ranges, Thomas (1979) suggests openings from 10 to 40 acres are used by elk. It is difficult to predict the interspersion of openings created by burning with remaining hiding cover, because 20 percent of each burn unit would remain unburned and the size of the openings created would be variable. However, hiding cover would continue to exist within lands affected by low severity fire and unburned areas. Consequently, it is expected that many of the openings created by mixed-severity burning would be within 500 feet of hiding cover and provide increased forage for elk within a few years of treatment. Summer Range Hiding Cover Table 111 summarizes the effects to elk hiding cover on summer range. Alternative 2 would result in removal of 2,875 acres and 1,667 acres of hiding cover on the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units respectively, whereas alternative 3 would reduce hiding cover by 731acres in the Beaver Creek unit and on 488 acres in the Keep Cool herd unit. Upon implementation neither herd unit would meet Plan standard 3 under either alternative. Elk use of the landscape would change as elk seek out places where hiding cover remains post-treatment. Elk may be temporarily displaced during harvest and burning activities, however PDFs such as limiting harvest to a single drainage at a time are in place that would reduce disturbances and displacements. Habitat Effectiveness Changes in habitat effectiveness are displayed in table 112. While alternative 2 would result in a temporary ( less than 5 years) increase in new roads on 2.6 miles and alternative 3 on 0.4 miles, both alternatives would continue to meet the 50 percent habitat effectiveness score recommended in the Montana Elk Logging Study. Project operations are likely to re-distribute elk on summer range, although PDFs that limit activity to one drainage at a time and maintain all new roads closed to the public would help to reduce impacts. Elk Security During Hunting Season Hiding Cover/Open Road Densities Table 111 summarizes post-implementation effects to elk security during the hunting season as measured by Plan standard 4a. Alternative 2 would result in removal of 2,875 acres and 1,667 acres of elk hiding cover within the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool herd units respectively, whereas alternative 3 would reduce hiding cover on 731acres of the Beaver Creek unit and 488 acres of the Keep Cool unit. Post implementation within the Beaver Creek herd unit, road densities would increase to 1.74 mi/mi2 under alternative 2 and increase to 1.70 mi/mi2under alternative 3 for up to 5 years. Following implementation (up to 5 years), open road densities (including roads open to administration) would go back to the pre-project density of 1.69. Also effects to displacement would be reduced because all roads to be constructed then obliterated following use would be closed to the public. Open road densities within the Keep Cool Unit would be unchanged under both alternatives. Elk would be expected to move away from project activities to areas that provide security during the hunting season. These are generally large areas that are greater than 0.50 mile from an open road and provide some level of cover. Both the amount of hiding cover removed and the spatial arrangement of treatment units would result in some displacement of elk. However because treatments would be confined to a single drainage at a time, impacts and the time that elk would be displaced would be reduced. Hunting Season Elk Security Because there is no new road construction in existing elk security areas or changes in road management, existing security habitat would continue to exist on 26 percent of each herd unit under both alternatives (table 112). This is below the 30 percent habitat security recommendation provided by Hillis et al. (1991). Harvest and burning would reduce elk hiding cover within security habitat by 1,879 acres (16 percent) under alternative 2 and 1,169 acres (10 percent) under alternative 3. Elk would be displaced from areas of management activity to more secure areas. However over 86 percent of the hiding cover within security habitat would be maintained and effects would be reduced by restricting activities to a single drainage at a time. Winter Range and Thermal Cover Under alternative 2 winter range thermal cover would be reduced on approximately 184 acres of the Beaver Creek unit under both alternatives. Within the Keep Cool unit, cover would be reduced by 26 acres under alternative 2 and by 19 acres under alternative 3. Like the no-action alternative, neither alternative would comply with Plan Standard 3. Because much of the harvest in the Beaver Creek herd unit occurs in areas with concentrated MPB mortality, thermal cover would likely be reduced on much of this acreage in the future under no action. As a result, the availability of winter range thermal cover would be similar under all alternatives. Overall elk thermal cover would be reduced and like alternative 1, both herd units would fall well below the 30 percent Forest Plan threshold. Conversely, treatments would improve available forage on low-elevation transition and winter range. As a result, and considering that elk that winter in dryer sites similar to the project area have been documented utilizing more open habitats where forage is available (Cook et al. 1998; MFWP 2011), it is expected that winter range conditions including both forage and thermal cover would be maintained at a level that would sustain elk over the short and long term. Forage Availability As described above under treatment effects, both burning and harvest are expected to increase available forage. Under alternative 2 this would include an increase on over 5,800 acres of the Beaver Creek unit (18 percent of the unit) and on 2,700 acres of the Keep Cool herd unit (6 percent of herd unit). Under alternative 3, forage would increase on over 4,500 acres (14 percent of the herd unit) of the Beaver Creek unit and on approximately 2,000 acres of the Keep Cool unit (5 percent of herd unit). Additionally, both alternatives would increase forage on elk summer, transition and winter ranges. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, treatments proposed under alternative 2 would affect up to another 15 percent and 5 percent of the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek units respectively. Cumulatively, this would affect a total of 43 percent of the Beaver Creek unit and 26 percent of the Keep Cool herd unit. Collectively, cumulative effects would reduce hiding cover on up to approximately 3,500 acres (5 percent of the existing hiding cover) and reduce winter range thermal cover on 235 acres (16 percent) of the total winter range thermal cover within the combined herd units. Conversely forage availability would increase on elk summer, winter and transition ranges and both alternatives would reduce the risk of stand replacing wildfire. Changes in cover and forage would affect elk distribution and use of the analysis area, however, 78 percent of the existing hiding and thermal cover would be unaffected and maintained within all units affected by burning. Public access would not increase, habitat effectiveness and elk security would be maintained, and year-round forage would be increased. Therefore, it is expected that elk habitat and desired elk numbers would be maintained, and there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a reduction in hiding and thermal cover, as well as reduced forage in areas greater than 500 feet from cover. Forage would be improved both in the short and long term, and hiding and thermal cover would be restored on all sites treated. Alternatives 2 and 3 Conclusions and Determination Alternative 2 Treatments proposed under alternative 2 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. Hunting opportunities would be maintained and based on the analysis presented above and the following rationale, adequate elk habitat would continue to be available within both units to support desired levels of elk. · Implementation would result in both short- and long-term increases in available forage on approximately eleven percent of the combined herd units, including increases on summer, transition and winter range. The increase in forage is expected to maintain or improve herd health. · There would be no increase in public access or changes to elk security habitat. · Within the combined herd units approximately 89 percent of the existing hiding cover and 86 percent of the existing thermal cover would be maintained. Cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment units and across the landscape. · Past wildfires have greatly reduced project area elk habitat and much of the remaining habitat is at risk. Implementation of alternative 2 would reduce future wildfire risk. · It is believed that active management is necessary to address fuel loading, species diversity and insect and disease concerns. Due to the predominance of mature forest, limited disturbance and reduced forage, some management is necessary to maintain herd health and increase elk populations within the elk management unit (MFWP 2004). Collectively, the treatments proposed under this alternative are designed to address these concerns and the long-term benefits associated with the increased forage availability and reduced wildfire risk, are believed to outweigh the risks associated with the anticipated reduction in cover. Alternative 3 Treatments proposed under alternative 3 would reduce elk hiding and thermal cover in both herd units, whereas the amount and distribution of forage would increase. Neither unit would meet Forest Plan standard 3 or 4a. Hunting opportunities would be maintained and based on the analysis presented above and the following rationale, adequate elk habitat would continue to be available within both units to support desired levels of elk. · Implementation would result in both short and long-term increases in available forage on approximately eleven percent of the combined herd units, including increases on summer, transition and winter range. The increase in forage is expected to maintain or improve herd health. · There would be no increase in public access or changes to elk security habitat. · Within the combined herd units, approximately 93 percent of the existing hiding cover and 86 percent of the existing winter range thermal cover would be maintained. Cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment units and across the landscape. · Past wildfires have greatly reduced project area elk habitat and much of the remaining habitat is at risk. Implementation of alternative 3 would reduce future wildfire risk. · It is believed that active management is necessary to address fuel loading, species diversity and insect and disease concerns. Due to the predominance of mature forest, limited disturbance and reduced forage, some management is necessary to maintain herd health and increase elk populations within the elk management unit (MFWP 2004). Collectively, the treatments proposed under this alternative are designed to address these concerns and the long-term benefits associated with the increased forage availability and reduced wildfire risk, are believed to outweigh the risks associated with the anticipated reduction in cover. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Elk are a management indicator for commonly hunted species; as such they are intended to be a bellwether of the effects of management activities on representative wildlife habitats with the objective of ensuring that viable populations of existing native and desirable nonnative animal species are maintained. Federal laws and direction applicable to management indicator species include the National Forest Management Act (NFMA), the Forest Service Manual, and the Helena National Forest Plan. The NFMA requires the Forest Service to “provide for diversity of plant and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet overall multiple-use objectives” [16 USC 1604(g)(3)(B)]. All alternatives are consistent with this requirement. Elk habitat would continue to be abundant and well-distributed and species’ viability would be maintained across the Forest. Compliance with Forest Plan Standard 3: Using the MFWP definition, Forest Plan Standard 3 (Forest Plan II/17) requires that elk summer range will be maintained at 50 percent or greater hiding cover. Under alternative 1, the Beaver Creek unit would meet plan standard 3 and the Keep Cool Unit would continue to fall below plan thresholds. Both action alternatives would remove additional hiding cover and the Beaver Creek unit would not meet standard 3 under either alternative, whereas and Keep Cool herd units would continue to fall below 50 percent cover. This situation would be addressed in a separate site-specific Forest Plan amendment. Plan standard 3 requires that elk thermal cover be provided on 25 percent of the winter range within each herd unit. Both the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek herd units would continue to fall below this threshold under all alternatives and thermal cover would be removed under alternatives 2 and 3. This situation will be addressed in a separate site-specific Forest Plan amendment. Compliance with Forest Plan Standard 4(a): Forest Plan Standard 4(a) (Forest Plan II/17-18) requires that an aggressive road management program be implemented to maintain or improve big game security. Specifically, road management will be implemented to at least maintain big game habitat capability and hunting opportunity, which is measured by the relationship between hiding cover and open road densities. Due to existing high open road densities and reduced levels of hiding cover, alternative 1 would not meet Standard 4(a). While open road densities would be unchanged, due to reductions in hiding cover, both action alternatives would move further away from the plan threshold. This situation would be addressed in a separate site-specific Forest Plan amendment. Compliance with Forest Plan Standard 4(b): Forest Plan standard 4(b) requires that elk calving grounds and nursery areas be closed to motorized vehicles during peak use by elk. This is usually from late May through July. If elk calving and nursery areas are identified prior to or during project implementation, these areas would be protected under all alternatives. Compliance with Forest Plan Standard 4(c): Forest Plan standard 4(c) (Forest Plan II/18) requires that all winter ranges be closed to vehicles between December 1 and May 15. Logging activities would be scheduled outside of the winter to address this standard and all alternatives comply with Standard 4(c). Compliance with Forest Plan Standard 6: Forest Plan standard 6 (Forest Plan II/19 and C/1 - 11) requires the recommendations embodied in the Montana Cooperative Elk-Logging study (appendix C of the Forest Plan) be followed during timber sale and road construction projects. There are a total of eleven recommendations some of which have been incorporated as project design features. The following describes the project’s consistency with each of the eleven recommendations. 1. Security during logging operations – All action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation. Design elements have been incorporated that confine logging to a single drainage at a time to minimize disturbance to elk. Also, logging activities would be completed in the shortest time frame possible. Use of firearms would be prohibited for anyone working within an area closed to the general public. 2. Redistribution of elk – All action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation which requires that timber sales be planned in a manner that does not redistribute elk onto adjacent or nearby property. 3. Traditional home range use by elk – This recommendation is intended to ensure that timber harvest and road construction are planned to minimize impacts to elk and elk hunting. All action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation since all constructed roads would be closed to the public during logging operations and decommissioned post-implementation. 4. Road construction and design – This recommendation is intended to maintain the integrity of elk movement patterns and provide security for unimpeded movement. All action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation as existing security habitat would be maintained under all alternatives. All constructed roads would be closed to the public during implementation and decommissioned afterwards. There may be some temporary disruption to traditional movement patterns; however, ample blocks of un-roaded areas exist that provide alternative travel ways. 5. Road management – This recommendation is also intended to maintain elk security through management of road densities. Implementation of Alternatives 2 and 3 would result in a short-term (5 years or less) increase in road density due to construction of roads to be obliterated following use. However new roads would not be opened to the public and elk security would not change in either herd unit. 6. Area closures during the hunting season – This recommendation is intended to ensure that travel restrictions are carefully considered relative to elk management objectives so that hunting opportunities aren’t unnecessarily impacted. This recommendation does not apply to the Stonewall project. 7. Clearcuts – This recommendation is intended to ensure that forage produced through clear-cutting is available to elk. The action alternatives are consistent with these considerations since slash clean up inside clearcuts would be reduced to less than 1.5 feet and all new roads would be closed to the public. Also, with implementation of buffers and project design features, openings would be less than 100 acres. 8. Cover type – This recommendation is intended to ensure that cover types, important to elk, are considered during planning and implementation of silvicultural practices. The action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation since cover type data is available Forestwide (via R1-VMap) and was used to identify and assess cover and forage. 9. Moist sites – This recommendation is intended to ensure that the integrity of moist sites is maintained since these areas comprise important components of elk habitat. All action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation and wetlands, riparian areas, and elk wallows would be buffered and protected during implementation. 10. Elk/cattle relationships – This recommendation is intended to ensure that forage may be created as a result of timber harvest remain available to elk. All action alternatives are consistent with this as grazing patterns or use would be modified if necessary to protect highly preferred forage species. 11. Winter range – This recommendation states that timbered areas adjacent to primary winter foraging areas should be managed to maintain the integrity of cover, and timber harvest should be scheduled outside of the winter period. All action alternatives are consistent with this recommendation since there would be no winter logging in elk winter range and forested areas would remain adjacent to forage areas following treatment (figure 79).  Elk cover and forage within elk winter range and associated treatment areasFigure 79. Elk cover and forage within elk winter range and associated treatment areasManagement Areas. There are six Management Areas within the project area; of those, the Stonewall project contains five Management Areas that have direction relevant to elk habitat: Management Area T-1 Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat - All roads to be constructed would be closed to public use and obliterated following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas – Elk hiding cover is provided on 2,151 acres or 80 percent of MA T-1 whereas elk thermal cover occurs on 315 acres or 11 percent of the management area. Within this management area, elk hiding and thermal cover would be reduced by up to 426 acres and 86 acres respectively, whereas forage would be increased on up to 752 acres. Considering that cover would be maintained in all units affected by burning, that INFISH buffers and PDF’s would maintain a cover component within all units, and that unaffected cover would be maintained adjacent to treatment units, both alternatives would increase forage, while maintaining adequate cover adjacent to foraging areas. As a result it is expected that forage and cover would be maintained at a level that would sustain elk over the short and long term (figure 80).  Elk thermal and hiding cover and proposed treatments in management area T-1Figure 80. Elk thermal and hiding cover and proposed treatments in management area T-1 Management Area T-2 Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat – All roads to be constructed would be closed to public use and obliterated following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas. Generally this means providing 25 percent thermal cover on identified winter range – Elk hiding cover is provided on 1,441 acres or 87 percent of MA T-2, whereas winter range thermal cover occurs on 251 acres or 14 percent of the winter range. Elk hiding and winter range thermal cover would be reduced by up to 821 acres and 138 acres respectively, whereas forage would be increased on up to 972 acres. Due to the natural fragmentation and open stand conditions that characterize the project area, management area T-2 winter range does not currently provide 25 percent thermal cover. Both action alternatives would increase forage availability, but would also move further away from Forest Plan thermal cover thresholds. This situation will be addressed in a separate site-specific Forest Plan amendment. Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested – There are treatment units next to existing plantations that currently do not provide hiding cover. Prior to implementation, these plantations would be evaluated in order to determine their current contribution to hiding cover. If they do not meet hiding cover definitions, then buffers would be retained between those areas in order to provide some level of cover between past and proposed treatment units. Buffers would be at least 200 feet wide, although they may be wider if field data indicates that this is necessary. Management Area T-3 Maintain 50 percent hiding cover (MFWP definition)for big game – There are currently 4,840 acres of big game hiding cover. While the action alternatives would reduce existing hiding cover by up to 854 acres, hiding cover would be retained on over 82 percent of the lands within management area T-3 under both alternatives. Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat – All new roads would be closed to public use and decommissioned following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage area – Elk hiding cover is provided on 4,840 acres or 86 percent of MA T-3, whereas elk thermal cover occurs on 957 acres or 17 percent. Within this management area, elk hiding and thermal cover would be reduced by up to 854 acres and 67 acres respectively, whereas forage would be increased on approximately 1,621 acres. Cover would be maintained in all units affected by burning, INFISH buffers and PDFs would maintain a cover component within all units, and unaffected cover would be maintained adjacent to treatment units; therefore, both action alternatives would increase forage while maintaining adequate cover adjacent to foraging areas. As a result, it is expected that forage and cover would be maintained at a level that would sustain elk over the short and long term (figure 81). Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested – There are treatment units next to existing plantations that currently do not provide hiding cover. Prior to implementation, these plantations would be surveyed in order to determine their current contribution to hiding cover. If they do not meet hiding cover definitions (i.e. ability to hide 90 percent of an elk at 200 feet), then buffers would be retained between those areas in order to provide some level of cover between past and proposed treatment units. Buffers would be at least 200 feet wide (based on the hiding cover definition), although they may be wider if field data indicate that this is necessary.  Title: Elk thermal cover, hiding cover and proposed treatments in MA T-3Figure 81. Elk thermal cover, hiding cover and proposed treatments in MA T-3 Management Area T-4 Where elk habitat exists, project design will incorporate management practices to maintain or enhance summer and winter habitat – Proposed actions under both alternatives are designed to improve forage on summer and winter habitat. Also there would be no new roads open to public access and project design features are in place that restrict harvest during the winter season and calving season, as well as retain cover within regeneration units if necessary. Management Area W-1 Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat – All roads to be constructed would be closed to public use and obliterated following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas – Elk hiding cover is provided on 3,452 acres or 74 percent of MA W-1, whereas elk thermal cover occurs on 493 acres or 11 percent. Within this management area, elk hiding and thermal cover would be reduced by up to 193 acres and 23 acres respectively, whereas forage would be increased on approximately 1,219 acres. Cover would be maintained in all units affected by burning, INFISH buffers and PDF’s would maintain a cover component within all units, and unaffected cover would be maintained adjacent to treatment units. Both action alternatives would increase forage, while maintaining adequate cover adjacent to foraging areas. As a result, it is expected that forage and cover would be maintained at a level that would sustain elk over the short and long term (figure 82  Title: Elk cover and proposed treatments in management area W-1Figure 82. Elk cover and proposed treatments in management area W-1Mule Deer Effects Common to All Alternatives Untreated portions of the project area would continue to progress through succession regardless of the alternative. Disturbance processes including climate change, insect infestations, disease, and fire would continue to influence the project area. At any given time, the project area would comprise a variety of successional stages. Hiding and thermal cover would continue to be reduced by mountain pine beetle-related mortality. No designated old growth would be affected under any action alternative. Old-growth stands provide both thermal benefits and snow interception because of their structure and canopy cover (Kirchhoff and Schoen 1987). As a result, deer expend less energy travelling through shallower snow in these stands and they find more rooted forage that remains snow free (Parker et al. 1984) Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects There are no activities proposed under this alternative, so there are no direct effects anticipated to mule deer. Indirect effects to habitat are similar to those described for elk. Decades of fire suppression have resulted in increased stocking and closed canopied mature forest with reduced levels of forage and increased cover (Hayden et al. 2008). However more recently MPB mortality has opened up the forest canopy across the project area, reducing cover on summer, transition and winter range. While forage has increased due to understory development, use of many areas would be expected to be reduced in the future due to the large amount of downed woody debris (Hayden et al. 2008) and understory conifer. In areas unaffected by mortality, deer cover and forage availability would be unchanged. Deer benefit most when there is a mosaic of conditions across the landscape including areas of forage, escape and hiding cover and travel corridors away from roads and trails (Hayden et al. 2008). Forage availability and species diversity would continue to decline or remain low because the landscape would continue to be dominated by homogeneous mature forest conditions, including encroachment of conifer into aspen and mountain shrub communities. As described under elk, hiding cover has been reduced in some areas due to MPB mortality, and this trend is expected to continue for the next 10 to 20 years. While hiding cover is fairly well distributed across the project area (figure 75), thermal cover is low due to both MPB mortality and the open stand conditions that are characteristic of lower elevation ponderosa pine. Human access would be unchanged, and there are no anticipated changes in hunting-related mortality or nonhunting disturbance. Should future wildfire occur, there would be a decrease in cover and a corresponding increase in forage, although benefits to deer would vary. For example, forage created on larger wildfires (such as the Snow Talon fire) would be less available, due to the large reduction in cover. Consequently smaller fires that have a better interspersion of cover and forage would provide more immediate benefit to both elk and deer. Due to continued fire suppression and elevated levels of fuels, the risk of larger, high intensity wildfire would be greatest under this alternative. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects to mule deer are evaluated across the project area. Anticipated cumulative effects are in volume 2, appendix C. Effects include continued grazing on approximately 5,100 acres, campground rehabilitation, almost 300 acres of NNIS treatment, 309 acres of hazard tree removal, fire wood collection, stream habitat improvement, and approximately 5 miles of trail maintenance/reconstruction. In total, approximately 4,100 acres or 17 percent of the analysis area would be affected. Streamside improvement, campground rehabilitation and trail work is expected to result in short-term disturbance during treatment and localized changes in habitat, although overall mule deer habitat would remain largely unchanged. Treatments that might result in long-term changes in habitat include NNIS treatment, hazard tree removal, firewood collection and wildfire (since 2011), which are displayed in the following table. Table 115. Alternative 1 mule deer cumulative effects Activity Total Acres Affected Hiding Cover Affected (acres) Thermal Cover Affected (acres) Grazing 5,172 4,204 805 Hazard Tree Removal 309 232 8 NNIS Treatment 292 189 20 Wildfire 10 9 0 Effects on grazing and NNIS treatment are expected to be similar to those described under elk, and while there would be localized reductions in forage, existing cover and forage would be maintained. As a result, and based on past use, effects from grazing would remain largely unchanged. Also, over the long term, NNIS treatment would be expected to help maintain native mule deer forage. Mule deer hiding and thermal cover would be reduced on 241 acres and 8 acres, respectively, due to hazard tree removal and wildfire and there would also be a localized reduction in cover in areas with concentrated MPB mortality. Firewood collection along open roads would continue, although there would be little changes in cover and forage. So while there would be localized changes in available habitat, mule deer cover and forage would be largely unchanged and continue to be available across the landscape. As a result there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a continued reduction in deer forage. Alternative 1 Determination and Conclusions Deer cover on winter, transition and summer ranges would be altered due to continued MPB mortality. Forage availability would increase somewhat but would continue to remain low, and over the long-term, herd health would not be expected to improve. Adequate forage and cover would continue to be available to support existing populations and maintain hunting opportunities. Alternatives 2 and 3 As described under affected environment, the entire project area is considered deer habitat. Hiding cover occurs on approximately 19,000 acres or 79 percent of the project area, whereas winter range thermal cover occurs on approximately 500 acres. Treatments proposed under the action alternatives within deer hiding and thermal cover are displayed in table 116. Effects of the different treatments on cover are similar to those described previously for elk. Table 116. Treatments within deer hiding cover by alternative  Deer Hiding Cover Treated Deer Winter Range Thermal Cover Treated Treatment Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Acres %1 Acres %1 Acres %1 Acres %1 Intermediate Harvest3 1,711 9 806 4 56 11 59 12 Regeneration Harvest3 847 4 723 3 0 0 0 0 Low Intensity Burn2 314 3 734 5 20 4 20 4 Jackpot Burn 0 0 321 2 0 0 0 0 Mixed Severity Burn2,4 3,351 22 1,999 13 144 29 75 15 Total 6,223 33 4,583 24 220 44 154 31 Reduction in Cover 3,395 18 2,029 11 92 19 78 16 1 – percent of available cover. 2 – Assumes 20 percent of the site would be unburned 3 – Cover would be reduced on the acres affected 4 – Cover would be reduced on lands affected by high intensity fire or 25 percent of acres affected Direct and Indirect Effects Anticipated direct effects of proposed treatments are discussed in section 4.3.2. Effects are expected to be similar to those described for elk, although deer are evaluated across the project area. Deer are highly mobile and there is no mortality anticipated. Effects are expected to largely involve short-term behavioral avoidance during treatment. However it may take 5 to 10 years to complete all proposed burning. Also due to the interspersion of unburned areas, INFISH buffers, and with implementation of PDFs that retain cover near treatment areas, adequate cover and forage would continue to exist to accommodate any displaced animals. Cover Indirect effects are discussed under section 4.3.2 and changes in habitat conditions mimic those discussed for elk. Deer hiding cover would be reduced by 3,395 acres under alternative 2 and 2,029 acres under alternative 3, whereas winter range thermal cover would be reduced by 92 acres and 78 acres under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. Effects would vary by treatment type. The reduction in overstory cover on lands affected by regeneration harvest and intermediate harvest would reduce cover on the lands affected, whereas openings created by mixed-severity fire would also reduce cover. There would some overstory mortality associated with low severity burning and most of the mixed severity fire; however, this would be widely scattered and the overstory would remain intact. Low severity burning would also reduce understory cover; however, considering that 20 percent of all burn units would be untreated, project design features include retention of downed wood and shrubs, and riparian buffers would be left largely unchanged, some cover would be retained in all units. As a result, treatment areas are interspersed with un-treated lands, and cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment sites and adjacent to forage areas. Forage As described under treatment effects, proposed regeneration harvest, intermediate treatments and burning are expected to increase available deer forage, including increases on summer, transition and winter ranges. For example, in ponderosa pine stands that typically occur at lower elevations on winter ranges, vegetation and forage can increase from near zero on closed-canopy stands to greater than 678 pounds per acre in stands with open canopies (Regelin and Wallmo 1978). Research noted forage production more than doubled in subalpine fir stands that were regenerated, and deer spent 72 percent of their foraging time in clearcut areas (Regelin and Wallmo 1978). These benefits continued over the long term and forage availability within regenerated stands was still 13 to 36 percent greater 18 to 20 years after harvest. (Wallmo et al. 1972; Collins and Urness 1983 in Hayden et al. 2008). Like elk, forage availability for deer depends on the proximity of the created forage to cover, and Hayden et al. (2008) suggests that deer forage should be within 600 feet of cover. As a result, changes in forage would be expected to be similar to those discussed under elk. Forage would be immediately available in many units due to the cover retained in unburned portions of all burn units, INFISH buffers and adjacent untreated stands, whereas over the long-term, forage would increase within all treatment acres. In addition to increasing the amount of forage available, proposed burning would also increase palatability and use. For example, while preferences vary seasonally, deer often prefer to forage in burned vs. unburned areas, which indicates that an increase in plant nutrients and/or preference usually occurs following fire. Gruell (1986 in USDA Forest Service 2011b) found that surface fires of moderate intensity following thinning and selection cuts can improve Douglas-fir or ponderosa pine forests for mule deer by promoting regeneration of crown-sprouting shrubs and preparing the seedbed for herbs and shrubs. Hobbs and Spoward (1984) found that prescribed burning elevated the concentration of protein and digestible matter in winter diets of mule deer feeding in grassland and mountain shrub communities. They also found that effects of fire on diet quality resulted from changes in the increased availability of species and diet selection rather than improvement in individual species. Differences in the amount of green grass accounted for much of the enhancement in diet quality and they concluded that prescribed fire can improve winter habitat for mule deer. The size of openings created by burning is also a consideration. Hayden et al. (2008) recommend maintaining or improving a matrix of forage conditions across the landscape with emphasis on increasing the variety of forage plants available and a mixture of shrub age classes. They also recommend that small openings— preferably less than 50 acres on summer range and less than 10 acres of winter range—be encouraged or maintained. Because most of the burning within deer winter range would be low-severity burning or mixed-severity burning that creates openings less than 10 acres in size, these winter range recommendations would be largely achieved under both action alternatives. Similarly, while there may be an occasional opening that reaches 75 acres in size in summer range, most mixed severity openings are expected to be at or below 50 acres. Finally, because proposed treatments would maintain or promote aspen, as well as increase herbaceous vegetation and shrubs, both alternatives would increase forage diversity across the landscape. While both alternatives propose roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, because these roads would be closed to public use during implementation and restored following treatments, any road-related impacts would be short term (see section 4.3.2). All roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal occur in areas that are already roaded and open to the public, therefore, human access would be largely unchanged and there are no anticipated increases in hunting-related mortality, road related disturbance or long-term human access. In summary, while there would be changes in deer cover and forage, when viewed across the landscape, both action alternatives would create a mosaic of cover and forage conditions that are preferred by deer. Additionally, both alternatives would improve forage conditions on summer, winter and transition ranges while maintaining cover over the short and long-term. Collectively, treatments proposed under either action alternative would be expected to maintain deer numbers over the short term and increase herd health over the long term. Cumulative Effects In addition to cumulative effects described under alternative 1, treatments proposed would affect up to (alternative 2) another 6,223 acres of hiding cover and 220 acres of winter range thermal cover. While hiding and winter range thermal cover would be reduced, cover would continue to be available within and adjacent to treatment units, as well as adjacent to available forage. There would also be a reduction in future cover in areas of concentrated MPB mortality as dead and dying trees fall to the ground. Proposed treatments would increase forage availability on over 7,000 acres of deer summer, winter and transition ranges (alternative 2). The changes in cover and forage would affect deer distribution and use. However, considering that existing uses are not expected to change; many ongoing and future activities would result in short-term disturbance (See alternative 1); treatment would be restricted to a single drainage at a time and unaffected lands would continue to be available to accommodate any displaced animals; and deer cover and forage would continue to be available within affected drainages and across the landscape, there are no significant cumulative effects anticipated. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible commitments anticipated. Irretrievable commitments include a reduction in hiding and thermal cover, as well as reduced forage greater than 500 feet from cover; however, forage would be improved both in the short and long term, and hiding and thermal cover would be restored on all sites treated. Determination and Conclusions Treatments proposed under alternatives 2 and 3 would reduce deer hiding and thermal cover and increase deer forage. Based on the analysis presented previously and the following rationale, adequate cover would continue to be available to support existing populations, whereas foraging availability would increase over the short and long term. Hunting opportunities would be maintained. · Implementation would result in both short- and long-term increases in the availability and diversity of forage on summer, transition and winter range, which are expected to result in a long-term increase in herd health. · Over 82 percent of existing hiding cover and 95 percent of existing winter range thermal cover would be maintained and cover would continue to be available across the landscape and adjacent to forage areas. · Existing hunter access would be unchanged. · Implementation would reduce wildfire risk and restore fire to the landscape. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Mule deer habitat would remain relatively unchanged under alternative 1. While the action alternatives would reduce deer cover, short- and long-term forage would be improved. Suitable deer cover would continue to be available. All alternatives are in compliance with Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) direction to maintain and improve habitat over time to support big game and other wildlife (II-1), develop and implement a road management program with road use and travel restrictions that are responsive to resource protection needs (p. II/2), and ensure that viable populations of existing native and desired nonnative species are maintained (p. II/17). All alternatives are consistent with National Forest Management Act requirements to provide for a diversity of animal communities (16 USC 1604((g)(3)(B)); also see 36 CFR 219.10(b): and FSM 2670.12. Compliance with Forest Plan Standard 8 Forest Plan standard 8 (Forest Plan II/19) requires that any proposed sagebrush reduction programs will be analyzed on a case-by-case basis for possible impacts on big game winter range. The action alternatives have been analyzed to determine the impacts of prescribed burning in sagebrush (See section 4.55). The analysis has indicated that although some sagebrush would be removed through burning, a sagebrush component would be retained on all sites. Also over the long-term sagebrush vigor and forage quality would be improved and, as such, beneficial to mule deer. Management Areas There are six Management Areas within the project area; of those, three Management Areas contain direction relevant to mule deer habitat: Management Area T-1 Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat - All roads to be constructed would be closed to public use and obliterated following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas – Deer hiding cover and thermal cover is provided in 2,141 acres and 314 acres of the T-3 management area respectively. Hiding cover would be reduced on up to 608 acres and thermal cover reduced on up to 87 acres; however cover would be maintained in all units affected by burning, INFISH buffers and PDF’s would maintain a cover component within all units, unaffected cover would be maintained adjacent to treatment units, and forage would increase on all treatment units. Therefore, both alternatives maintain adequate cover adjacent to foraging areas. Management Area T-2 Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat – All new roads would be closed to public use and decommissioned following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas. Generally this means providing 25 percent thermal cover on identified winter range – Winter range thermal cover is provided on 78 acres of 12 percent of the management area winter range. Due to the natural fragmentation and open stand conditions that characterize the project area, management area T-2 winter range does not currently provide 25 percent thermal cover. Both action alternatives would reduce winter range thermal cover by up to 56 acres and move further away from Forest Plan thresholds. This situation will be addressed in a separate site-specific Forest Plan amendment. Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested – There are treatment units next to existing plantations that currently do not provide hiding cover. Prior to implementation, these plantations would be evaluated in order to determine their current contribution to hiding cover. If they do not meet hiding cover definitions, then buffers would be retained between those areas in order to provide some level of cover between past and proposed treatment units. Buffers would be at least 200 feet wide (based on the hiding cover definition), although they may be wider if field data indicates that this is necessary. Management Area T-3 Maintain 50 percent hiding cover (MFWP definition) for big game – There are currently 4,840 acres (74 percent of the management area) of big game hiding cover. While the action alternatives would reduce existing hiding cover by up to 853acres, hiding cover would be retained on over 82 percent of the lands within management area T-3. Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat – All new roads would be closed to public use and decommissioned following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas – Deer hiding cover and thermal cover is provided on 4,840 acres and 903 acres of the T-3 management area respectively. Hiding cover would be reduced on up to 853 acres and thermal cover reduced on up to 67 acres. Considering that cover would be maintained in all units affected by burning, INFISH buffers and PDF’s would maintain a cover component within all units, unaffected cover would be maintained adjacent to treatment units, and forage would increase on all treatment units, both alternatives maintain adequate cover adjacent to foraging areas. Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested – There are treatment units next to existing plantations that currently do not provide hiding cover. Prior to implementation, these plantations would be evaluated in order to determine their current contribution to hiding cover. If they do not meet hiding cover definitions, then buffers would be retained between those areas in order to provide some level of cover between past and proposed treatment units. Buffers would be at least 200 feet wide, although they may be wider if field data indicate that this is necessary. Management Area W-1 Wildlife habitat improvement practices, including road management, prescribed fire and other techniques, may be used to maintain and/or enhance the quality of big game winter habitat – All new roads would be closed to public use and decommissioned following implementation. Prescribed fire goals include improving forage diversity and production in big game winter ranges. Maintain adequate thermal cover and hiding cover adjacent to forage areas – Deer hiding cover and thermal cover is provided on 3,452 acres and 494 acres of the W-1 management area respectively. Hiding and thermal cover would be reduced by burning on up to 193 acres and 23 acres respectively. However, considering that at least 20 percent of all burn units would be unaffected, INFISH buffers and PDF’s would maintain a cover component within burned areas, unaffected cover would be maintained adjacent to treatment units, and forage would increase on lands treated, both alternatives maintain adequate cover adjacent to foraging areas. Migratory Birds As described under methodology, effects to migratory birds are addressed in the species and habitat sections of this analysis, in combination with analysis of threatened, endangered, sensitive birds and bird species of conservation concern. The memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service on the Migratory Bird Treaty Act identifies key principles and directs the Forest Service to (1) focus on bird populations; (2) focus on habitat restoration and enhancement where actions can benefit specific ecosystems and migratory birds dependent on them; (3) recognize that actions taken to benefit some migratory bird populations may adversely affect other migratory bird populations; and (4) recognize that actions that may provide long-term benefits to migratory birds may have short-term impacts on individual birds. The parties agreed that through the NEPA process, the Forest Service would evaluate the effects of agency actions on migratory birds, focusing first on species of management concern along with their priority habitats and key risk factors. Migratory birds and their habitats including species with viability concern (TES) and priority species are evaluated in the habitat and species-specific sections. Alternative 1 would maintain habitat over the short term, whereas alternatives 2 and 3 would help to restore declining habitats while maintaining diverse habitat conditions across the landscape. As a result, habitat for migratory birds would be maintained or improved under all alternatives. Also, local populations of all species that currently utilize the project area are expected to be maintained. The action alternatives focus on habitat restoration, and include project design features that are expected to reduce impacts to migratory birds, therefore, all alternatives are in compliance with the Migratory Bird Treaty ActPlants Introduction There are no threatened, endangered or proposed plant species known to occur on the Helena National Forest (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2011b). Therefore, this section is limited to analyzing Region 1(R1) sensitive species and their habitats. Sensitive species are species identified by the Regional Forester for which population viability is currently of concern, as evidenced by significant current or predicted downward trends in population numbers or density, or by significant current or predicted downward trends in habitat capability that would reduce a species’ existing distribution (USDA Forest Service 2005). The Forest Service has established direction in Forest Service Manual 2600 – Wildlife, Fish, and Sensitive Plant Habitat Management (FSM 2600, USDA Forest Service 2005)) to guide habitat management for proposed, endangered, threatened, and sensitive plant species. This direction establishes the process, objectives, and standards for conducting a biological evaluation, and ensures that these species receive full consideration in the decision making process. The Botany Report and Biological Evaluation (Englebert 2012) incorporated all the information required for a biological evaluation. Nine sensitive plant species are known to occur on or very near the Helena National Forest. An additional 12 species are suspected to occur on the Forest. Those 21 species are identified in table 117, along with the likelihood of occurrence. Whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) is the only sensitive species found in the project area. The species listed as ‘possible’ in the project area may have habitat within the project area. Only those listed as ‘known to occur’ or ‘possible occurrence’ are carried forward in this analysis. The remaining species do not have habitat in the project area and therefore no impacts to those species from this project are expected. Table 117. Region 1 sensitive plant species that occur or may occur on the Helena National Forest SPECIES (FAMILY) COMMON NAME KNOWN TO OCCUR ON HELENA NATIONAL FOREST KNOWN TO OCCUR IN STONEWALL PROJECT AREA LIKELIHOOD OF OCCURRENCE IN STONEWALL PROJECT AREA Amerorchis rotundifolia (Orchidaceae) Roundleaf orchid No No Possible – Known from the Rocky Mtn. Front and the NW corner of Montana in spruce forests along seeps and streams Aquilegia brevistyla (Ranunculaceae) Smallflower columbine No No Unlikely – In Montana, it is known only from the Little Belt Mts in open woods and stream banks at mid-elevations in the montane zone. Astragalus lackschewitzii (Fabaceae) Lackschewitz’s milkvetch No No Unlikely – Restricted to high elevation gravelly and rocky slopes and ridges, this species’ SPECIES (FAMILY) COMMON NAME KNOWN TO OCCUR ON HELENA NATIONAL FOREST KNOWN TO OCCUR IN STONEWALL PROJECT AREA LIKELIHOOD OF OCCURRENCE IN STONEWALL PROJECT AREA habitat is not generally subject to human disturbance Botrychium crenulatum (Ophioglossaceae) Scalloped moonwort No No Possible – Known from the Beaverhead-Deerlodge National Forest and in western Montana, it generally occurs in wet habitats with high cover. Botrychium paradoxum (Ophioglossaceae) Peculiar moonwort Yes No Possible – This diminutive species is known from the Occidental Plateau, and near Irish Mine Hill. On the Helena NF populations are in sagebrush/rough fescue and rough fescue, however other populations have been documented from mesic meadows associated with spruce and lodgepole pine forests in montane and subalpine (MNHP 2007) Cypripedium parviflorum (Orchidaceae) Lesser yellow lady’s slipper Yes No Possible -- Known from Divide landscape in fens, damp mossy woods, seepage area, and moist forest-meadow ecotone, in valleys & lower montane. Cypripedium passerinum (Orchidaceae) Sparrow egg lady’s slipper No No Possible – This orchid is found in mossy, moist, or seepy places in coniferous forest; in northwestern Montana including Glacier NP. Drosera anglica (Droseraceae) English sundew Yes No Unlikely – Known from Indian Meadows, this species occurs with sphagnum moss in wet, organic soils of fens. Habitat is specialized. Drosera linearis (Droseraceae) Slenderleaf sundew Yes No Unlikely – Known from Indian Meadows, in wet, organic soil of nutrient-poor fens Epipactis gigantea (Orchidaceae) Stream orchid No No Unlikely – This species is associated with seeps and springs, often thermal. Goodyera repens (Orchidaceae) Lesser rattlesnake plantain No No Unlikely –In Montana, it is known from the Little Belt and Big Snowy Mts. in moist, montane forests with mossy understory. Grindelia howellii (Asteraceae) Howell’s gumweed No No Possible –This species is an endemic known only from a cluster of sites northeast of Missoula, and a single county in Idaho. SPECIES (FAMILY) COMMON NAME KNOWN TO OCCUR ON HELENA NATIONAL FOREST KNOWN TO OCCUR IN STONEWALL PROJECT AREA LIKELIHOOD OF OCCURRENCE IN STONEWALL PROJECT AREA Juncus hallii (Juncaceae) Hall’s rush Yes No Possible—Several populations occur on the Forest in the Big Belts and the Divide area. Moist to wet meadows, Oxytropis podocarpa (Fabaceae) Stalkpod locoweed No No Unlikely – Habitat for this species is in the alpine zone. Phlox kelseyi var. missoulensis (Phlox missoulensis ) (Polemoniaceae) Missoula phlox Yes No Possible – It is known from east of the analysis area; habitat is rough fescue meadow, exposed, limestone-derived slopes in foothills and montane. Pinus albicaulis (Pinaceae) Whitebark pine Yes Yes Known to occur- This species is known to occur in almost all major mountain ranges of western and central Montana. In the project area it is known to be a component of several of the treatment units. Polygonum douglasii ssp. austinae (Polygonaceae) Austin knotweed Yes No Unlikely—This taxon is known from the Big Belts in open gravelly shale-derived soil of eroding slopes/banks or usually moist, barren shale slopes. Saxifraga tempestiva (Saxifragaceae) Storm saxifrage No No Unlikely – This species is a Montana endemic known only from vernally moist open sites and rock ledges at high elevations, west of Continental Divide. Schoenoplectus subterminalis (Cyperaceae) Swaying bulrush Yes No Unlikely – This species is known from Indian Meadows, and sites in the NW primarily west of Continental Divide in open water and boggy margins of ponds, lakes, and sloughs. Thalictrum alpinum (Ranunculaceae) Alpine meadow-rue No No Unlikely – In Montana, this species is known from sites in the SW corner, in moist alkaline meadows. Veratrum californicum (Liliaceae) California false hellebore No No Unlikely – In Montana it is known from 4 sites in Bitterroot Valley Methodology The Montana Natural Heritage Program (MTNHP) (2010) maintains a statewide database for sensitive species. Data from the MTNHP was applied to known sensitive plant populations in the project area. Ground reconnaissance was conducted by Forest Service personnel in representative habitats within the project area. Field reconnaissance was conducted throughout the project area, with focus on moist and wetland habitats associated with timber harvest proposals. Those habitats support several sensitive species (USDA Forest Service 1998) and have the highest potential for sensitive plant populations. Wetlands throughout the project area were delineated and no sensitive plant populations were found. Field notes and GPS locations to represent specific field locations can be found in the project record. Past surveys by the Montana Natural Heritage Program, botanical surveys from the Indian Meadows Research Natural Area as well as past surveys by Forest Service personnel were the focus for the current survey work (Olsen 2010). In 2005, Cooper and others conducted inventories searching for sensitive vascular plants as well as riparian and wetland associated plant communities in the area of the Snow Talon fire and areas to the west of the fire, which included the Stonewall Project area. No sensitive plant populations were found in this survey. Those survey records can be found in the project record. Barton and Crispin (2002) completed surveys across the Helena National Forest in 2002. The purpose of the surveys was to locate sensitive plant populations in association with noxious weed populations, primarily along roadsides. Some of the roads in the project area were surveyed. No sensitive plant populations were found in this area during those surveys. Whitebark pine was added to the Regional Forester’s Sensitive Species List in 2011(Weldon 2011a), so was not included as a sensitive species in the previous surveys. Stand exam data for the project area indicate that it is present in several of the prescribed fire treatment units and it is also present in other units as an “occasional” component (Amell 2012, Milburn et al. 2009). The methodology used in this analysis includes the best available science gathered from inventory data as well as several geospatial layers using known sensitive plant populations to predict sensitive plant habitat. The specific layers used include the Montana Natural Heritage Program data on sensitive species, the Helena National Forest Soil Survey, digital elevation models, information and experiences from past surveys, personal ground reconnaissance of the project area by Forest Service personnel along with field crew surveys in areas identified as potential habitat. Assumptions The following assumptions were used: · Species on the Regional Forester's Sensitive Species List that occur on, or are suspected to occur on the Helena National Forest have been identified. · Geospatial systems combined with habitat information, on-the-ground experience and past surveys is useful to screen areas of low probability of species occurrence. · Reconnaissance of representative habitats is appropriate to determine the presence of sensitive plant populations. · Known habitats need to be specifically identified and surveyed in the field. Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis Direct effects are those that occur at the same time and place of the proposed actions. Indirect effects are those effects that may occur along roads and stands adjacent to proposed treatments. The cumulative effects analysis area for sensitive plant species is the Stonewall Project area. For the herbaceous sensitive species this analysis is bounded in time by 10 years past and 10 years into the future, which allows for an adequate length of time to record vegetative changes. The analysis for whitebark pine however requires a much greater temporal bounding; please see the Vegetation Section for details of the whitebark pine analysis. Overview of Issues Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on plants were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Indicators The following indicators were used to measure the differences between alternatives: · For whitebark pine we looked at the total acres proposed for treatment in units in which whitebark pine has been identified. · Because sensitive species habitat can be degraded by noxious weed infestations, we looked at the estimated acres of potential noxious weed infestation due to proposed activities. · In addition, effects that cannot be easily quantified are described qualitatively. Impacts to sensitive plant species may be direct impacts, such as trampling, defoliation, and mechanical damage; or the impacts may be more indirect such as a change in the microclimate or a change in species composition, both of which may result in a loss of habitat. In general, direct impacts are short-term impacts, occurring immediately, while indirect impacts such as changes to the habitat occur over a longer timeframe. Affected Environment Existing Condition Whitebark pine is the only sensitive species known to occur in the project area, and is carried forward in this analysis. None of the eight species identified as possibly occurring in the project area were located during survey work to date. Additional rationale for carrying these species forward in this analysis includes (Olsen 2010): · Roundleaf orchid has not been found on the Helena National Forest, but is known from the Rocky Mountain Front, north of the Blackfoot landscape area. Habitat may exist in the wetter parts of the project area. · Scalloped moonwort is known from the Beaverhead-Deerlodge National Forest, immediately adjacent to the Helena National Forest adjacent to the Divide landscape area. This species has not been found to date on the Helena National Forest. Habitat may exist in the project area for this species along stream bottoms, around seeps, on the edges of marshes, and in wet roadside swales. · Peculiar moonwort is known from two populations on the Helena National Forest, both in the Divide landscape area. Habitat may occur in the project area in mesic meadows. · Lesser yellow lady’s slipper was found at one location within the Helena National Forest boundary and at another location just outside the boundary. Neither population has been recently documented in additional sensitive plant surveys. The population occurs in the Divide landscape area. Habitat may occur in the project area in moist coniferous forests, seepage areas and moist ecotones between peatlands and upland forest. · Sparrow egg lady’s slipper has not been found on the Helena National Forest but is known from Glacier Park and northwest Montana. Habitat for this species is the same as that for lesser yellow lady’s slipper. · Howell’s gumweed has not been found on the Helena Forest but is known from an area west of the Blackfoot landscape. It may have habitat in the project area in vernally moist, lightly disturbed soil adjacent to ponds and marshes, as well as similar human-created habitats such as roadsides. · Hall’s rush has 15 populations Forest-wide. The Montana Heritage database identifies eight populations on the Helena National Forest (three of the Heritage Program populations were again documented by Helena National Forest survey crews in 2009). Seven new populations were found by Helena National Forest survey crews in 2009. The populations occur in the Divide and Big Belts landscape areas. This plant may have habitat in the project area in wet to moist meadows. · Missoula phlox has been found in each of the four landscape areas of the Forest. The Montana Heritage database identifies eight populations on the Helena National Forest. Three new populations were located in 2008 and three additional populations were found in 2009 while the Forest was validating a model which predicts sensitive plant habitat. Details for field survey areas and protocols are available in the project record. There may be habitat for this taxon in the project area along wind-swept ridges and forb-dominated meadows. Species Unlikely to be Present All species, except whitebark pine, were included during field surveys, but it was determined that 12 of those species are unlikely to occur in the project area (as indicated in table 117). Those 12 species are not carried forward in this analysis. The following is additional rationale for the elimination of those species (Olsen 2010): · English sundew, slenderleaf sundew and swaying bulrush are known from the Indian Meadows Research Natural Area, which is in the combination boundary but would not be affected by the proposed treatments. These species are found in fens, which are very rare and specialized habitats. No other fens are known within the project area. · Lackschewitz’s milkvetch, stream orchid, stalkpod locoweed, storm saxifrage, and California false hellebore all have very specialized habitat that does not occur in the project area. · Smallflower columbine, lesser rattlesnake plantain, and alpine meadow-rue are not likely to occur in the project area as the known populations are not from this area. These species have not been found on the Helena National Forest to date, but the species are searched for in any survey work. Environmental Consequences Effects Common to All Alternatives Effects to herbaceous sensitive species from large, stand-replacing fire If current management continues (alternative 1), a large stand-replacing fire is a potential reality (Kurtz 2009). The action alternatives cannot eliminate the potential for a large-scale fire; however, the activities proposed are designed to modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape, thereby reducing the risk to resources in the project area. Thus, while the potential for wildfires is common to all three alternatives, there is less risk of effects to herbaceous sensitive species from wildfire under both the action alternatives. The potential exists for wildfire to have short-term detrimental effects on herbaceous sensitive plant habitats, but long-term effects are not anticipated in most cases. However, there has been a dramatic increase of severe wildfires in the ponderosa pine type in recent decades where fuels have built up due to fire suppression (Agee and Skinner 2005). In these habitats there is potential for long-term damage to sensitive plant habitats (Menges and Dolan 1998, Pendergrass et al. 1999). Plant response to fire is a result of the interaction between severity of the fire and the individual plant species’ inherent resistance to injury and ability to recover (Brown and Kapler Smith 2000). Mortality of herbaceous species is more dependent on the length of time plants are exposed to high heat, determined by the amount of duff and woody fuel consumed by the fire, than flame length and fire line intensity (Armour et al. 1984). The effect of wildfire on herbaceous sensitive plant habitats therefore would depend on the surface fuel conditions. The longer fuels build up on the forest floor, the greater the potential damage to herbaceous sensitive plant habitats. After habitat loss, the spread of invasive species is considered the greatest threat to imperiled species in the United States (Sieg et al. 2003). Large stand-replacing fires are known to increase the risk of infestation by noxious weeds (D’Antonio 2000). Thus included with the potential for large-scale fire is the risk of noxious weed infestation. Of course, fires are not the only cause of weed infestations; any time the ground is disturbed (such as with the activities proposed under the action alternatives) there is the potential for infestation. Noxious weeds cause habitat degradation because they can out-compete desired plant species for water and nutrients. Drift from herbicides sprayed to help control weeds can also have detrimental effects to herbaceous sensitive plants. This risk is reduced by adhering to label instructions for applying specific herbicides, and by application of project design feature NOX-9 that requires a 100-foot buffer around sensitive plant species when applying herbicides. Within this buffer, only hand-pulling of weeds would be allowed (USDA Forest Service 2006c, d). Effects specific to whitebark pine Whitebark pine in the Northern Rocky Mountains depends on fire to maintain its dominance or presence on sites where it is a successional species (see the Vegetation section). Therefore if a large, stand-replacing fire occurs, whitebark pine may benefit because sites suitable for regeneration would be created. If, however, no seed source is nearby to facilitate the regeneration, such a fire could largely eliminate this sensitive species from the area. As is noted in the Vegetation section, the increases in fuel loads threaten the survival of even the largest and most fire-resistant whitebark pine trees. Whitebark pine has been declining throughout major portions of its range for the last 50 years due to the effects of diseases, insects, and succession (Amell 2012). Although the action alternatives may reduce the effects from these threats they cannot eliminate the threats, therefore effects from diseases, insects and succession are common to all alternatives. Please see appendix B for a detailed discussion of these threats. Effects Common to All Action Alternatives The effects of ground disturbance on herbaceous sensitive plant populations would be similar in all action alternatives. There are no known occurrences of herbaceous sensitive species in the project area; however, if unknown occurrences are present those plants may be directly impacted by ground-disturbing activities. Effects from ground disturbance include the risk of noxious weed infestation as discussed earlier in the section Effects Common to All Alternatives, as well as direct impacts such as trampling, defoliation, soil and vegetation compaction and mechanical damage. These effects may be detrimental to individual plants as well as to the habitat for the sensitive plants. There is a project design feature in place that would reduce the risk of impacts by requiring appropriate mitigation if a population is located within the project area: · If sensitive plant populations are located within the project area appropriate mitigation (e.g., site avoidance, avoid concentration of fuels on sites to be burned) would be followed upon consultation with a Forest Service botanist. There are known occurrences of whitebark pine in the proposed treatment areas of both action alternatives. Those occurrences would be protected by the project design feature SILV-2 which is designed to protect whitebark pine individuals and enhance habitat for the species. Thus while there is the potential for individuals to be charred or physically damaged during the treatment, beneficial effects (in the form of habitat enhancement due to the removal of shade-tolerant species and creation of caching sites for Clark’s nutcrackers) are expected in the long-term. The Vegetation section states that whitebark pine would increase in the short term with the increase extending into the long term under both action alternatives. Alternative 1– No Action Direct and Indirect Effects There would be no direct effects to any of the sensitive species under alternative 1, since none of the proposed treatments would occur. Current management would continue. Alternative 1 does not propose activities to modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Current management activities would not reduce potential for stand replacing wildfire events in the treated stands or help to break up the structure in the project area. Consequently, there is potential for indirect effects from wildfire as discussed earlier under Effects Common to All Alternatives. Amell (2012) states in the Silviculture section that whitebark pine are expected to decline with the continuation of current management. Rather than reiterate that information, it is incorporated here by reference. Irreversible/Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments that would affect sensitive plants under this alternative. Cumulative Effects There are policies in place that reduce or eliminate impacts from management activities on sensitive species (USDA Forest Service 2005). Therefore, the effects expected from this alternative when combined with the effects from the other management activities past and future, are not expected to contribute to change in status or viability of sensitive plants. In addition, cumulative effects are not expected to contribute to an increase in current or predicted downward trends in population numbers or habitat capability that would reduce the existing distribution of any of the R1 sensitive plant species discussed in this analysis, under this alternative. This conclusion applies the analysis indicators for direct and indirect effects (i.e. potential for direct physical impacts of trampling and defoliation, and potential for habitat degradation due to infestation of invasive species) from the proposed activities and adds them to expected effects from other management activities. Cumulative effects from the following activities across the planning area are not anticipated: · There is a roadside hazard tree removal project occurring on the main roads in this project area. The ground disturbance associated with that activity may increase the potential for habitat degradation from infestation of noxious weeds; however infestations would be monitored and treated per the Helena National Forest Noxious Weed Record of Decision (2006d). · Livestock grazing within the analysis area would continue as identified in the Allotment Management Plans for the Stonewall, Keep Cool and Arrastra allotments. There are no known occurrences of sensitive species within these allotments. Known sensitive plant populations on the forest, outside the project area, have not shown adverse effects from grazing and would not be affected by fuel treatment activities from this project. · Timber harvest and thinning (fuels reduction) has led to changes in forest composition, structure and fire frequency. There are no known sensitive plant species in the project area that occur in areas that have been harvested or thinned. There are areas outside the project area where known sensitive plant species occur within past harvest treatment areas, however, those occurrences would not be affected by treatment activities from this project. · Motorized and nonmotorized recreational use has led to the development of nonsystem roads and trails, development of dispersed campsites, erosion, and vectoring of noxious weeds into areas not previously infested. These activities can lead to physical damage to plants and their habitats (biomass removal, vegetation compaction and ground disturbance). Vehicles and people help to spread noxious weeds by carrying weed seeds into new areas. These impacts are controllable through area closures and travel management. · Road and trail construction and maintenance causes soil disturbance and erosion, fragmentation and destruction of habitat, and noxious weed invasion. It also increases the impacts from recreational activities by allowing improved access for those activities. Known sensitive plant locations outside the project area would not be affected by activities associated with proposed roadwork from this project. If any populations are discovered associated with ground disturbing activities, they would be protected. Populations would also be protected from herbicide application. · Fire suppression has led to increased fuel loading, canopy closure, and higher intensity wildfire. Fire is a natural disturbance in the ecosystem. In some areas, habitat succession and fire could possibly create or improve habitat for select plant species by opening up meadows or reducing the litter accumulation and competition from other plants. In other areas, wildfires or controlled fires would create high ground temperatures that could sterilize the soil and eliminate fungal species that are necessary for the survival of others. Whitebark pine is dependent on fire to maintain its presence in the project area (Amell 2012). Fire exclusion has allowed an increase in competition from shade-tolerant species. Fire also tends to favor post-fire germination of nonnative species in environments where nonnatives are abundant and/or native species are stressed. · Trends in climate change indicate the future precipitation levels will be lower and temperatures will be higher than the current long-term averages. Drier conditions are expected to be detrimental to riparian species that depend on moist habitats. Warmer temperatures are expected to result in a change in the distribution of plants as the elevation at which plants are found shifts upward. This shift appears to be greater for species found in mountain habitats (Lenoir et al. 2008). Modeling predicts a decline in whitebark pine due to global increase in temperature and more frequent summer droughts. However it’s also predicted that there will be an expansion of whitebark pine due to more frequent fire return intervals resulting from global warming (Fryer 2002). · Noxious weeds would continue to be treated as specified in the Helena National Forest Noxious Weed FEIS and Record of Decision (USDA Forest Service 2006d). While herbicides used in treating noxious weeds may be inherently harmful to herbaceous plants, the existing Forest program as many safeguards in place to prevent detrimental impacts to sensitive species. The actions and effects described in this section can be both additive and interactive to each other and to the direct and indirect effects described above. As stated earlier, because current management direction is designed to eliminate or reduce negative cumulative impacts by protecting sensitive plants from direct and indirect impacts, the cumulative effects to all species discussed in this analysis are expected to be minimal. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Project Design Features Common to All Action Alternatives The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to plants and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design feature in table 9 pertaining to plants is BOT-1 that addresses all alternatives, all units This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to both action alternatives. Design features that are applicable to sensitive plant species include not only those listed above, designed specifically to protect sensitive plant species but also those designed to protect other resources. Direct and Indirect Effects Because no herbaceous sensitive species are known to occur in the proposed treatment areas, direct effects to the herbaceous sensitive species are not expected. Whitebark pine is known to occur in five units as shown in table 118. Please note the “Acres in Unit” does not reflect total acres of whitebark pine, but rather the total acres of the unit of which whitebark pine is a component. And while it is known that whitebark pine occurs in these units, it may also occur (as scattered individuals) in other units. These acres are used as a basis for comparing alternatives. Under Alternative 2, prescribed fire treatment is proposed on 2,557 acres, in which whitebark pine is a component of the species composition. As discussed under Effects Common to All Action Alternatives, those occurrences of whitebark pine would be protected by the project design feature SILV-2 (table 9, chapter 2). Under this alternative whitebark pine is expected to increase in the short term, with the increase extending into the long term (Amell 2012). Please see appendix B for details of effects to whitebark pine. Table 118 Treatment units with whitebark pine present – Alternative 2 UNIT ID ACRES IN UNIT PROPOSED TREATMENT 76 123 prescribed fire 79 337 prescribed fire 82 776 prescribed fire 83 457 prescribed fire 88 864 prescribed fire Total acres 2,557  There is a potential for indirect effects from wildfire as discussed under Effects Common to All Alternatives. The risk of effects from wildfire (including the connected noxious weed infestation) is less under alternative 2 than under alternative 1, as the proposed actions are designed to meet the purpose and need by modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. The proposed actions are meant to reduce potential for stand replacing wildfire events in the treated stands, as well as break up the structure in the project area. Reducing potential for stand-replacing events may reduce wildfire impacts to sensitive plants. Potential habitat degradation due to noxious weed infestation as a result of ground disturbance is greater under alternative 2 than alternative 1. The Invasive Plants section identifies the potential for an additional 311 acres of potential weed infestation due to the proposed activities. This does not mean 311 acres of sensitive species habitat would be infested, but rather the risk of infestation of sensitive species habitat is greater under alternative 2 because of the potential increase of weeds in the area. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments that would affect sensitive plants under this alternative when project design features are applied. Cumulative Effects The cumulative actions and resulting cumulative effects as discussed under alternative 1 also apply to alternative 2. There would be no cumulative effects for this alternative as no known herbaceous plant populations would be affected, and there is a project design feature in place to protect whitebark pine. See also the discussion of cumulative effects due to indirect effects under alternative 1. Alternative 3 Direct and Indirect Effects Direct and indirect effects to sensitive species and their habitats under alternative 3 are expected to be the same as under alternative 2 except as follows: · The risk of indirect effects from wildfire (including the connected effect of noxious weed infestation because of such fires) is greater under alternative 3 than alternative 2, because fewer acres are proposed for treatment, leaving a slightly greater potential for a large stand-replacing fire. · Conversely, the risk of habitat degradation due to noxious weed infestation is less under alternative 3 than alternative 2 because ground disturbing activities would occur on fewer acres. Please see the Invasive Plants section for details of potential weed infestation due to proposed activities. Table 119 shows the comparison of potential weed infestation for all alternatives: Table 119 Comparison of potential weed infestation due to proposed activities ALTERNATIVE ACRES OF POTENTIAL WEED INFESTATION DUE TO PROPOSED ACTIVITIES 1 0 2 311 3 233 · Four of the five units which have whitebark pine as a component would be treated with prescribed fire under alternative 3. There is no treatment proposed for Unit 76, so 123 fewer acres would be treated. Irreversible/Irretrievable Commitments There are no irreversible or irretrievable commitments that would affect sensitive plants under this alternative when project design features are applied. Cumulative Effects The cumulative actions and resulting cumulative effects as discussed under alternative 1 also apply to this alternative. There would be no cumulative effects for this alternative as no known herbaceous plant populations would be affected, and there is a project design feature in place to protect whitebark pine. Please see the discussion of cumulative effects earlier under alternative 1. Summary of Effects Alternative 1 would have no new soil disturbing activities that would disturb sensitive plant populations. However, alternative 1 does not propose activities that modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Consequently, there remains a higher risk of a large, stand-replacing fire that could result in effects to herbaceous sensitive species habitat. The Vegetation section notes that under alternative 1 whitebark pine would not increase in the short term and would decline from present levels in the long term. Alternative 2 has the highest level of soil disturbing activities with the highest level of potential to affect any unknown herbaceous sensitive plant populations. Nevertheless, alternative 2 addresses the purpose and need by proposing the greatest amount of acres of activities that modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. The proposed actions are meant to reduce potential for stand-replacing wildfire events in the treated stands, as well as break up the structure in the project area. Reducing potential for stand replacing events may reduce wildfire impacts to specific resources. The Vegetation section states that proposed activities under alternative 2 are consistent with recommendations for restoration of whitebark pine ecosystems, and that in the treated areas whitebark pine would increase in the short term with the increase extending into the long term. Alternative 3 also proposes treatment activities that may disturb unknown occurrences of herbaceous sensitive plants (see description for alternative 2), however on fewer acres than alternative 2. The Vegetation section states that proposed activities under alternative 3 are consistent with recommendations for restoration of whitebark pine ecosystems and that in the treated areas whitebark pine would increase in the short term with the increase extending into the long term. There are no known occurrences of herbaceous sensitive plants in the project area and there is a project design feature in place to protect whitebark pine; therefore, direct and indirect effects are limited. Cumulative effects are not expected to contribute to change in status or viability of sensitive plants, under any of the alternatives. No downward trend in population numbers or density, or downward trend in habitat capability that would reduce the existing distribution of any of the sensitive plant species discussed in this analysis, is expected under any of the alternatives. Species-Specific Effects including Determination of Effects Roundleaf orchid This species is known from the Rocky Mountain Front and the northwest corner of Montana. Field surveys of potential wetlands within the analysis area did not locate any populations of this species. No other past surveys have located this species on the Helena National Forest. The habitat for this species is spruce forests along moist seeps and springs. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects Wetlands, seeps and springs would be protected from ground disturbance in the design features for this project (page 9); therefore, direct effects are not expected. However, when habitat is present for a species it is possible that unknown individuals are present, therefore, there is the remote chance, albeit very slight, that individuals could be directly affected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See Cumulative Effects section for alternative 1, and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3, detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of roundleaf orchid but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of roundleaf orchid are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for roundleaf orchid in the project area and as a result there is a slight possibility that unknown individuals could be impacted · There are project design features in place to protect this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat under all three alternatives. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large, stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Scalloped moonwort This species is known from the Beaverhead-Deerlodge National Forest, immediately adjacent to the Helena National Forest. This species has not been found to date in the project area through numerous surveys. This species is associated with wetland habitats. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects Wetlands, seeps and springs would be protected from ground disturbance in the design features for this project; therefore, direct effects are not expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See Cumulative Effects section under alternative 1and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for the three alternatives detailed earlier in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of scalloped moonwort but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of scalloped moonwort are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for scalloped moonwort in the project area and therefore. there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · There are project design features in place to protect this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat under all three alternatives. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large, stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Peculiar moonwort Peculiar moonwort is known from two populations on the Helena National Forest, both in the Divide landscape area. The habitat for this species on the Helena National Forest is open grassland and open grassland and sagebrush. This habitat does not occur in treatment areas; no populations are known to occur in the project area. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects No treatments are proposed in potential habitat, and there are no known occurrences of this species in the project area, therefore, no direct effects are expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See Cumulative Effects section under alternative 1and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for the three alternatives detailed earlier in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of peculiar moonwort but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of peculiar moonwort are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for peculiar moonwort in the project area and therefore there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · There are no activities proposed in this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat from surrounding activities. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Lesser yellow lady’s slipper Montana Natural Heritage Program has records showing an occurrence of this species just inside the Helena National Forest boundary, and an occurrence just outside the boundary. Neither population has been seen recently. Field surveys in 2009 of potential wetlands did not locate any populations of this species. No other past surveys have located this species on the Helena National Forest. No populations are known to occur in the analysis area. The habitat for this species is fens, damp mossy woods, seepage areas, and moist forest-meadow ecotone, in the valley and lower montane zones. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects Wetlands, seeps and springs would be protected from ground disturbance in the design features for this project; therefore, direct effects are not expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See Cumulative Effects section under alternative 1and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3 detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of lesser yellow lady’s slipper but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of lesser yellow lady’s slipper are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for lesser yellow lady’s slipper in the project area and therefore there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · There are project design features in place to protect this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat under all three alternatives. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Sparrow egg lady’s slipper Sparrow egg lady’s slipper has not been found on the Helena National Forest but is known from Glacier National Park and northwest Montana. Field surveys in 2009 of potential wetlands did not locate any populations of this species. No other past surveys have located this species on the Helena National Forest. No populations are known to occur in the analysis area. The habitat for this species is mossy, moist or seepy places in coniferous forests. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects Wetlands, seeps and springs would be protected from ground disturbance in the design features for this project; therefore, direct effects are not expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See Cumulative Effects section under alternative 1and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3 detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of sparrow egg lady’s slipper but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of sparrow egg lady’s slipper are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for sparrow egg lady’s slipper in the project area and therefore there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · There are project design features in place to protect this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat under all three alternatives. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Howell’s gumweed This species has not been found in the Helena National Forest to date. It is known from open roadsides in the western Blackfoot area. The Montana Natural Heritage Program was contracted by the Forest Service to survey known noxious weed populations across the Forest (Barton and Crispin 2002). They specifically searched for this species. It was not found during those surveys as well as in 2009 field surveys. Habitat is described as vernally moist, lightly disturbed soils adjacent to ponds and marshes, as well as roadsides and other disturbed areas. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects It is unlikely that this species would occur in heavily forested areas where management activities are proposed; therefore, direct effects are not expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See Cumulative Effects section under alternative 1and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3 detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of Howell’s gumweed but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of Howell’s gumweed are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for Howell’s gumweed in the project area and therefore there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · It is unlikely this species would occur in areas where management activities are proposed. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat from surrounding activities. There are no activities associated with alternative; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Hall’s rush This species has 15 populations Forestwide. The Montana Heritage database identifies eight populations on the Helena National Forest (three of the Heritage Program populations were located again by HNF crews). Seven new populations were found by Helena National Forest survey crews in 2009 (Bicker field surveys 2009). Habitat is wet to moist meadows. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects No treatments are proposed in potential habitat, and there are no known occurrences of this species in the project area; therefore, no direct effects are expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See the Cumulative Effects section for alternative 1, and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3 detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of Hall’s rush but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of Hall’s rush are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for Hall’s rush in the project area; therefore, there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · There are no activities proposed in this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat from surrounding activities. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large, stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Missoula phlox This species is located in each of the four landscape areas of the Forest. The Montana Heritage database identifies eight populations on the Helena National Forest. The habitat for this species is open, exposed limestone-derived slopes in the foothills, to exposed ridges in the subalpine zone. Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects No treatments are proposed in potential habitat, and there are no known occurrences of this species in the project area, therefore, no direct effects are expected. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. See the Cumulative Effects section under alternative 1, and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3 detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of Missoula phlox but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · None of the known occurrences of Missoula phlox are within the project area and none would be impacted by this project. · There may be habitat for Missoula phlox in the project area; as a result, there is a slight possibility of unknown individuals that could be impacted · There are no activities proposed in this species’ habitat. · There is potential for indirect effects to habitat from surrounding activities. There are no activities associated with alternative 1; nevertheless, there is the possibility of habitat degradation due to the risk of large stand-replacing fires and the associated habitat degradation from noxious weed infestation. Whitebark pine This species is a hardy conifer that tolerates poor soils, steep slopes, and windy exposures and is found at alpine tree line and subalpine elevations throughout its range (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2011a). It is known to occur in almost all major mountain ranges of western and central Montana. In the project area it is known to be a minor component in several of the treatment units. The Vegetation section contains additional information regarding this species; that information is incorporated here by reference, Direct, Indirect, and Cumulative Effects This species is known to occur as a minor component in treatment units 76, 79, 82, 83 and 88 (please see the Silviculture section for details). Those occurrences would be promoted by the project design feature SILV-2 which is designed to protect whitebark pine individuals and enhance habitat for the species. Thus, while there is the potential for individuals to be charred or physically damaged during the treatment, beneficial effects (in the form of habitat enhancement due to the removal of shade-tolerant species and creation of caching sites for Clark’s nutcrackers) are expected in the long-term. Indirect effects would be as described under Effects Common to All Alternatives. The Vegetation section states that whitebark pine would not increase in the short term and would decline from present levels in the long term under alternative 1, and would increase in the short term, with the increase extending into the long term under alternatives 2 and 3. The proposed actions under both alternatives are consistent with recommendations for whitebark pine restoration (see appendix B). See Cumulative Effects sections for alternative 1, and appendix C for specific cumulative effects. Determination Based on the analysis for alternatives 1, 2, and 3, detailed in this document, I determine that the activities proposed may impact individuals of whitebark pine but would not contribute toward a trend for federal listing or loss of viability. This determination is supported by the following rationale: · Whitebark pine is expected to decline within the project area under alternative 1 (Amell 2012). However, this project area makes up a very small portion of the range of the species, and a decline of the individuals in this project area cannot be determined to result in a trend towards federal listing or a loss of viability. · Whitebark pine occurs as a minor component within some units that are proposed for prescribed burning under both action alternatives. Project design feature SILV-2 was designed to protect the species while incorporating activities to enhance the habitat. While some individuals may be impacted by these activities, overall a beneficial effect is expected in the long term. · Amell (2012) states that the activities proposed by the action alternatives are consistent with recommendations for restoration of whitebark pine ecosystems and that in the treated areas whitebark pine would increase in the short term with the increase extending into the long term. Summary of Determinations of Effects Table 120. Summary of determination of effects SPECIES COMMON NAME (FAMILY) DETERMINATION OF EFFECTS ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Amerorchis rotundifolia Roundleaf orchid  (Orchidaceae) MII22 MII MII Botrychium crenulatum Scalloped moonwort (Ophioglossaceae) MII MII MII Botrychium paradoxum Peculiar moonwort (Ophioglossaceae) MII MII MII Cypripedium parviflorum Lesser yellow lady’s slipper (Orchidaceae) MII MII MII Cypripedium passerinum Sparrow egg lady’s slipper (Orchidaceae) MII MII MII Grindelia howellii Howell’s gumweed  (Asteraceae) MII MII MII Juncus hallii Hall’s rush (Juncaceae) MII MII MII Phlox kelseyi var. missoulensis Missoula phlox MII MII MII 22 May impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend towards Federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or species. SPECIES COMMON NAME (FAMILY) DETERMINATION OF EFFECTS ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 (Polemoniaceae) Pinus albicaulis Whitebark pine (Pinaceae) MII MII MII Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Whitebark pine is the only sensitive plant species that has been found to date in the project area. All alternatives are consistent with Regional direction, Forest Plan Standards and Guidelines and the Endangered Species Act. If any additional species of special concern were verified in the project area, appropriate measures would be taken.Noxious Weeds Introduction This section addresses the effects of the proposed activities on noxious weeds within the Stonewall Project area. Noxious weed infestations are detrimental to native fauna and flora and present the greatest large-scale threat to native ecosystems that exist in the Nation’s wild lands today (DiTomaso 2000; Lodge and Shrader-Frechette 2003; Lonsdale 1999; Mack et al. 2000; Pauchard et al. 2003). At high infestation levels, these effects are adverse due to the loss of native plant diversity, reduction of wildlife habitat and forage, increase in erosion and depletion of soil moisture and nutrient levels (DiTomaso 2000). There are approximately 564 acres of weeds mapped on National Forest System land within the Stonewall Project boundary. Figure 82 shows the general distribution of noxious weeds. These infestations are expected to spread, with the amount of spread increasing proportionally with the amount of ground disturbance.  Title: General location of noxious weeds in the Stonewall Vegetation ProjectFigure 82. General location of noxious weeds in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area Methodology The methodology used in this analysis includes the best available data from the Helena National Forest Weeds Database and Geographic Information System (GIS) datasets. In addition, this analysis incorporates data collected by local Forest Service personnel during ground reconnaissance of the project area, and during vegetation monitoring of past vegetation treatments. Geographic Information Systems combine various datasets to help us understand relationships and the effects of travel routes on weeds and other flora, as well as influences from landform and landtypes. Information Used A GIS geodatabase (StonewallNEPA.gdb) contains numerous geospatial layers that provide the base data used in this analysis. This geodatabase is available in the project file located at the Helena National Forest or Lincoln Ranger District in Lincoln, Montana. Those layers include the known locations of weed infestations, watershed and stream information, and habitat types for risk assessment. Assumptions The following assumptions apply to this analysis: · The analysis and decisions made in the record of decision for the Noxious Weed Treatment Project EIS are incorporated in noxious weed analysis and implementation on the Helena National Forest. · Any soil disturbing activity with mechanized equipment has the potential to increase noxious weed invasion or spread. · The expected rate of spread of noxious weeds is 14% per year, (Asher and Spurrier1998) without disturbance. The rate of spread could be even higher in areas affected by ground disturbing activities. · Herbicide use in accordance with the requirements specified in the Final Environmental Impact Statement: Helena National Forest Noxious Weed Treatment Project and accompanying Record of Decision (USDA Forest Service 2006d) is appropriate for noxious weed management on infested lands. · The Forest treats approximately one-third of its mapped weeds on an annual basis under its normal weed treatment program; therefore for this analysis it is assumed that one-third of the acres of weeds, would treated annually. · The paragraphs below define mapped weed acres and weed treatment acres as used in this analysis. . Mapped Weed Acres: Mapped acres are reflected by polygons containing at least 1percent noxious weed cover. There are weeds outside those polygons that are too scattered to map, or are infestations that have not been discovered yet. The mapped acres are from the weeds layer in the Forest GIS database. . Weed Treatment Acres: Weed treatment acres for the purposes of this analysis are assumed to be the total polygon acres described above, to assess if any thresholds are being approached. Actual chemical application is reported to the State of Montana annually, as a requirement of a chemical applicator's/operator's license. Pesticide application is also recorded in the National Forest System FACTS database. Spatial and Temporal Context for Cumulative Effects Analysis The cumulative effects analysis area is the project area (figure 82). This geographic bounding was determined because activities beyond this boundary would have diminished effects. There are proposed haul routes identified that extend beyond this boundary, but expanding the analysis area to include those routes beyond the project area would result in an analysis of effects that is so subjective and conjectural that it would not contribute useful information. The analysis is bound in time by 10 years into the future, which allows for an adequate length of time to record vegetative changes. Effects associated with various actions are based on literature, known weed infestations and personal experience. Indicators, assumptions and method of analysis are the same as those described earlier. Overview of Issues The effects of project activities on noxious weeds were identified from public scoping as significant. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Weed Spread/Infestation: Proposed actions, including harvest disturbance and use of haul routes in areas with weeds present, may disturb landscapes allowing existing weed populations to expand or allowing additional species to become established. Treatment of existing weed infestations would occur under the guidance of the Forestwide effort and treatments to prevent the spread of weeds is included in design features to reduce potential spread. Issue Indicators Indicators used to disclose the differences between the alternatives are: · Predicted acres of invasive plants infestation due to the proposed treatments; · Associated management cost for weed control activities. Affected Environment Existing Condition Weeds have been expanding on the Helena National Forest for many years. A variety of factors contributed to the spread of noxious weeds. Noxious weeds are invasive by definition, and are able to spread without natural enemies, pathogens or ungulate grazing to keep them in check. Weeds favor disturbance caused by wildfire and ground disturbance of any kind. Increased public use across the Forest in the past few years due in part to off-road vehicle use and recreation displacement from wildfire, as well as travel plan closure areas, places more pressure on the remaining open areas. Various methods of weed control are used on known weed infestations across the Helena National Forest (please see Appendix A in the Noxious Weeds Report (Englebert 2012a) for an estimate of costs for various control treatments). Herbicide application is the most common form of control used across the Forest. The Forest generally treats approximately 3,900 acres of weeds annually (averaging 2007 through 2009 as typical years). Although herbicide application has been the primary noxious weed treatment method, the Forest has also conducted a number of biological control agent releases and has established numerous insectaries across the Forest. Partners and volunteers such as the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, Backcountry Horsemen, ATV groups, and Powell County and Lewis and Clark County participate with the Forest in weed treatment annually. The budget allocated for noxious weed treatment in 2009 was $335,000 with a target to treat approximately 3,000 acres. In addition, numerous grants and volunteer contributions assist the budget to help the Helena National Forest treat weeds. Species information Montana currently has 24 species on the statewide noxious weed list (Grubb et al. 2003). Five of those species are known to occur within the analysis areas: butter and eggs (Linaria vulgaris), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), houndstongue (Cynoglossum officinale), St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) and spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa). Common mullein (Verbascum thapsus)is listed as a noxious weed by Lewis and Clark County. In addition to the known (mapped) infestations, it is likely that oxeye daisy (Leucanthemum vulgare also known as Chrysanthemum leucanthemum) and cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) occur along roadways, especially near areas of recent disturbance. The State of Montana lists oxeye daisy as a noxious weed and cheatgrass as a regulated species. Noxious weed infestations throughout the project area range from areas of 5 to 10 individual weed plants to linear patches along roads and trails to large patches of greater than 20 acres. Infestation levels range from light (1 percent canopy cover) to high (greater than 50% canopy cover). Table 121 shows the acres of weeds that are mapped in the project area. Infestation acres are rounded to the nearest acre. Table 121. Mapped noxious weed infestation in the analysis areas Noxious Weed Species (Scientific Name) Project Area Infested Acres by Species Butter and eggs – also known as yellow toadflax (Linaria vulgaris) 156 Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) 118 Common mullein (Verbascum thapsus) 148 Houndstongue – also known as gypsyweed (Cynoglossum officinale) 126 St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) 8 Spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa) 554 Total infested acres* 564 *Total infested acres do not equal the sum of all acres infested by a particular species. When a polygon is mapped and it contains multiple species, acres are recorded for each species. Butter and eggs (Linaria vulgaris) is also known as yellow toadflax. It has been shown to readily establish on open and disturbed sites where competition from other plants is reduced (Zouhar 2003). Butter and eggs seeds may be dispersed by water, ants, birds, and rodents, but existing infestations appear to expand mainly by vegetative reproduction rather than by seed (Pauchard et al. 2003). Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) spreads primarily by adventitious root buds that may form new adventitious shoots that can develop along the root at any location (Zouhar 2001a). Canada thistle is present in much of the project area, generally associated with roadside disturbance or harvest disturbance. Its habitat is restricted to open areas of less than 10 percent canopy closure. Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) is a serious weed that competes with native vegetation and fuels wildfire (Young et al. 1987). Cheatgrass has not been mapped on the Forest but is established along numerous roadsides and other areas of disturbance. Cheatgrass spread rapidly through sagebrush ranges following World War II and has been expanding its range ever since (Menalled et al. 2008). Cheatgrass is highly adaptable and has increased around the Helena National Forest over the past 30 years as evidenced by data collection (Olsen, personal observation). It is listed in Montana as a regulated plant. Common mullein (Verbascum thapsus) is listed as a noxious weed in Lewis and Clark County. It has recently been mapped along roads in the project area. Gucker (2008) considers common mullein a short-lived member of disturbed communities whose abundance decreases with increased time since disturbance. Common mullein reproduces entirely by seed and has no means of vegetative regeneration. Its seed bank is very persistent, with seeds germinating after 100 years or more in the soil (Gucker 2008). Houndstongue (Cynoglossum officinale) is also known as gypsyflower. This species is common along roads and in logged areas. Houndstongue is spread by large seeds that attach to animals or humans, as well as dispersed by wind (Zouhar 2002). A biennial or short-lived perennial, houndstongue reproduces only by seed. It is relatively shade tolerant, although it thrives in full sunlight. This species is difficult to map as it may occur in small, scattered patches. Oxeye daisy (Leucanthemum vulgare also known as Chrysanthemum leucanthemum) is not mapped in the project area, but quite likely occurs in small infestations, especially near areas of past disturbance. Besides reproducing vegetatively along a rhizome, oxeye daisy is a prolific seed producer. This plant is capable of taking over and modifying natural areas, pasture and rangeland and may increase soil erosion compared to native plant communities (Olson and Wallander 1999). St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) is quite limited in the project area. St. Johnswort is often treated as a grassland plant, but it is also common in many forested areas in North America. It may occur in open forests, natural clearings, or within forests where canopy cover has been reduced or removed by disturbances. In forested areas St. Johnswort is commonly associated with disturbances such as roads, logging, grazing and fire. St. Johnswort reproduces by seed and by sprouting from lateral roots and root crowns. Seeds can remain viable in the soils for several years (Zouhar 2004). Spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa also known as Centaurea stoebe ssp. micranthos and Centaurea biebersteinii) has the largest extent of infestation within both the project area and the cumulative effects boundary. The species occurs along roadsides and throughout south-facing areas of past harvest, as well as in the natural grasslands. Spotted knapweed thrives in open areas with forest canopies of less than 20 percent. Spotted knapweed reproduces almost entirely from seed. Plants are also able to extend lateral shoots below the soil surface that form rosettes adjacent to the parent plant. This species has also been shown to have allelopathic properties, secreting toxins that suppress the growth of other plants, although resource competition is just as effective in its ability to dominate areas (Zouhar 2001). Environmental Consequences Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to noxious weeds and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features in table 9 pertaining to noxious weeds are NOX-1, NOX-2, NOX -3, NOX-4 NOX-5, NOX-6 and NOX-7. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to both action alternatives. Design features that are applicable to noxious weeds include not only those listed above, designed specifically to prevent noxious weed spread, but also those designed to protect other resources such as water and soil. Effects Common to All Alternatives The Forest treats approximately one-third of its mapped weeds on an annual basis under its normal weed treatment program (per the Helena National Forest Noxious Weed Treatment Project, USDA Forest Service1996). Therefore for this analysis it is assumed that one-third, or 188 acres of the 564 acres of weeds, would be treated annually. Herbicide treatment of these acres would have an average cost of about $30 per acre for easily accessible sites (up to 200 feet from a road and on slopes less than 40 percent) and $62 per acre for areas with more difficult terrain (farther than 200 feet from a road and on slopes greater than 40 percent). The cost of bio-control is included in these prices. An average cost of $50 per acre is used to calculate costs. Table 122 displays treatment type and cost to treat one-third of the acres in the project area. This table does not include the cost of monitoring. This cost is not included in further analysis of the alternatives as it is assumed to be a baseline, independent of management actions, and common to all alternatives. Table 122. Treatment type and cost to treat one-third of the currently infested acres - all alternatives Treatment Type Cost/Acre Acres Total Cost Herbicide/Bio-control $50.00 188 $9,400 Noxious weed infestations adversely affect native fauna and flora and present the greatest large-scale threat to native ecosystems that exist in the nation’s wild lands today (DiTomaso 2000; Lodge and Shrader-Frechette 2003; Lonsdale 1999; Mack et al. 2000; Pauchard et al. 2003). At high infestation levels (canopy cover greater than or equal to 25 percent), noxious weeds cause a loss of native plant diversity, reduction of wildlife habitat and forage, increase in erosion, and depletion of soil moisture and nutrient levels (DiTomaso 2000). These effects are common to all alternatives and would vary depending on the level of infestation. Weeds could potentially spread at a rate of 14 percent per year into dry forest areas as conifer species die and sunlight, nutrients, and moisture are more available to herbaceous plant species (Asher and Spurrier 1998). This is most important in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests, and lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta)/Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)/ponderosa pine mixed forests. The most susceptible forest habitat types would be dry habitat types that have existing infestations of noxious weeds because of the natural openness of such forest types. Spotted knapweed, cheatgrass, Canada thistle, common mullein and houndstongue may spread rapidly with ground disturbance and may spread at a slower rate without disturbance (Young et al. 1987; Zouhar 2001, 2001a, 2002). Butter and eggs spreads readily without ground disturbance and very rapidly with disturbance (Zouhar 2003). The butter and eggs and oxeye daisy are of primary concern because they are difficult to control. Spotted knapweed is of primary concern across the analysis area because of the amount of infestation. New weed infestations, and spread of current infestations would occur under all alternatives, particularly along roadsides and areas of disturbance (Lonsdale 1999). The HNF Weed Treatment Project FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006c) provides guidance and environmental requirements for weed control activities that would be applied to this area under any alternative. The Forest currently uses herbicides to treat approximately 30 percent of infestations annually. Roadsides would be treated annually, as they are a major vector for weed invasion. In addition to herbicide treatment, the noxious weed control program on the Forest has been successful in establishing insectaries. Biological control would be used in areas where the biological agents had optimal conditions for survival and expansion. In riparian areas, biological control would be emphasized where conditions for insect establishment are met. A stand-replacing fire is a current risk in the Stonewall project area because of current fuels conditions (Kurtz 2009). Given the current conditions within the project area, and the dynamics associated with lodgepole and ponderosa pine mortality, untreated areas can be expected to experience uncharacteristically higher intensity fires that consume a considerable portion of duff and litter because of current density, stand structure, red-needled litter, and stand composition (Agee and Skinner 2005; Graham et al. 2004). This disturbance caused by wildfires would result in areas that are highly susceptible to weed invasions. For example, the Snowtalon fire occurred in an adjacent area in 2003. Much of that fire was stand-replacing. Yellow toadflax and spotted knapweed spread rapidly following the fire. Herbicides and biocontrol were applied aggressively in the three years following the fire, with follow-up treatments since that time. The data on response of weeds and changes in weed ecology because of climate change are limited. Weeds are genetically diverse and if resources such as light, water, nutrients, or carbon dioxide change within the environment, it is more likely there may be an expansion of weeds. However, very little is known regarding the impact of climate change on the reproductive success of invasive weeds and the potential consequences for their management (Ziska 2006). Native plant diversity would be impacted by infestations of nonnative plants, especially noxious weeds. Noxious weeds dominate plant communities and tend to form monocultures that negatively influence native biological diversity. This weed competition to individual plants and plant communities can result in loss of species diversity and sensitive native plants. Native grasses used for domestic livestock and wild ungulates have been particularly susceptible to impacts from weeds (Beck 2001). A review of the mechanisms underlying exotic plant invasions by Levine and others (2003) revealed that although numerous studies have been done examining the effects of invasive plants on community structure and diversity, few studies have examined the underlying processes (e.g. competition, allelopathy, production of flammable biomass, nutrient cycling) that cause the impact. It is well understood that community biodiversity decreases with exotic plant invasion, but the results of changes to soil community diversity, resource allocation, and soil water availability for example have not been examined (Levine et al. 2003). Some studies have investigated effects on nutrient cycling on invaders that are nitrogen fixers for example, as available nitrogen in that case might be predictable (Vitousek and Walker 1989). Evans et al. (2001) found that cheatgrass invasion can significantly alter nutrient cycling through differences in litter quality and quantity. However, the consequences of altered nitrogen availability for community structure are poorly demonstrated and highly variable (Levine et al. 2003). Studies of impacts to natural fire processes strongly support the expectation that invader impacts on disturbance regimes (ecosystem process) can strongly and possibly irreversibly affect community structure (Levine et al. 2003). Dramatic alterations of fire frequency in historic shrublands that are now dominated by cheatgrass have been demonstrated (D’Antonio 2000, Ehrenfeld et al. 2001). Other cases of exotic grass and shrub impacts include increasing fuel resulting in greater flame lengths, higher temperatures and greater heat release. In each case, the mechanism through which impact develops depends on whether the invader can out-compete the natives for resources. In most cases, the specific ecophysiological reasons for greater biomass production have not been identified. The effects of cheatgrass strongly support the prediction that invaders affecting disturbance processes have the greatest potential to create large impacts on ecosystems (Vitousek 1990). Allelopathy is a biological phenomenon by which one organism produces biochemicals that influence the growth, survival and reproduction of other plants. Ridenour and Calloway (2001) showed that spotted knapweed reduced the root growth of Idaho fescue (Festuca idahoensis) by 50 percent, showing an adverse allelopathic effect. Additional studies on the effect of arbuscular mycorrhizae on interactions of spotted knapweed—Idaho fescue roots showed an enhancement of the competitive ability of spotted knapweed but direct effects of mycorrhizae were weak (Marler et al. 1999). Unanswered questions in the ecosystem-impacts literature include the degree to which the documented impacts result simply from the addition of new functional traits brought in by the invader, or alternatively the reduction or elimination of native species (e.g. Mack et al. 2001). The use of herbicides may have positive or negative impacts on native plant diversity. Rice and others (1997) found in a detailed comparison of plant community composition over an eight-year period that plots treated with Tordon®, Transline®, and Curtail® were more similar to the potential natural communities than the no-spray controls (Mueggler and Stewart 1980). On the other hand, the side effects of weed management can vary as a function of local site conditions (Shea et al. 2005). Side effects of management actions include reducing vigor or abundance of native or desirable species, inhibiting overall productivity or diversity, shifting community structure and function, and altering physical conditions (D'Antonio et al. 2004, Hulme 2006, Louda et al. 1997). Therefore, effective weed management requires weighing the success of control measures (e.g., impacts on target weeds and recovery of native species) against the side effects of management actions. This necessitates a thorough understanding of how management tools interact with non-target system components as well as the target weed (Shea et al. 2005). The Helena National Forest Weed Treatment Project FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006c) provides guidance and environmental requirements for weed control and treatment activities that would apply to this area in any alternative. All personnel using herbicides are appropriately certified by the State of Montana and knowledgeable about the environmental guidelines and requirements of the Noxious Weed EIS. Effects Common to All Action Alternatives While the spread of noxious weeds would continue under all alternatives, the rate of spread could potentially be faster in areas proposed for treatments, particularly areas to be thinned and burned. Weed management would continue as in the past, however, activities proposed for the Stonewall Project add a layer of ground disturbance and therefore requires additional management for weeds. Areas of ground disturbance would be monitored for weed infestations and treated as appropriate, in accordance with the Helena National Forest Weed Treatment Project FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006c) and Best Management Practices (BMPs) as specified in FSM 2080 (USDA Forest Service 2001), and the Forest Plan. Chemical weed treatment would be the primary treatment method in areas that are accessible by spray equipment. Biological control would apply in areas where the biological agents have optimal conditions for survival and expansion. In riparian areas, biological control would be emphasized where conditions for insect establishment are met. The effect of all treatment methods would be to control and contain existing and new infestations related to vegetation treatments. The most susceptible habitat types within the project area are the dry habitat types that have existing infestation of noxious weeds. Included are habitat types dominated by Douglas-fir or ponderosa pine. Thinning and burning have been shown to increase the abundance of invasive species in a similar dry (ponderosa pine) forest type in western Montana. Removing the overstory can increase the availability of limiting resources and allow weeds to thrive (Dodson et al. 2008). Metlen and others (2006) found that understory diversity increased following burning, and the increase was in both native and non-native species. Slash burning can also create localized areas that are conducive to the propagation of noxious weeds. Within these dry forest habitat types there are proposed thinning and burning treatment units with existing populations of weeds. These weed populations would likely expand with disturbance, but there are project design features in place to help minimize the likelihood of expansion. Harvest units in moist forest, subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa) habitat types that would have closed canopies have a lower probability of weed infestation, particularly spotted knapweed. This species does not tolerate shading (Zouhar 2001). Canada thistle and houndstongue tolerate more shade than spotted knapweed, but the spread of these species is closely associated with ground disturbing activities (Zouhar 2001a, 2002). The probability of weed expansion in these areas would be the lowest of the proposed treatment areas. Ground disturbance increases susceptibility to weed invasion. The tractor-based treatments would create moderate ground disturbance on unfrozen ground. It is estimated that 10 percent of acres treated with tractor-based treatments on unfrozen ground in alternatives 2 and 3 may be susceptible to new weed infestation. This estimate is supported by a study in four Washington Douglas-fir forests, in which exotic species percent cover averaged 10 percent in the first year following overstory thinning treatments (Thysell and Carey 2001). Areas most susceptible are the regeneration and intermediate treatments in the open canopy cover where ground disturbance would occur. Specific effects are described in the sections for alternatives 2 and 3. Ground-based logging operations over snow and on frozen ground would help minimize ground disturbance and noxious weed spread. Limiting logging activity to the dormant season on a frozen surface would greatly decrease the chance for weed spread from actively growing plants within the logged or haul area, or from soil containing weed seeds transported to the area on machinery. For this analysis, it is estimated that approximately 1 percent –5 percent (mid-point of 3 percent) of the treated acres may become infested with noxious weeds as a result of ground-based harvesting activities that occur during winter conditions. Past studies have shown a substantial decrease in soil surface disturbance resulting from logging when the activity occurs on frozen ground (McIver and Starr 2000). Limited ground disturbance would result in lower risk of increased weed infestations. The prescribed fire treatment, which is mixed or low severity, as opposed to high severity associated with wildfires, would not require the use of heavy equipment, and therefore would not result in removal of top soil. It is estimated that as a result of the prescribed fire treatment, approximately 1 percent –5 percent (mid-point of 3 percent) of the treated acres may become infested with noxious weeds. Understory burn treatments have been shown to result in a much smaller increase in exotic species infestation than combined thinning and burning (Dodson et al. 2008). The 2006 EIS for treating weeds on the Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 2006c) identified several 6th code HUCs in which herbicide application would be limited based on the amount of herbicide applied, the location of the application, the stream flow, and HUC area. These estimates are shown by HUC, and the rationale for that determination is from the coarse filter calculation to estimate possible concentrations of herbicide in stream waters, shown in in appendix B and appendix C respectfully of the Noxious Weed Report (Englebert 2012a)Soil Introduction This section evaluates the soil conditions and discloses the potential direct, indirect and cumulative effects of the alternatives for the Stonewall Vegetation Project. The Stonewall Project would comply with Region 1 Soil Quality Standards (R1 SQS (1999)) and the Helena National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (1986) (Forest Plan) for long-term soil quality. The proposed silvicultural and fuel treatments proposed for each action alternative are not expected to adversely affect soil resources with the implementation of project design features as part of each alternative. Methodology We surveyed the majority of the proposed treatment units (58) during November of 2010 using the Forest Soil Disturbance Monitoring Protocol (Page-Dumroese et al. 2009). All units were traversed along randomly chosen transects to cover as much of the units as possible. Paced transects were used to measure ground cover, coarse woody debris, slopes, detrimental soil conditions, and any other pertinent soil observations. Additionally, we took measures for soil texture, percent coarse fragments, and depth of organic material. Coarse woody debris transects were established using a modified Brown’s line intercept method (Brown 1974). For this analysis, we used the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) (Elliot et al. 2000) model to predict sediment movement in proposed burning and harvest units, and to assess erosion potential. WEPP models are accurate to within plus or minus 50 percent (ibid). We relied on literature reviews, field notes, geographic information system (GIS) data, Helena National Forest soil surveys (2001) and professional judgment to support reported conclusions. In determining significant change in productivity, a 15 percent reduction in soil quality potential was the basis for setting threshold values. This 15 percent is the rationale for the R1 SQS and equates to the detrimental soil disturbance measured in the field. Monitoring on the Helena National Forest shows for traditional summer-based harvest activities in dry conditions, there is a 11.5 percent increase in DSD (9 percent from skid trails, 2.5 percent from landings); for winter-based harvest, there is a 5 percent increase in DSD (3 percent from skid trails, 2 percent from landings); for skyline harvest there is a 4-5 percent increase in DSD, and for pile burning, there is a 5 percent increase in DSD. These assumptions of increased DSD are incorporated into the project design features. Data Assumption and Limitations The existing and estimated values for detrimental soil disturbance are not absolute and best used to compare differences between alternatives. The calculation of ‘percent of additional detrimental disturbance from a given activity’ is an estimate, because detrimental disturbance is a combination of such factors as existing groundcover, soil texture, timing of operations and equipment used, as well as skill of the equipment operator, the amount of wood to be removed, and sale administration. The DSD estimates assume that Best Management Practices would be applied and that soil recovery occurs over time. Scientific Uncertainty and Controversy In order to manage forest vegetation, some level of soil disturbance inevitably occurs. Much of the public concern regarding soil disturbance is based on generalizations. Defining the threshold at which soil disturbance decreases site productivity has been the subject of much discussion and controversy. Powers (1990) cites that the rationale for the 15 percent limit of change in soil bulk density was largely based on the collective judgment of soil researchers, academics, and field practitioners, as well as the ability to detect change in productivity through then-current monitoring methods. Thus, the soil quality guidelines are set to detect a potential decline in soil quality. The 15 percent guideline was meant to serve as an indicator of potential soil quality issues in a unit, not a threshold that cannot be exceeded. Ares and others (2005) state, “generalizations about negative effects of harvest-related soil disturbance on tree growth may be in error because these impacts depend on their type and severity and on soil properties and climatic conditions.” The authors go on to point out that “Many studies in the Pacific Northwest and elsewhere have addressed tree growth and soil response in logged sites using the ‘after-the-effect’ retrospective approach as described by Powers (1989), which may not allow to ascertain the original type, degree, and extent of disturbance. In addition tree growth may have been unknowingly and differentially affected by plant competition, disease, herbivory, and other factors. Tree growth impacts are often measured for short periods of time and this data is then incorrectly used to project long-term effects” (Ares et al. 2005). The North American Long-Term-Soil Quality Research Program (LTSP) is studying soil quality standards. The 5-year results were recently published (Page-Dumroese et al. 2006; Flemming et al. 2006; and Sanchez et al. 2006). The LTSP study is ongoing and provides the best available science to resource professionals. To date there has been no reduction in tree growth noted because of compaction or organic removal in plots with soils typical of the analysis area. Analysis Area Temporal and Spatial Boundaries Harvest or fuel treatment units are the analysis area for direct, indirect, and cumulative effects on soil quality (R1 Supplement 2500-99-1). Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal, skid roads, and landings within unit boundaries are included in the disturbance analysis. Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal outside of units were included in analysis of the unit they accessed. National Forest System roads and long-term specified roads are part of the Forest Transportation System and not considered for disturbance analysis. Soil cumulative effects analysis is limited to the “land area affected by a management activity” (USDA Forest Service 1999). For the purpose of this analysis, short-term effects last from 1-50 years while long-term effects last from 50-100 years. Overview of Issues Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on soils were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Some comments indicated concern that roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, road reconstruction, and use of existing roads would adversely impact soils through compaction. See the Transportation section for information about roads and soil compaction. Affected Environment Existing Condition Weather Weather data for the project area is displayed in table 123 in this section. This data is from the Rock: Clime (Rocky Mountain Research Station Climate Generator). Most precipitation falls in the form of snow from November through March and as rain in May and June. Weather patterns are strongly influenced by the surrounding mountains as isolated summer thunderstorms are common. The reported climate is modeled for 4,976 feet in elevation, in the middle of the project area. We used the reported weather data for WEPP (Water Erosion Prediction Project) modeling. Table 123. Annual weather data for the project area MONTH AVERAGE MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE (°F) AVERAGE MINIMUM TEMPERATURE (°F) PRECIPITATION (IN) NUMBER OF WET DAYS January 26 7 2.2 15 February 35 12 1.6 11 March 40 16 1.5 12 April 51 24 1.6 9 MONTH AVERAGE MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE (°F) AVERAGE MINIMUM TEMPERATURE (°F) PRECIPITATION (IN) NUMBER OF WET DAYS May 60 32 2.5 10 June 68 38 2 11 July 78 40 1.2 7 August 78 39 1.5 8 September 67 33 1.4 8 October 54 27 1.3 8 November 37 19 1.6 13 December 28 11 2.2 15 Annual   20.6 127 Soil Characteristics The project area is within moraine-influenced footslopes and headwater areas of the Upper Blackfoot River Watershed. The overall topography of the project area is heavily influenced by glacial activity including scouring of residual bedrock and deposition of till material in valley bottoms and gentle hillslopes. Table 124displays the characteristics for soils in the project units. These soil characteristics are defined by the Helena National Forest Soil Survey (USDA Forest Service and Natural Resource Conservation Service 2001). Approximately 21 percent of the soils are from glacial till, while the remaining 79 percent are from metasedimentary rock. The glacial till material is coarse and unconsolidated, forming isolated wet areas that pose operational restrictions. The metasedimentary parent material does not have inherent management restrictions. Most of the soils in the project area are also skeletal in nature,23 and several of the mapped units have a channery texture.24 This suggested that the soils are resistant to compaction and resilient due to their coarse texture. However, approximately 44 percent of the area is mapped with a volcanic ashcap, which poses operational limitations due to the compaction potential in these areas. The ashcap soils have a compactable silt-loam texture over the skeletal subsoil. The ashcap soils have a higher water-holding capacity, which tends to extend the wet and productive period for soils into the dry season (Garrison-Johnston et al. 2007). In the project area, the ashcap layer is variable, mainly occurring in protected concavities. 23 meaning that they consist of greater than 35 percent coarse fragments 24 meaning they are dominated by flat fragments up to 6 inches in diameter.  Table 124. Soil characteristics and limitations for the Stonewall Vegetation project units Soil Classification Mus* Parent Material Surface Texture Slope Range Limitations Acres Typic Cryoboralfs 12A Glacial Till Stony Loam 10-25% Wet Soils 1,103 Typic Cryoboralfs 13A Glacial Till from Basalt and Metasedimentary rock Cobbly Loam 10-25% Wet Soils 477 Typic and Mollic Cryoboralfs 49 Metasedimentary Cobbly Loam 25-50% None 2,353 Argic Cryoborolls 49A Metasedimentary Loam 10-40% None 11 Typic Cryoboralfs/Typic Cryochrepts Complex 49B Metasedimentary Channery Loam 40-60% Volcanic Ashcap 2,371 Typic Cryochrepts 59 Metasedimentary Channery Silt Loam 10-40% Volcanic Ashcap 517 Andic Cryochrepts 59A Metasedimentary Loam 10-40% Volcanic Ashcap 124 Typic Cryumbrepts 69 Metasedimentary, Granitics, and Basalt Sandy Loam 10-40% None 60 Typic Cryochrepts 79 Metasedimentary Channery Loam 40-60% Volcanic Ashcap 119 Cirqueland 80 Metasedimentary Bedrock 40-60%+ None 236 Typic Ustochrepts 87 Metasedimentary and Basalt Channery Loam 60-90% None 512 Andic Cryochrepts 90 Metasedimentary and Basalt Mixed Loess 60-90% Volcanic Ashcap 458 Typic Cryochrepts/Typic Cryoboralfs Complex 790 Glacial Till and Metasedimentary Rock Loam 25-40% Volcanic Ashcap 172 Andic Cryochrepts/Rock Outcrop Complex 791 Glacial Till and Metasedimentary Rock Loam 25-40% Volcanic Ashcap 50 * Map Unit Symbol The project area for the Stonewall Vegetation Project has a lengthy history of land management. There are active mining claims as well as signs of past mining, grazing, and timber harvest. The flatter portions of the project area have an existing network of skid trails and roads. The area borders private land on the south and southwest, making it easily accessible for dispersed uses such as camping and firewood gathering. Effects of past management activities for the project area were determined during field surveys. For a complete history of past management activities see appendix B. In order to better formulate an existing condition that takes into account past management activities, indicators of soil quality were drawn from the North American Long-Term-Soil Quality Research Program (LTSP). The LTSP is a Forest Service program developed to meet the objectives of the National Forest Management Act (NMFA) to maintain forest productivity. The two main soil quality properties most influenced by timber extraction and indicative of soil (and forest) productivity are soil organic matter and soil porosity (Powers et al. 1998). Soil Organic Matter Soil organic matter (SOM) is one of the most important portions of the soil resource. Soil organic matter is crucial for water holding capacity in the soil. Although the project area receives a high amount of precipitation relative to other areas in western Montana, well-drained soils tend to dry early in the season and limit vegetation growth and soil biological activity. Soil organic matter functions similarly to the ashcap soils as it holds water longer and extends the growing season. Other important physical properties of SOM include aeration, drainage, and cation exchange (Jurgensen et al. 1997). Soil organic matter is where most of the biological activity takes place; hence the “living” portion of the soil. This portion of the soil contains most of the essential nutrients and carbon stores. Soil organic matter accumulates over decades as plant material (leaf litter and woody debris) falls to the ground and decomposes, eventually forming humus and mixing with the mineral portion of the soils (Jurgensen et al. 1997). Page-Dumroese and Jurgensen (2006) noted that soils in Idaho and Montana have much higher percentages of their nutrient capacity in the SOM of the forest floor and topsoil. These processes have a direct effect on site productivity, sustainability, and soil quality. Organic matter is the one main component of the soil resource that can be effectively managed to enhance soil quality. Maintaining, and where lacking, increasing SOM levels is critical for sustaining forest health and productivity (Jurgensen et al. 1997). Forest floor organic material includes undecomposed litter and more decomposed duff as well as woody material in various stages of decomposition. Table 125, contains key soil parameters identified for units during field surveys. Total average depth of organic material (litter and duff) in the project units is included in table 125. Organic material depth ranges from 1 to 7 cm, with the majority of the units (36) having less than 3 cm of organic material. Most sites have a thicker layer of litter with little duff accumulation. Duff is the more desirable organic component in the complex humic material that supports cation exchange capacity and water holding capacity. The thin organic layer in the Stonewall Project area is likely due to the cold nature of the soils and slow decomposition rate as well as removal of the litter/duff layer due to people and activities in the area. Coarse Woody Debris25 25 generally defined as any woody residue larger than 3 inches in diameter (Graham et al. 1994) Coarse woody debris (CWD) is indicative of soil quality and resiliency. Physically, CWD protects exposed mineral soil from erosion and protects seedlings from grazing (Graham et al, 1994). Coarse woody debris also provides shade and when CWD decay has advanced, it can hold large amounts of water, making it important for dry season vegetation growth (Harvey et al. 1987). From a chemical perspective, CWD releases several nutrients when it decays or burns, including sulphur, phosphorus, and nitrogen. This is especially true during advanced stages of decay (Graham et al. 1994). Coarse woody debris functions as a site for non-symbiotic nitrogen fixation in the absence of other nitrogen fixing plants (Jurgensen et al. 1997). The soil biological environment is also enhanced by CWD. During advanced stages of decay, humus and woody material act as a site for the formation of ectomycorrhizal root tips. Ectomycorrhizae help woody plants take up water and nutrients and their fruiting bodies are crucial in the food chains of small rodents and predators (Graham et al. 1994). The recommended amount of CWD for the project area is 5 to 20 tons per acre, outlined from Brown et al. (2003) and Graham et al. (1994) for maintaining soil quality while minimizing fuel hazards. Coarse woody debris amounts vary by unit in the project area (table 125). There are pockets with well over 100 tons per acre because of fallen trees killed by beetles In spite of the benefits of CWD to soil quality, too much can degrade soil quality to an extent. As stated earlier, coarse woody debris is a crucial source of soil nutrients and biological activity, particularly in advanced stages of decay. Therefore, when CWD begins to accumulate in the absence of fire, nutrients begin to accumulate in CWD and are no longer available for plant uptake and soil biological activity (Hart et al. 2005). This is likely the case in some of the areas with higher amounts of CWD. Ground Cover Ground cover percentages for Stonewall units are in table 125 Soils in the project units should have a very small percentage of ground cover in the form of bare soil. The only naturally occurring bare soil should be associated with tip-up mounds in windthrow areas or recent wildfire areas. As established above, organic ground cover (CWD and litter) is a hotbed for biological activity. Bare soil is generally much less productive and in the project area is indicative of impaired soil conditions. As displayed in table 125, there are a few units with high percentages of bare soil but most are in the 0-5 percent range. Units 14 and 15 seem anomalous with the high percentages of bare soil (36 and 32 percent, respectively). However, both of these units, along with units 12 and 13 have piles of bare soil from past mining activity. The remaining units have mixed distributions of wood, litter, and vegetation. As established previously, soil wood and litter are important for soil quality. If, however, the balance of these components as compared to the vegetative component begins to shift, there is a condition as described above where the majority of the plant-available nutrients are “locked up” in the litter and wood component and not available for vegetation uptake and cycling back into the soil system. This is obviously the case in units 26, 35, 63, and 65 and likely the case in units 1, 17, 19, 22, 32-34, 52-54, and 59. Soil Porosity Soil porosity is another important indicator of soil quality and the other main property addressed in the LTSP study. Soil porosity is directly affected by soil compaction and is primarily a physical change in the soil that directly affects soil chemical and biological properties. Soil compaction occurs as a result of applied load, vibration, and pressure from equipment used for harvest activities and site preparation. Soil compaction breaks down surface aggregates, which leads to a decrease in macropore space with an increase in micropore space and volumetrically more soil as compared to air. This creates an increased bulk density (BD) and resistance to penetration in the soil (Gomez et al. 2002). This decrease in soil macropores can impede root penetration, water infiltration, and gas and nutrient exchange (Quesnel and Curran 2000). All of this in turn has the potential to decrease tree regeneration and growth. Another effect of increased soil bulk density and decreased water infiltration rates is the potential to alter watershed hydrology and increase soil erosion rates. This occurs primarily because decreased water infiltration causes soils to become saturated much quicker and leads to increases in overland flow, which increases erosion and runoff in a watershed. Primary skid trails and landings show the most extensive and longest lasting of these effects. Working on frozen or dry ground helps soils resist increases in bulk density. Activities on wet soils are the most damaging, as the soil aggregates are more susceptible to compaction. The three primary field measurements taken to assess levels of soil porosity changes and resiliency to compaction are detrimental disturbance, texture, and percent coarse fragments. The Region 1 technical guide for soil detrimental disturbance analysis (USDA Forest Service 2009) states, “…new activities would be designed so that they do not create detrimental soil disturbance (DSD) on more than 15% of an activity area (R1 Supplement to FSM 2554.03). In other words, existing DSD plus the DSD predicted for proposed activities would not exceed 15% of a given activity area. In areas where more than 15% DSD exists from prior activities, the cumulative detrimental effects should not exceed the conditions prior to the planned activity and should move toward a net improvement in soil quality.” This therefore sets the threshold value for DSD at 15 percent. Existing detrimental soil disturbance for the field-surveyed units is in table 125 that follows. As can be seen, there is a variety of results. Units 12-15 had relatively high DSD results due primarily to the presence of previous mining activity in the units. With the exception of those four units, DSD was primarily associated with skid trails and landings from previous harvests. Soils in the project area are fine-textured with high percentages of clay throughout (table 125). Although these soils also have high percentage of coarse textured sand, the clay portion can be highly compactable and sensitive to ground-based equipment, especially when wet. The percent coarse fragments column in table 125 displays a measure of rock content in the top 6 inches of mineral soil. Rock content is another indicator of the susceptibility of soil to compaction. Soils with over 35 percent coarse fragments are generally more resilient to compaction. Surveyed soils in the project area range from 13 to 70 percent coarse fragments. Only four units have less than 20 percent coarse fragments, which illustrates that most are fairly resilient. Regardless of the physical characteristics, moisture is an equally important factor in soil compaction. Dry soils are much less likely to compact than wet soils. Even soils with high rock content would compact when wet. Table 125. Current conditions by unit in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Unit CWD (T/A) Depth of Organic (cm) Ground Cover Percentage Current Detrimental Disturbance Texture Percent Coarse Fragments Bare Soil Rock Wood Litter Vegetation 1 6 6 0 2 13 62 23 19 fi sa cl lo 15 3 0 3 2 0 2 3 94 6 sa cl 13 4 0 3 2 0 2 3 94 6 sa cl 13 5 13 3 3 3 10 13 70 3 cl lo 15 6 2 4 3 3 16 38 41 0 sa cl lo 30 7 2 4 3 3 16 38 41 0 sa cl lo 30 8 14 4 3 0 6 25 66 3 sa cl lo 36 9 12 6 0 0 7 27 67 0 sa cl lo 37 10 7 2 0 0 7 27 67 0 fi sa cl 43 11 4 3 0 0 2 30 68 8 cl lo 21 12* 3 3 7 2 2 53 37 18 sa cl lo 33 13* 9 3 4 0 0 35 61 7 sa cl lo 25 14* 0 1 36 0 0 15 49 30 sa cl 70 15* 4 2 32 13 2 42 12 22 sa cl 61 17 4 4 0 0 0 62 38 0 sa cl lo 33 18 0 2 0 2 0 7 92 5 sa cl 43 19 4 3 0 0 3 73 23 0 sa cl 38 20 12 3 0 0 0 27 73 2 sa cl 40 21 0 2 0 0 0 12 88 3 sa cl 33 22 13 4 3 3 13 49 31 0 sa cl lo 28 Unit CWD (T/A) Depth of Organic (cm) Ground Cover Percentage Current Detrimental Disturbance Texture Percent Coarse Fragments Bare Soil Rock Wood Litter Vegetation 23 5 5 0 0 10 17 73 0 sa cl lo 36 24 7 3 3 3 7 10 77 0 sa cl 35 25 15 5 0 0 20 27 53 0 sa cl lo 33 26 6 5 4 0 9 67 20 0 sa cl lo 33 27 7 3 3 3 10 17 67 0 sa cl lo 30 28 5 5 0 0 20 13 67 0 sa cl lo 25 29 5 4 0 0 7 17 77 10 sa cl lo 34 30 9 3 2 0 4 20 73 0 cl lo 28 31 9 3 2 0 4 20 73 0 cl lo 28 32 6 3 5 5 7 56 28 0 sa cl lo 38 33 10 5 0 0 16 44 39 2 sa cl lo 41 34 13 6 0 0 30 40 30 0 sa cl lo 48 35 7 7 0 0 23 63 13 0 sa cl lo 31 36 18 5 3 0 3 20 73 0 sa cl lo 40 37 16 4 2 0 8 20 70 2 sa cl lo 32 38 16 4 2 0 8 20 70 2 sa cl lo 32 39 9 4 0 0 0 23 77 0 sa cl lo 38 40 18 3 0 0 10 35 55 2 cl sa 39 41 6 3 0 0 3 38 58 8 sa cl lo 51 42 12 3 2 0 2 37 60 2 sa cl 48 43 7 3 2 0 3 43 52 10 sa cl 45 44 6 1 0 0 0 43 57 0 sa cl lo 45 45 3 2 0 0 0 37 63 0 sa cl lo 48 46 3 3 1 0 1 27 71 13 sa cl lo 45 47 3 2 0 2 3 30 65 12 sa cl 41 48 0 3 2 2 0 22 75 12 sa cl 70 49 0 3 0 0 2 21 77 11 fi sa cl lo 28 51 0 2 2 0 0 15 83 15 sa cl 39 52 18 3 4 0 10 62 24 6 sa cl lo 24 53 17 7 0 0 27 40 33 10 sa cl lo 43 54 10 5 0 0 16 44 39 2 sa cl lo 41 55 25 3 3 0 10 13 73 0 sa cl lo 37 56 25 3 3 0 10 13 73 0 sa cl lo 37 59 1 3 7 0 3 57 33 27 sa cl lo 46 62 2 2 5 2 3 8 82 10 sa cl 33 63 0 2 5 0 0 75 20 10 sa cl 25 65 2 4 5 5 8 75 8 25 sa cl lo 34 72 0 4 0 0 0 15 85 12 sa cl lo 40 74 42 3 6 3 26 11 54 0 sa cl lo 29 *Units with past mining activity. Summary of Current Conditions The project area has a long management history that includes mining, grazing, and timber harvesting, which contributed to past ground disturbing activities that lead to the current conditions. The amount of detrimental soil disturbance in the units is mixed, but primarily is the result of past log landings and skid trails with the exception of four units that have residual effects from mining. The soils in the project area are generally coarse textured and resilient to compaction and erosion if operations take place during dry or frozen conditions. Ground cover is generally high in the project area and trending toward recovery where a thin organic layer exists. Coarse woody debris levels also vary across units but are mostly within forest standards. There are multiple areas and units where large amounts of CWD signal a build-up of “locked-up” nutrients that are not plant or soil available. Environmental Consequences Alternative 1 – No Action No additional impacts to soil quality would occur. Existing areas with reduced soil quality would continue to recover through natural means (organic matter accumulation, freeze/thaw cycles, root penetration, etc.). There would be a gradual trend toward increased soil quality in units that currently have high detrimental disturbance. Coarse woody debris would slowly accumulate as stands age and begin to die. There would be no cumulative effects. Direct Effects Common to Alternatives 2 and 3 For the action alternatives (alternatives 2 and 3), the same types of management activities are proposed (table 126). The measurable differences in alternatives are the extent and area of treatment. This section describes each of the proposed activities and the effects to the soil resource. The extent and mitigation measures specific to each alternative is further explained below. Table 126. Acres of treatment and road miles for each action alternative Treatments And Road Miles Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) Acres Alternative 3 Acres Hand Treatments 6,541 5,001 Skyline Vegetation Treatments 663 364 Ground-based Vegetation Treatments 1,359 1,198 Total 8,563 6,564 Broadcast Burn 127 110 Burn Piles 146 94 Jackpot Burn 300 504 Low Severity Fire 449 326 Mixed Severity Fire 5,014 3,302 Site Prep Burn 180 171 Underburn 1,825 1,648 Total 8,040 6,155 Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal (miles) 2.6 0.4 Road Maintenance (miles) 45.6 43.8 Total 48.2 44.2 Ground-Based Vegetation Treatments Ground-based harvesting includes conventional log skidders and feller-bunchers. Log skidders follow designated skidding routes, while the feller-bunchers operate across the unit area. The force from log-loaded machines can compact and displace soil, reducing soil aeration and infiltration capacity. Proper layout of the skid trail pattern can concentrate these impacts and keep detrimental disturbance within allowable limits (15 percent of each unit). The planned ground-based harvest operation in Stonewall would follow old skid trails, resulting in an overlap of disturbance. The effects are therefore not necessarily additive. There is little data on the extent of overlap between new operations on old disturbance. For comparison purposes, past monitoring on the Klamath National Forest showed that 69 percent of new skid trails reuse old skid trails (Laurent 2009). It was further assumed that main skid trails disturbed 10 percent of each unit. The assumption was made that 69 percent of the 10 percent (or 7 percent of each unit) would occur on pre-existing skid trails. Therefore, the assumption from this monitoring is that there would be 3 percent new detrimental disturbance added to the current amount from primary skid trails for units with existing skid trail networks. The Flathead National Forest had a similar monitoring effort where they measured DSD before and after treatments. The results were mixed, with one unit showing less than 1 percent increase in DSD and another showing 5 percent increase (Archer 2011, personal communication). The average was 3 percent, just as in the Klamath National Forest monitoring. The Helena National Forest has monitored and assumes that for summer tractor harvesting, there is 9 percent DSD from skid trails (Marr 2011b, personal communication). There has not been an attempt to quantify the additive effects of skid trails versus reuse of old skid trails on the Helena National Forest. Regardless of the amount, it follows that current DSD is primarily from old skid trails and landings. When a unit has a high existing DSD percentage, there is more of an opportunity to reuse existing skid trails and therefore reduce the additive soil disturbance from the proposed operations. There is negative correlation between existing detrimental disturbance and the amount added to a unit following ground-based treatments. For example, ground-based harvest on an area with no prior mechanical harvest entry would result in 9 percent DSD. However, an area with 25 percent existing detrimental disturbance prior to ground-based harvest could conceivably result in no additional detrimental disturbance because all of the new skid trails are placed on old skid trails. For the current analysis, it was assumed that units with greater than 10 percent DSD would result in an additional 3 percent increase from primary skid trails. Some compaction would occur in areas outside of main skid trails where machinery makes one or two passes but this increased compaction would not exceed threshold values as documented by Powers (2002). It is possible that in some of the units the combined current detrimental disturbance and projected detrimental disturbance from the activities would exceed 15 percent. These units are disclosed in the section that applies to the individual alternative. Rehabilitation of these units would include subsoiling and placing slash on areas with detrimental disturbance. If subsoiling is required, it would be done under dry soil conditions (dry down to 24 inches) with winged rippers to a depth of at least 18 inches. Landings Landings are central processing zones that are essential for logging operations. Landings are approximately 0.25 acre to 0.33 acre in size but are generally larger when accommodating whole-tree yarding. Existing landings would be reused where possible. Landings can produce erosion and sediment if not properly designed and maintained. Project design features provide for sufficient erosion control. Monitoring on the Helena National Forest validates these assumptions and has found landings to average 0.25 acre in size and add 2.5 percent DSD to ground based operations (Marr 2011b, personal communication). Skyline Vegetation Treatments Cable harvesting would cause small amounts of soil displacement in the yarding corridors from dragging logs. The cable corridor can vary from 6 to 8 feet wide and would have an area in the center of the corridor that is down cut 9 to 12 inches. The spatial area in yarding corridors has been measured as varying between 3 and 8 percent depending upon the size of trees (Klock 1975). In accordance with monitoring on the Helena National Forest (Marr 2011b, personal communication), it is assumed that 5 percent additional disturbance would occur from cable logging corridors in the Stonewall project area. Skyline harvests do not include the addition of landings, as these are located on National Forest System roads in these units. Hand Vegetation Treatments Hand thinning and piling slash would maintain sufficient fine soil cover and would not cause additional ground disturbance. Prescribed Burning The risk from prescribed burning is that fire has the potential to create erosion possibilities by removing soil cover and the forest floor, both critical for soil functions. In low severity fire-treated areas, there would be enough forest floor retained to minimize any negative effects. Moderate burn prescriptions would be more severe but the mosaic nature of these burns should create a situation where there are firebreaks sufficient to reduce the erosion potential. Burning should have a net positive impact by increasing the availability of nutrients for the soil and understory, thereby increasing forest productivity. Revegetation in forest openings would depend upon the seed source and remnant plant communities. Using low and moderate severity fire would increase the available nutrient base for forest productivity based on studies in the Rocky Mountains (Gundale et al. 2005, DeLuca et al. 2006). The mosaic burn pattern would also ensure soil cover for moisture retention. Short-term nutrient flushes should occur for up to 3 years depending on the burn severity, with long-term nitrate increases up to 50 years (Deluca et al. 2006). Charcoal as a byproduct of fire, becomes functionally important as a stabilizer for soil chemistry against alkaloids that may impair soil nutrient processes, and as a soil conditioner for added water holding capacity and cation exchange sites (Deluca and Aplet 2008). Charcoal would also increase Nitrogen availability (Ball et al. 2010). In reference to DSD, it is expected that for low severity prescriptions (including underburning), less than 2 percent would be severely burned and result in detrimental soil conditions from loss of groundcover. For the mixed or moderate burn severity prescriptions (including broadcast burns), it is anticipated there would be more severely burned area and hence 10 percent detrimentally disturbed soils (Marr 2011a). Prescribed Pile Burning Burning slash piles can have long-lasting negative, soil effects through direct consumption of soil ground cover, and removal of seed sources for revegetation. An indirect effect of pile burning is the potential for introducing invasive plants once native seed sources are removed. These effects are localized, and limited to areas where the slash piles are placed. This includes jackpot burning as these types of burns typically have similar effects as pile burning. Monitoring on the Helena National Forest found that these burns affect less than 5 percent of units analyzed (USDA Forest Service 2005). It is assumed that units where pile and jackpot burns are prescribed would have 5 percent DSD resulting from these activities. Coarse Woody Debris Across all activities, coarse woody debris levels, as recommended previously, would be retained at 5-20 tons per acre or additional CWD would be left on site to meet these requirements. The prescribed underburning units were not surveyed for CWD. However, these higher elevation areas do not have an extensive management history and it is unlikely they are lacking in CWD. The underburning as described would create pockets of dead trees and some bare soil. This would provide recruitment for downed CWD on these openings in the long term. Road Construction Construction of roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal creates detrimental soil disturbance by bulldozing the surface layer aside and exposing non-productive subsoil layers. Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal are assumed to be 25 feet wide. On flat to gentle slopes, soil disturbance can be minimal to shallow cuts (0.5 to 2 feet). On steeper slopes where cut and fill techniques are required, cuts can be 4 to 8 feet high. The fill material is deposited on top of the existing soil, thereby increasing soil depth, which in turn increases soil water holding capacity. Soil organic materials are also incorporated into the soil. Increased water holding capacity and organic matter has a positive effect on site productivity. The increased soil quality does not equal the soil quality lost in the cut portion of the road. The road surface is compacted by equipment travel during the construction process as well as from log truck travel on the road. Building proposed roads built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal results in short-term degradation of soil hydrology and long-term reduction in soil biological function. Obliteration and reclamation efforts improve soil hydrologic function over leaving roads in place. For the short term, reclamation improves soil infiltration adequately to address erosion potential, though reclaimed soil would have infiltration rates lower than natural forest rates (Luce 1997; Foltz and Maillard 2003). For the long term, infiltration rates improve over time as freeze/thaw and plant roots improve soil porosity, though rates would likely remain lower than adjacent natural forest soil (Switalski et al. 2004). Soil biological function restores as forest floor and native plant communities return. Indirect Effects Common to Alternatives 2 and 3 Noxious Weeds An important indirect effect from harvest operations is the potential to spread and introduce noxious weeds. See the Noxious Weed section for a detailed list of weeds found in the area and their current range. Noxious weeds can have a detrimental effect on soil quality through competition for resources such as space, light, water, and nutrients; and through allelopathy.26 Allelopathic weed species exude chemicals that can have a negative effect on native plant species. Canada thistle, spotted knapweed, and leafy spurge are known to be allelopathic (Foy and Inderjit 2001). 26 Allelopathy is defined as “chemical interactions among and between plants that do not include positive effects” (Foy and Inderjit 2001). Though the potential exists for adverse impacts to soil quality because of noxious weeds infestation, the actual impact to long-term soil quality is minimal. Project design features would help to reduce the spread of noxious weeds. Units treated in the winter would help to reduce the spread of noxious weeds because weeds are dormant at this time decreasing the transport of viable seeds. Soil Erosion Proposed activities for the action alternatives have the potential to expose mineral soil to overland flow and subsequent erosion. Potential erosion because of project implementation was modeled using Disturbed WEPP. The accuracy of all Disturbed WEPP predictions is plus or minus 50 percent (Elliot et al. 2000). WEPP is most appropriately used to compare alternatives. We selected Units 13, 23, and 84 for modeling because their location on soils with a high erosion hazard and long and sustained slopes represents each of the treatment types (tractor-13, skyline-23, and burn-84). These three units therefore represent the worst-case scenario for erosion potential. We extrapolated inputs for WEPP modeling from the assumptions in the direct effects above. Specifically, it was assumed that conventional tractor harvesting would result in 12 percent decrease in ground cover, accounting for the detrimental disturbance percentage, moderate intensity prescribed burning would have a 10 percent decrease in ground cover, etc. Other WEPP inputs were gradient, slope length, soil texture, and rock percentage. These were estimated from Geographical Information Systems (GIS) data and soil mapping. All vegetation inputs were mature forest with the exception of the prescribed burning unit being low severity fire. Table 127 demonstrates that the probability of erosion in the first year following harvest is 3percent for all units across all alternatives. There was no distinction made between alternatives 2 and 3 because they have the same prescriptions for the three units analyzed. The soil quality standards state that the tolerable soil loss rate is generally less than 1 to 2 tons per acre per year (USDA Forest Service 1999). None of the predicted erosion rates here exceeds these soil quality standards. These WEPP results do not take into account PDFs intended to reduce erosion potential. Therefore, it is unlikely that erosion would be an issue from either action alternative. Table 127. WEPP modeling results for the Stonewall Project, erosion and sedimentation ALTERNATIVE UNIT DRAINAGE PROBABILITY OF EROSION‡ PROBABILITY OF SEDIMENTATION‡ AVERAGE EROSION RATE (TONS/ACRE)* 30-YEAR EROSION RATE (TONS/ACRE)** No Action 13 Lincoln Gulch 3% 3% 0 0.134 Action 13 Lincoln Gulch 3% 3% 0.09 0.946 No Action 23 Lincoln Gulch 3% 3% 0 0.037 Action 23 Lincoln Gulch 3% 3% 0.03 0.746 No Action 84 Theodore Creek 3% 3% 0.01 0.359 Action 84 Theodore Creek 3% 3% 0.03 0.577 ‡The probability of erosion or sedimentation for the no action alternative is the probability of erosion or sedimentation in any given year. For the proposed action, it is the probability of erosion or sedimentation the first year following harvest. *There is an equal probability that the erosion rate could be greater than or less than the average value. ** The 30-year erosion rate represents the amount of erosion anticipated if there were a 30-year rainfall following implementation. Cumulative Effects Common to Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative effects are activities that overlap spatially and temporally within the activity area. For the soils analysis, the unit is the activity area analyzed for cumulative effects (as defined in Forest Service Manual 2500, Supplement number 2500-99-1). Therefore, activities analyzed here would take place inside of units. The cumulative effects for alternative 2 (the proposed action) and alternative 3 are included in appendix C and includes the cumulative effects of all the previously discussed direct effects in this section. The detrimental disturbance analysis takes into account all proposed activities within a unit in the same fashion as a cumulative effects analysis. In the detrimental disturbance analysis, the spatial distribution of proposed activities and current conditions was taken into account. Typical road maintenance and upgrading may have cumulative effects. This includes replacing and adding drainage structures, blading the road surface, brushing the sides of the roads, and placing additional surface material. This generally increases drainage and can decrease erosion off the road surface due to decreased overland flow. Road maintenance is ongoing and would extend beyond the life of this project. This project does not propose to change any road classifications but would utilize existing stored roads for access and vegetation removal. Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal are taken into account with the vegetation treatments. For more detail on the cumulative effects of roads, see the Hydrology Report (McNamara 2012). There are no proposed changes to recreation management from the current project. There is currently motorized use that would continue throughout the project area. There is the potential to increase illegal off-road motorized use because forest stands would be opened up following the proposed activities. This is covered in more detail in the Recreation Report (Valentine 2012b). Other recreational activities such as gathering of forest products, hunting, and hiking are likely to continue as they currently are. Effects from these activities are taken into account in the current conditions. Recovery Rates The expected recovery rates for proposed activities in the action alternatives are included in table 128. We based these estimates on a combination of published literature, monitoring reports from adjacent forests, field observations, and professional judgment. Recovery of roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal is anticipated to be similar to summer tractor harvesting. Recovery depends upon the effectiveness of roots to penetrate compacted soil, leading to a return of porosity and drainage. Implementing the restoration project design features (PDF), described in would increase the recovery time for affected soils, particularly the placement of slash on heavily disturbed areas. Organic material amendments cannot be emphasized enough. In addition, contemporary timber harvest operations are less impactful than the historic operations monitored in the studies of table 128. It is therefore likely that recovery time from the proposed activities would be quicker than the best available science cited here. Table 128. Expected recovery rates for proposed activities in the action alternatives ACTIVITY RECOVERY (YEARS) REFERENCES Summer Tractor Harvest 30.50 Froehlich et al. 1985; Bisbing et al. 2010 Winter Tractor Harvest 10.40 Lolo NF Monitoring (Archer 2008); Flathead NF Monitoring (Basko 2002) Prescribed Burning 10 Auggie Soils Specialist Report (Archer 2009); Idaho Panhandle NF monitoring (Niehoff 2002)   Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to soil and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed under soil, watersheds and fisheries in table 9 pertaining to soil are S/WS/F-1 through S/WS/F-14. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to both action alternatives. Design features that are applicable to soil include not only those listed above, designed specifically to protect the soil, but also those designed to protect other resources such as water and fish. Project Design Features and Restoration Effectiveness Project design features and best management practices are effective at minimizing the amount of soil disturbance. For example, Han et al. (2006) found logging during dry months can reduce compaction effects in fine textured soils since soil strength is maximized when soil moisture is below field capacity. Harvesting when soils are dry also appears to limit the machinery impact to the wheel track (Williamson and Neilson 2000; Han et al. 2009). On the Helena National Forest, soil quality monitoring results have previously demonstrated that conservation of soil resources has improved during implementation of forestry activities since adoption of BMPs in 1988. This is documented in the Helena National Forest Annual Monitoring Report Fiscal Year 2004 which reported: “…forestry practices have generally become more effective in limiting the amount of area affected by detrimental soil disturbance to comply with the Forest Plan measure of soil variability (i.e. 20%) since adoption of forestry Best Management Practices (BMPs) in 1988. Six of the monitoring plots assessed areas harvested prior to adoption of BMPs in 1988. The mean value for aerial extent of moderate to severe soil disturbance on these 6 plots was 19%, and ranged from 8% to 26%. The remaining 4 monitoring plots assessed areas harvested after 1988 and adoption of BMPs. The mean value for aerial extent of moderate to severe soil disturbance on these 4 plots was 13%, and ranged from 5% to 17%” (USDA Forest Service 2007, p. 80). Key findings from additional BMP monitoring (USDA Forest Service 2003) for harvest units in the Maudlow-Toston sale area include: · Adequate amounts of coarse woody material were retained in harvest units, as recommended by researchers (Graham et al. 1994). · Region 1 soil quality standards (USDA Forest Service 1999) for limiting detrimental soil disturbance, such as compaction and displacement, were met in helicopter, skyline cable (both summer and winter logging), and winter tractor logging units. · Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal and log landings have been successfully recontoured, with adequate amounts of woody material scattered across reclaimed areas, and then seeded. The State of Montana and other land managers monitor the implementation and effectiveness of Montana Forestry BMPs within recent forest management activities. This effort is known as BMP Auditing. Results are provided in an annual report. The Montana State Audit found that “across all ownerships, BMPs were properly applied 93% of the time and overall effectiveness of the implementation was 97%” (Montana DNRC 2006). The effectiveness of soil rehabilitation treatments may be low, improving soil conditions by 30-50 percent (Luce 1997; Foltz and Maillard 2003). This implies that erosion control work is effective, and soil compaction has been alleviated; but biological and other physical soil processes are not returned to background levels. For roads built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal rehabilitation, or where slash is left on the skid trail, 50 percent effectiveness has been used. This acknowledges that biological and physical properties are improved beyond doing no restoration but not to background levels. Application of slash and other organic materials on skid trails, burn piles, skyline corridors, and log landings helps restore areas denude of vegetation and topsoil to more natural conditions. These additional organic inputs aid biological processes and accelerate recovery. Road decommissioning research (Switalski et al. 2004; Kolka and Smidt 2004) is cited here for effectiveness of these practices. The added slash and other organic materials provide the benefits such as enhanced microbial activity, increased water holding capacity, and erosion control. British Columbian monitoring of soil restoration showed that standard techniques such as those proposed in (decompacting, placing slash and duff, and seeding) can be effective in re-establishing vegetation and therefore alleviating negative soil effects (Bulmer 1997). Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to soil and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed under soil, watersheds and fisheries in table 9 pertaining to soil are S/WS/F-1 through S/WS/F-14. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Design features that are applicable to soil include not only those listed above, designed specifically to protect the soil, but also those designed to protect other resources such as water and fish. Project Design Features and Restoration Effectiveness Project design features and best management practices are effective at minimizing the amount of soil disturbance. For example, Han et al. (2006) found logging during dry months can reduce compaction effects in fine textured soils since soil strength is maximized when soil moisture is below field capacity. Harvesting when soils are dry also appears to limit the machinery impact to the wheel track (Williamson and Neilson 2000; Han et al. 2009). On the Helena National Forest, soil quality monitoring results have previously demonstrated that conservation of soil resources has improved during implementation of forestry activities since adoption of BMPs in 1988. This is documented in the Helena National Forest Annual Monitoring Report Fiscal Year 2004 which reported: “…forestry practices have generally become more effective in limiting the amount of area affected by detrimental soil disturbance to comply with the Forest Plan measure of soil variability (i.e. 20%) since adoption of forestry Best Management Practices (BMPs) in 1988. Six of the monitoring plots assessed areas harvested prior to adoption of BMPs in 1988. The mean value for aerial extent of moderate to severe soil disturbance on these 6 plots was 19%, and ranged from 8% to 26%. The remaining 4 monitoring plots assessed areas harvested after 1988 and adoption of BMPs. The mean value for aerial extent of moderate to severe soil disturbance on these 4 plots was 13%, and ranged from 5% to 17%” (USDA Forest Service 2007, p. 80). Key findings from additional BMP monitoring (USDA Forest Service 2003) for harvest units in the Maudlow-Toston sale area include: · Adequate amounts of coarse woody material were retained in harvest units, as recommended by researchers (Graham et al. 1994). · Region 1 soil quality standards (USDA Forest Service 1999) for limiting detrimental soil disturbance, such as compaction and displacement, were met in helicopter, skyline cable (both summer and winter logging), and winter tractor logging units. · Roads that would be built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal and log landings have been successfully recontoured, with adequate amounts of woody material scattered across reclaimed areas, and then seeded. The State of Montana and other land managers monitor the implementation and effectiveness of Montana Forestry BMPs within recent forest management activities. This effort is known as BMP Auditing. Results are provided in an annual report. The Montana State Audit found that “across all ownerships, BMPs were properly applied 93% of the time and overall effectiveness of the implementation was 97%” (Montana DNRC 2006). The effectiveness of soil rehabilitation treatments may be low, improving soil conditions by 30-50 percent (Luce 1997; Foltz and Maillard 2003). This implies that erosion control work is effective, and soil compaction has been alleviated; but biological and other physical soil processes are not returned to background levels. For roads built and then obliterated immediately following timber removal rehabilitation, or where slash is left on the skid trail, 50 percent effectiveness has been used. This acknowledges that biological and physical properties are improved beyond doing no restoration but not to background levels. Application of slash and other organic materials on skid trails, burn piles, skyline corridors, and log landings helps restore areas denude of vegetation and topsoil to more natural conditions. These additional organic inputs aid biological processes and accelerate recovery. Road decommissioning research (Switalski et al. 2004; Kolka and Smidt 2004) is cited here for effectiveness of these practices. The added slash and other organic materials provide the benefits such as enhanced microbial activity, increased water holding capacity, and erosion control. British Columbian monitoring of soil restoration showed that standard techniques such as those proposed in table 129 (decompacting, placing slash and duff, and seeding) can be effective in re-establishing vegetation and therefore alleviating negative soil effects (Bulmer 1997). This document details the primary effects from the proposed treatments. As stated earlier, the effects from each of the action alternatives are essentially the same with the exception of the degree of activities in each of the alternatives. As can be seen in table 126 alternative 2 proposes more overall treatment acres and more road miles utilized than alternative 3. Alternative 2 would have long- and short-term direct and indirect negative effects on forest soil quality. However, the project would meet the Region 1 Soil Quality Standards by implementing the project design features and restoration measures and help reduce negative impacts to soils.Anticipated detrimental disturbance for the proposed action by unit is shown in table 129. All units are expected to meet Region 1 Soil Quality Standards. Table 129. Projected detrimental soil disturbance for the proposed action in the Stonewall Project UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 1 96 SWD/SPB 19 8.1 27.1 17.0 Restoration/WL 2 146 LSF/<5ac N/A 2.0 2.0  None 3 37 PCT/HP/BP 6 5.0 11.0  None 4 7 S/S/HP/BP 6 8.0 14.0  WL 5 18 S/S/HP/BP 3 8.0 11.0  WL 6 14 Imp Cut/UB 0 9.0 9.0  None 7 17 Imp Cut/UB 0 9.0 9.0  None 8 62 Imp Cut/UB 3 9.0 12.0  None 9 18 ST/S/HP/BP 0 10.5 10.5  WL 10 18 CLC/UB 0 9.3 9.3  WL 11 23 SWD/UB 8 9.2 17.2 12.6 Restoration/WL 12 80 SWD/UB 18 7.5 25.5 15.8 Restoration/WL 13 41 ST/JB 7 10.5 17.5 12.3 Restoration/WL 14* 11 PCT/HP/BP 30 5.0 35.0 30.0* Restoration 15* 15 Imp Cut/UB 22 6.5 28.5 22.0* Restoration 16 3 PCT/HP/BP N/A 5.0 5.0  None 17 38 CLC/JB 0 10.5 10.5  WL 18 21 PCT/HP/BP 5 5.0 10.0  None 19 15 CLC/JB 0 10.5 10.5  WL 20 32 ST/JB 2 11.4 13.4  WL 21 6 PCT/HP/BP 3 8.9 11.9  None 22 30 SWD/SPB 0 9.0 9.0  None 23 29 Imp Cut/UB 0 9.0 9.0  None 24 5 Imp Cut/UB 0 9.0 9.0  None 25 29 ST/BB 0 9.0 9.0  None UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 26 65 Imp Cut/UB 0 9.0 9.0  None 27 31 CLC/SPB 0 9.0 9.0  None 28 22 Imp Cut/UB 0 10.0 10.0  WL 29 25 SWD/S/HP/B 10 12.0 22.0 10.0 Restoration/WL 30 14 Imp Cut/UB 0 11.1 11.1  None 31 16 Imp Cut/UB 0 11.1 11.1  None 32 45 Imp Cut/UB 0 15.1 15.1  None 33 17 Imp Cut/JB 2 12.0 14.0  None 34 12 SWD/JB 0 12.0 12.0  None 35 24 CLC/BB 0 9.0 9.0  None 36 20 CLC/BB 0 9.0 9.0  None 37 8 CLC/BB 2 9.0 11.0  None 38 7 CLC/BB 2 13.5 15.5 14.3 Rip Landings 39 42 ST/UB 0 9.9 9.9  None 40 11 ST/UB 2 13.5 15.5 14.3 Rip Landings 41 12 SWD/UB 7 6.5 13.5  None 42 65 ST/UB 2 13.5 15.5 14.3 Rip Landings 43 104 ST/UB 10 7.5 17.5 7.8 Restoration/WL 44 97 Imp Cut/UB 0 10.3 10.3  None 45 38 Imp Cut/UB 0 10.8 10.8  WL 46 251 Imp Cut/UB 13 7.5 20.5 10.8 Restoration/WL 47 220 Imp Cut/UB 12 7.5 19.5 9.8 Restoration/WL 48 141 PCT/UB 12 2.0 14.0  Handthin 49 49 PCT/UB/PVT 11 2.0 13.0  Handthin 50 49 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 51 193 PCT/UB/PVT 15 2.0 17.0 16.0 Restoration/Handthin 52 22 CLC/BB 6 9.0 15.0  None UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 53 17 SWD/JB 10 12.0 22.0 16.0 Restoration 54 20 Imp Cut/JB 2 12.0 14.0  None 55 29 Imp Cut/UB 0 12.5 12.5  None 56 17 CLC/BB 0 9.0 9.0  None 57 93 SWD/JB N/A 10.5 10.5  WL 58 15 SWD/JB N/A 10.5 10.5  WL 59 16 PCT 27 0.0 27.0  Handthin 60 25 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 61 34 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 62 37 PCT 10 3.0 13.0  WL 63 17 PCT 10 3.0 13.0  WL 64 30 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 65 25 PCT 25 0.0 25.0  Handthin 66 26 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 67 20 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 68 15 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 69 31 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 70 39 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 71 40 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 72 85 PCT 12 0.0 12.0  Handthin 73 33 PCT N/A 0.0 0.0  None 74 23 CLC/SPB 0 13.5 13.5  None 75 148 PCT/UB N/A 2.0 2.0  None 76 123 LSF/<10ac N/A 2.0 2.0  None 77 709 MSF/<30ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 78 38 LSF/<5ac N/A 2.0 2.0  None 79 337 MSF/<30ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 80 326 MSF/<20ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 81 629 MSF/<30ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 82 776 MSF/<75ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 83 457 MSF/<75ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 84 831 MSF/<30ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 85 143 LSF/<5ac N/A 2.0 2.0  None 86 47 MSF/<10ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 87 36 MSF/<5ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None 88 865 MSF/<30ac N/A 10.0 10.0  None ‡This value includes restoration detailed in PDFs S/WS/F 9-13 above with the assumption that they have 50% effectiveness in soil restoration (Luce, 1997). These values also assume that units with high existing detrimental disturbance (10%+) have an increase in 3% detrimental disturbance from skid trails due to overlap. *Final detrimental disturbance values are assuming higher overlap and restoration due to preponderance of mining disturbance. WL=Winter Logging CLC/BB=Clearcut with Reserves/Broadcast Burn, CLC/JB=Clearcut with Reserves/Jackpot Burn, CLC/SPB=Clearcut with Reserves/Site Prep Burn, CLC/UB=Clearcut with Reserves/Underburn, Imp Cut/JB=Improvement Cut/Jackpot Burn, Imp Cut/UB=Improvement Cut/Underburn, LSF/<5ac=Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres, LSF/<10ac=Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres, MSF/<5ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings < 5 acres, MSF/<10ac= Moderate Severity Fire, Openings < 10 acres, MSF/<20ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres, MSF/<30ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres, MSF/<75ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres, PCT=Precommercial Thin, PCT/HP/BP=Precommercial Thin/Handpiling/Burn Piles, PCT/UB=Precommercial Thin/Underburn, PCT/UB/PVT=Precommercial Thin/Underburn or Slash along Private, S/S/HP/BP=Sanitation/Slashing/Handpiles/Burnpiles, ST/BB=Seedtree with Reserves/Broadcast Burn, ST/JB=Seedtree with Reserves/Jackpot burn, ST/S/HP/BP=Seedtree with Reserves/Slashing/Handpiles/Burnpiles, ST/UB=Seedtree with Reserves/Underburn, SWD/JB=Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves/Jackpot burn, SWD/S/HP/B=Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves/Slashing/Handpile/Burn, SWD/SPB=Shelterwood with Reserves/Site Prep Burn, SWD/UB=Shelterwood with Reserves/UnderburnUnits 14 and 15 currently have high detrimental disturbance (30 and 22 percent, respectively). These two units showed signs of past mining activities and have some of the highest bare ground percentages (36 and 32, respectively) as well as low coarse woody debris tonnage (0 and 4). Using the calculations described above, these two units have the potential to have a higher detrimental disturbance after restoration than they do currently. Region 1 Soil Quality Standards state that, “In areas where more than 15% DSD exists from prior activities, the cumulative detrimental effects should not exceed the conditions prior to the planned activity and should move toward a net improvement in soil quality” (USDA Forest Service 2009). In these two units, there is an ample amount of area previously disturbed. Based on professional experience, it is highly likely that the projected disturbance from the proposed action would take place on current detrimental disturbance. This disturbed ground would then be restored and there would be a net decrease in detrimental disturbance. Also, in terms of net improvement, these units would have CWD levels increase to at least 5 tons per acre, many areas with bare soil would be covered with valuable organic material in the form of slash, and introduction of fire would help cycle nutrients locked up in biomass into the soil. These actions would all show a net improvement in soil quality trends within these units and hence meet Region 1 Soil Quality Standards. Units 51 and 53 are also above the 15 percent threshold using the calculations in table 129. Both of these units are projected to have 16 percent detrimental disturbance after restoration by the calculations above. It should be noted that this is within the accepted range (+/- 5 percent) of accuracy for these measures (Page-Dumroese et al. 2009). The main disturbance that would push these units to the threshold is prescribed burning. Based on professional experience, it is possible to implement the prescribed burning in these units without exceeding thresholds. We would monitor these units for soil conditions following harvest and before burning. A soil scientist would be consulted prior to burning to ensure that soil moisture is high enough to not create excessive detrimental effects. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The planned actions for the Stonewall Vegetation Project adhere to the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest, and the soil quality guidelines for maintaining soil quality from Region 1 with the implementation of design features. Summary of Alternative 2 Alternative 2 (proposed action) has the most proposed treatment acres. This alternative has the most acreage that would potentially be detrimentally disturbed. However, this alternative also has the most acreage proposed for prescribed fire. Based on research and professional experience, the positive effects of reintroducing fire, as described in the sections previous, far outweigh negative potential from disturbing a larger acreage of land. Alternative 3 The primary effects from the proposed treatments are detailed in this document. As stated earlier, the effects from each of the action alternatives are essentially the same with the exception of the degree of activities in each of the alternatives. As can be seen in table 130, alternative 3 proposes fewer treatment acres and less road miles utilized overall.Alternative 3 would have long- and short-term direct and indirect negative effects on forest soil quality. However, the project would meet Region 1 Soil Quality Standards by implementing the project design features and restoration measures and help reduce negative impacts to soils. Anticipated detrimental disturbance for alternative 3 is shown by unit in the following table. All units are expected to meet Region 1 Soil Quality Standards. Table 130. Projected detrimental soil disturbance for alternative 3 in the Stonewall Project UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 1 96 SWD/SPB 19.0 8.1 27.1 17.0 Restoration/WL 2 146 LSF/<5ac  2.0 2.0  None 3 37 PCT/HP/BP 6.0 5.0 11.0  None 4 7 S/S/HP/BP 6.0 8.0 14.0  WL 5 18 S/S/HP/BP 3.0 10.5 13.5  WL 6 14 Imp Cut/UB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 7 17 Imp Cut/UB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 8 62 Imp Cut/UB 3.0 6.5 9.5  None 9 18 ST/S/HP/BP 0.0 10.5 10.5  WL 10 18 CLC/UB 0.0 9.3 9.3  WL 11 23 SWD/UB 8.0 9.2 17.2 12.6 Restoration/WL 12 80 SWD/UB 18.0 7.5 25.5 15.8 Restoration/WL 13 41 ST/JB 7.0 10.5 17.5 12.3 Restoration/WL 14* 11 PCT/HP/BP 30.0 5.0 35.0 30.0* Restoration 15* 15 Imp Cut/UB 22.0 6.5 28.5 22.0* Restoration 16 3 PCT/HP/BP  5.0 5.0  None 17a 38 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 19a 15 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 20a 24 UB 2.0 2.0 4.0  None 22a 22 SWD/SPB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 23 29 Imp Cut/UB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 24 5 Imp Cut/UB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 25 29 ST/BB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 27 31 CLC/SPB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 28 22 Imp Cut/UB 0.0 13.5 13.5  None UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 29a 25 UB 10.0 2.0 12.0  None 30a 14 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 31a 16 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 32a 45 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 34 12 SWD/JB 2.0 9.5 11.5  None 35 24 CLC/BB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 36 20 CLC/BB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 37 8 CLC/BB 2.0 6.5 8.5  None 38 7 CLC/BB 2.0 13.5 15.5 14.3 Rip Landings 39 26 ST/UB 0.0 6.5 6.5  None 40 11 ST/UB 2.0 13.5 15.5 14.3 Rip Landings 41 12 SWD/UB 7.0 6.5 13.5  None 42 65 ST/UB 2.0 13.5 15.5 14.3 Rip Landings 43 104 ST/UB 10.0 7.5 17.5 13.8 Restoration/WL 44a 97 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 45a 38 UB 0.0 2.0 2.0  None 46a 223 UB 13.0 2.0 15.0  None 46b 27 Imp Cut/UB 13.0 7.5 20.5 10.8 Restoration/WL 47a 180 UB 12.0 2.0 14.0  None 47b 9 Imp Cut/UB 12.0 7.5 19.5 9.8 Restoration/WL 47c 31 Imp Cut/UB 12.0 7.5 19.5 9.8 Restoration/WL 48 141 PCT/UB 12.0 2.0 14.0  Handthin 50 49 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 51 193 PCT/UB/PVT 15.0 2.0 17.0 16.0 Restoration/Handthin 52 22 CLC/BB 6.0 6.5 12.5  None 53 17 SWD/JB 10.0 9.5 19.5 14.8 Restoration 57 93 SWD/JB  10.5 10.5  WL UNIT ACRES TREATMENT CURRENT % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE PROJECTED % DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE FROM TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER TREATMENTS DETRIMENTAL DISTURBANCE % AFTER RESTORATION‡ ACTIONS TO MEET SOIL STANDARDS 58 15 SWD/JB  10.5 10.5  WL 59 16 PCT 27.0 0.0 27.0  Handthin 61a 9 PCT/HP/UB  5.0 5.0  None 62 37 PCT 10.0 3.0 13.0  WL 63 17 PCT 10.0 3.0 13.0  WL 66 26 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 67 20 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 68 15 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 69 31 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 70 39 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 71 40 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 72 85 PCT 12.0 0.0 12.0  Handthin 73 33 PCT  0.0 0.0  None 74 23 CLC/SPB 0.0 13.5 13.5  None 75b 20 PCT/HP/UB  5.0 5.0  None 78 38 LSF/<5ac  2.0 2.0  None 79 337 MSF/<30ac  10.0 10.0  None 80a 326 JB  5.0 5.0  None 82 776 MSF/<75ac  10.0 10.0  None 83 457 MSF/<75ac  10.0 10.0  None 84 831 MSF/<30ac  10.0 10.0  None 85 143 LSF/<5ac  2.0 2.0  None 87 36 MSF/<5ac  10.0 10.0  None 88 865 MSF/<30ac  10.0 10.0  None ‡this value includes restoration detailed in PDFs S/WS/F 9-13 above with the assumption that they have 50% effectiveness in soil restoration (Luce, 1997). These values also assume that units with high existing detrimental disturbance (10%+) have an increase in 3% detrimental disturbance from skid trails due to overlap. * Final detrimental disturbance values are assuming higher overlap and restoration due to preponderance of mining disturbance. CLC/BB=Clearcut with Reserves/Broadcast Burn, CLC/JB=Clearcut with Reserves/Jackpot Burn, CLC/SPB=Clearcut with Reserves/Site Prep Burn, CLC/UB=Clearcut with Reserves/Underburn, Imp Cut/JB=Improvement Cut/Jackpot Burn, Imp Cut/UB=Improvement Cut/Underburn, LSF/<5ac=Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres, LSF/<10ac=Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres, MSF/<5ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings < 5 acres, MSF/<10ac= Moderate Severity Fire, Openings < 10 acres, MSF/<20ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres, MSF/<30ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres, MSF/<75ac=Moderate Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres, PCT=Precommercial Thin, PCT/HP/BP=Precommercial Thin/Handpiling/Burn Piles, PCT/UB=Precommercial Thin/Underburn, PCT/UB/PVT=Precommercial Thin/Underburn or Slash along Private, S/S/HP/BP=Sanitation/Slashing/Handpiles/Burnpiles, ST/BB=Seedtree with Reserves/Broadcast Burn, ST/JB=Seedtree with Reserves/Jackpot burn, ST/S/HP/BP=Seedtree with Reserves/Slashing/Handpiles/Burnpiles, ST/UB=Seedtree with Reserves/Underburn, SWD/JB=Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves/Jackpot burn, SWD/S/HP/B=Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves/Slashing/Handpile/Burn, SWD/SPB=Shelterwood with Reserves/Site Prep Burn, SWD/UB=Shelterwood with Reserves/UnderburnAlternative 3 is the same for detrimental disturbance in units 14, 15, and 51 as alternative 2 (see table 129 and discussion on pages 23 and 24). Calculations for alternative 3, however, do not include unit 53 (as seen in alternative 2) because unit 53 does not come above the 15 percent detrimental disturbance threshold in alternative 3 (table 130). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Alternative 3 for the Stonewall Vegetation Project adheres to the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest and the soil quality guidelines for maintaining soil quality from Region 1 with the implementation of design features. Summary of Alternative 3 Alternative 3 has fewer proposed treatment acres than alternative 2, and therefore, has fewer acres that would potentially be detrimentally disturbed by prescribed fire. Based on research and professional experience, the positive effects of reintroducing fire, as described in the sections previous, far outweigh any negative potential from disturbing a larger acreage of land.Units 51 and 53 in alternative 2 and unit 51 in alternative 3 would be checked for soil conditions before burning to ensure that soil moisture conditions are high enough to not create additional detrimental disturbance. Hydrology Introduction This section addresses potential project-related and cumulative effects on water resources—specifically, water quality and quantity in the streams within and downstream of the project area, as well as riparian area and wetland condition and function within the project area. Project streams are tributaries to the Blackfoot River. Existing water quality concerns in the project area are mainly related to sediment delivered from roadways. Undersized culverts on roads in the project area, while not affecting current water quality, are also a concern in that culvert failure during a large flow event would likely result in the entrainment and deposition of large volumes of sediment within stream channels. Sediment is of particular concern in the project watersheds because, although the streams flowing through the project area are not listed as water-quality impaired by the State, they flow to the Blackfoot River, which has a total maximum daily load (TMDL) developed for sediment (for the section downstream of the forest boundary). In an effort to improve watershed and stream water quality conditions in conjunction with the project, extensive road maintenance to meet the State Best Management Practices (BMP) is planned for roads used for the project. In addition, the action alternatives include about 0.4 to 2.6 miles of road that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Reducing sediment delivery from roads would help meet a target set by the Montana Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) for the Blackfoot River sediment TMDL for sediment reduction in tributary watersheds (Montana DEQ 2004). Methodology Sediment delivery from roads at stream crossings was predicted using an erosion/sedimentation model called WEPP Road (Elliot et al.1999). The newly developed W3 version, a physically based erosion simulation model built on the fundamentals of hydrology, plant science, hydraulics, and erosion mechanics (Laflen et al. 2004), was exclusively designed to evaluate effects of forest projects on stream flows in Region 1 of the Forest Service. Input data used to run this model were collected in the field in the sediment surveys identified in the next section. Sediment source areas were surveyed along all roads in project watersheds. The W3 WEPP model estimated an annual average sediment delivery to project streams under existing conditions, and then model runs were done assuming surfacing and drainage improvements were implemented at road stream crossings. The physical basis and performance of the WEPP models is discussed in the model documentation (Elliot et al. 1999, 2000) as well as several peer-reviewed papers (e.g., Larsen and MacDonald 2007; Laflen et al. 2004; Elliott 2004). In general, erosion prediction models have difficulty predicting sediment output with precision from a road, hillslope, or watershed at time-scales useful to land managers. This is due mainly to a high degree of variability in site characteristics and climate. An average erosion/sediment delivery rate prediction can encompass this variability to some degree, although this value becomes much more useful when combined with a predicted probability that erosion would occur. The WEPP models incorporate climate data tailored to the individual site using PRISM data (Daly et al. 2001) and simulates daily events for a number of years specified by the user (30 years in this analysis) to determine the probability of sediment leaving the unit. The model incorporates individual precipitation event characteristics and antecedent conditions as well as site characteristics into its prediction of average annual runoff, erosion, and sediment yield values. The culvert risk analysis was based on field measurements of the culverts within the project area and flood frequency regression curves developed for the state of Montana (Parret and Johnson 2004). Many of the streams within the project area appear to lose water to the subsurface in the downstream sections; thus the predicted flows are probably conservative for culvert flow design. An equivalent clearcut area (ECA) analysis was completed to evaluate water yield increases due to insect mortality, wildfires, and previous forest management actions. Water yield was also evaluated using the WEPP W3 model. The model was developed to replace the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE) and has been widely used in the United States and the world. WEPP requires four inputs, climate, topography, soil, and management (vegetation), and provides various types of outputs including water balance (surface runoff, subsurface flow, and evapotranspiration), soil detachment and deposition at points along the slope, sediment delivery, and vegetation growth. Water yield increases occur as a result of changes in watershed evapotranspiration, and information used in the analysis is derived from a variety of sources including the timber stand data base, which gives us a reasonable estimate of the equivalent clearcut acres. Water yield increases presented for alternative 1 (current conditions) are relative to an undisturbed, fully-forested condition27. The Equivalent Clearcut Area analysis was also used to estimate the impact on water yield of project activities as well as past and present activities throughout the four 6th-field watersheds in the project area (USDA Forest Service 1978, 1980). Water quantity can be an issue as excess water yield may result in accelerated stream bank erosion resulting in habitat degradation and additional sedimentation. The use of water yield and potential impacts on a stream is consistent with EPA guidance for sediment Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs). State water quality standards also recommend limits on water yield and related increased flow—activities increasing mean monthly flows above 15 percent can require an Authorization to Degrade (ARM 17.30.715). Activities resulting in flow increases of less than 15 percent are considered not significant and are not required to undergo review. The indicator used in this analysis is percent annual water yield 27 Water yield analysis in this report uses, as a baseline, a watershed where mature forest exists and no fire or other vegetation removal has occurred in the recent past. Under natural conditions (or under conditions during which long-term flow records in the region were recorded), it is unlikely that the forests in watersheds in the study area would have been entirely intact over this interval, due to fires or insect infestations. Thus, this method of analysis is conservative—a more realistic baseline would likely consider part of a watershed to be deforested and/or recovering from disturbance at any given point in time. A natural channel would be adjusted to a marginally higher water yield than a conservative analysis would suggest. increase. In keeping with state regulations and other EPA-approved water quality habitat restoration plans and sediment TMDLs, modeled water yield benchmark for non-TMDL streams is 10 percent and for TMDL streams 8 percent is used (e.g., Montana DEQ 2004). Changes in water yield are difficult to predict at the landscape scale due to the high degree of complexity in the movement of water in mountainous forested environments. Even with exhaustive site data (i.e. transpiration rates, soil moisture and porosity, precipitation, stream flow, groundwater level and flow) available only in experimental settings, water yield estimates are approximate at best. The ECA model has been in use for several decades in the northern Rockies, and provides a reasonable estimation of the impacts of vegetation removal. Numerous studies have been done on water yield and streamflow changes after forest harvest. In a review and summary of the short-term effects of forest harvest in the United States and other countries, Hibbert (1967) concluded that a “reduction of forest cover increased water yield,” but the “response to treatment is highly variable, and for the most part, unpredictable.” He also found that, in general, the increases in streamflow and water yield decreased over time as vegetation re-grew. In a later review, Bosch and Hewlett (1982) analyzed an additional 55 studies and concluded that increased streamflow is caused by a decrease in forest cover, and that the decrease correlated with the amount of the forest overstory canopy removed. Further, it was found that cutting conifers produced a greater increase in streamflow than cutting deciduous trees. The dense needles and branches of conifers intercept more water than hardwoods, and interception of precipitation occurs all year long. Conifers also actively photosynthesize for a longer period (Swank et al. 1988). Streamflow increases were highest in areas with greater amounts of mean annual precipitation, and were generally short lived as vegetation re-grew. Physical riparian habitat was assessed as part of the sediment source survey described in the next section, using standard proper functioning condition (PFC) guidelines (Prichard 1998). Streams are considered to be in proper functioning condition when there is adequate vegetation, land form, or large woody debris present to dissipate stream energy associated with high water flows, filter sediment, capture bedload and aid floodplain development; improve flood-water retention and ground water recharge; develop root masses that stabilize stream banks; develop channel characteristics to provide habitat for beneficial uses; and support greater biodiversity (ibid). Streams rated as functional-at-risk are considered functional (see above), but an existing soil, water, or vegetation attribute makes them susceptible to degradation. A stream is considered nonfunctional when it is clear that there is not adequate vegetation, landform, or large woody debris to dissipate stream energy associated with high flows, thus leaving banks subject to accelerated erosion and worsening water quality (ibid). Information Used Data Sources Sediment/Pollutant Source Survey – A sediment/pollutant source survey was completed for the project analysis. This consisted of a detailed, on-the-ground survey of the streams within the project area. Sediment and other pollutants were identified, described, photographed, and located using Global Positioning System (GPS) units. This information was entered in a database and sediment or other pollutant sources were plotted on maps of the drainages within the project area. The survey was done in an effort to assess the condition of streams within the project area as well as identify various pollution sources and causes. Roads Sediment and Culvert Survey – A detailed roads sediment and culvert survey was also done for the project analysis. Roads within the area were surveyed in detail; sites where sediment was being transported to stream channels were evaluated and located with GPS units. Parameters measured at the sites were those required by the WEPP-Roads model. Data included road design, dimensions, gradient, surface material, buffer dimensions, and overall disturbance width and length. Roads Analysis Process – A roads analysis was undertaken for the Helena National Forest in 2004. The analysis examined roads in maintenance levels 1 through 5. The analysis includes drainage road densities, road mileage within riparian habitat conservation areas, mileage in wet areas, mileage across erosive and slide-prone soils, mileage within TMDL watersheds, and the number of road-stream interactions. Risk ratings were given to individual roads as well as watersheds on the forest as a result of this analysis Data Queries from the Timber Stand Database – These queries assess past harvest activities and fire acreage by 6th-field watershed in the project area. This information was used in the analysis of water yield change. GIS layers and Queries – Numerous GIS layers were used for spatial analysis including proposed harvest units, proposed and existing roads, 6th-field watershed boundaries and streams from the national hydrography dataset (NHD), Helena National Forest (HNF) landtypes, stream buffers and various intersections of these layers with the HNF soil resource inventory. This information was used in various analyses. Soil Survey, Helena National Forest – The HNF Soil Survey provided data on soil types and characteristics for the study area. This information was used in modeling erosion and sedimentation. Stonedry NFMA Analysis – The Stonedry NFMA analysis looked at a variety of data including recent water quality data, roads analysis, riparian stream characteristics for reference reaches, and past harvest and fire activity. Information from past and proposed timber harvest on private property within the project area was also used in the analysis of water yield change. Assumptions Water Quality The project would meet State water quality standards for streams if all reasonable land, soil, and water conservation practices are implemented and those practices “protect present and reasonably anticipate beneficial uses.” Of the beneficial uses designated for project area streams, the proposed activities could possibly affect salmonid habitat through increased delivery of fine sediment to streams. Other beneficial uses for project-area streams are unlikely to be affected by the proposed activities. In streams with no previously identified water quality impairment, this analysis assumes beneficial uses are being fully met and would continue to be met if project activities do not cause an increase in sediment delivery, as predicted by modeling. The effects of each alternative are based on the following assumptions related to water quality: · The potential for sediment delivery from forested areas is highest in the first year following disturbance, and generally recovers to pre-disturbance conditions within three to five years. · Road improvements (new drainage features, gravel application) may result in elevated erosion shortly after installation, but would remain effective in reducing sediment delivery over a period of at least three to five years. · Obliteration of roads may result in elevated erosion during and shortly after work, but would become stable and cease to be sediment sources within one to two years following disturbance. · Proposed roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would not develop sediment delivery points because they would be located in upland locations without hydrologic connection to any channels. Water Quantity Water yield from a watershed is typically defined as the total volume of water leaving the basin via surface flow over a specified length of time. Annual water yield fluctuates based on climatic variability and changes in land use patterns. Most hydrologic impacts occur during periods of the peak stream flow in a watershed. Stream flow is defined as “the channelized flow of water at the earth’s surface”; peak flow is defined as “the maximum flow rate that occurs within a specified period of time, usually on an annual or event basis.” In the project area, peak flows occur as the snowpack melts in the spring. Occasionally, periods of high stream flow can be caused by rainstorms. Snow melts from a watershed in a predictable pattern. Melt begins earlier in the season at lower elevations and proceeds upslope. Snow has generally disappeared from the lower elevations some time before the spring stream flows peak. During peak flow, snow is beginning to disappear from the mid-elevations and is actively melting at the higher elevations of a watershed. After an area has been harvested, both winter snow accumulation and spring melt rates increase. This effect is less important at lower elevations, since the snow disappears before peak flow. At mid-elevations, the additional melt may or may not be important, depending on seasonal variations. Harvesting at high elevations would have the greatest impact and is, therefore, of most concern. The changes in snow accumulation and melt brought about by forest harvesting are reduced as new forests grow. This is commonly referred to as hydrologic recovery. Second-growth forests are said to be hydrologically recovered when snowpack conditions approximate those prior to logging and, as a result, any impact on stream flow is minimized. The most important influence of vegetation on snow accumulation is the interception of snow by the forest canopy and the subsequent loss of this snow to the atmosphere. This interception effect is a result of the combination of tree height and canopy closure. The rate at which the snowpack melts is affected by the extent to which the snowpack is exposed to solar radiation, and like interception, is also controlled by the canopy. Consequently, canopy closure is one of the main stand characteristics affecting snow accumulation and melt. The degree of canopy closure is determined by tree species, height, and stocking density. Since tree height data is readily available and is closely correlated with canopy closure, it is the variable used to evaluate hydrologic recovery. Forest management practices and road construction may increase water yield by removing living trees from treated areas, thus reducing the amount of water removed from the watershed by transpiration and canopy interception, evaporation, and sublimation. Excess water yield can be of concern because it may result in accelerated stream bank erosion resulting in habitat degradation and additional sedimentation. Widespread tree mortality from natural causes, such as insects, disease or fire may similarly increase water yield. Removal of trees has a greater effect on the water balance than removal of smaller plants such as grasses, forbs, and many shrubs, because large trees are generally more deeply rooted and thus have access to groundwater for a longer period of time. Trees also transpire much more water per unit area of ground coverage than smaller plants. The effects of tree removal on water yield depend on many factors, the most important of which is the percent watershed area with tree removal/mortality. A statistically significant increase in stream flow is generally not measurable until at least 20 to 30 percent of a watershed’s forest cover is removed (MacDonald and Stednick 2003). Additionally, annual precipitation must generally exceed 18 to 20 inches in order for a measurable yield increase to occur even with greater forest cover removal (Bosch and Hewlett 1982; MacDonald 1987). Many of the trees proposed for harvest under alternatives 2 and 3 would be dead or dying from insect infestation. Dead trees do not transpire and are thus not a substantial contributor to water loss in project sub-watersheds. Thus, removing these trees would have no measurable effect on the water balance in any watershed. The area of land proposed for clearing for roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal is negligible at the 6th-HUC basin scale, and the majority of trees that would be removed to facilitate these roads are dead. Thus, road construction would have a minimal effect on overall water yield. Roads typically are compacted surfaces, however, that can create local flow increases that may lead to sedimentation if road drainage is connected to streams. Road construction, however, can have a significant effect on sedimentation. The construction and maintenance of logging roads and landings exposes soil and increases the susceptibility to erosion and transport of sediment to streams (Kochenderfer et al. 1997; Swift 1985, 1988). The greatest input of sediment from roads generally occurs during construction and active log haul during timber harvest. Stream crossings, wetland crossings, and the approaches of roads to these areas are sources of the majority of sediment contribution to streams and wetlands (Swift 1988) especially where BMPs have not been properly applied (Stuart and Edwards 2006). Physical Riparian Habitat Proper functioning condition (PFC) is a qualitative method for assessing the condition of riparian areas (Prichard 1998). The term PFC is used to describe both the assessment process and a defined, on-the-ground condition of a riparian area. The on-the-ground condition termed PFC refers to the functional level of physical riparian processes. Proper functioning condition is a state of resiliency that allows a riparian area to maintain its integrity during high-flow events. This resiliency allows an area to produce desired values over time, such as fish habitat, neotropical bird habitat, forage, and dissipation of flood energy. Riparian areas that are not functioning properly cannot sustain these values. Proper functioning condition is used as the indicator of riparian area condition in this analysis. Spatial and Temporal Scale of Analysis The spatial scale of analysis of direct and indirect effects is the 6th-field hydrologic unit code (HUC). The individual 6th-field HUCs range in size from 7,552 acres for Lincoln Creek and11,617 acres for Beaver Creek, to 22,834 acres for Keep Cool Creek. This is an appropriate scale because the types of watershed impacts that are associated with forest management practices (increased sediment delivery and water yield) are generally discernible at the 6th-field HUC scale. Tools available for analysis of watershed impacts were also considered; a smaller scale of analysis would require significantly more data and effort without a commensurate increase in accuracy. The cumulative effects analysis covers the three 6th-field HUCs combined, and is approximately 42,003 acres in size. Cumulative effects from the project were considered along with other management activities and natural fires. Additionally, the mouth of the combined drainages is in the TMDL section of the Blackfoot River Headwaters, and thus is an appropriate point at which to assess cumulative effects. The temporal bounding of the analysis for direct and indirect effects ranges from 1 to 5 years, referred to as “short-term” effects. Short-term increases in sediment delivery associated with construction activities (i.e. road improvements and decommissioning) would last as long as soil is disturbed or exposed in locations hydrologically connected to streams. Once the road surfaces have stabilized with aggregate or vegetation has re-established after obliteration, construction-related impacts would not be expected to persist (temporal scale of a few months to one year). After the completion of management activities on treatment units, the potential for sediment delivery is highest in the first year following disturbance and generally recovers to pre-disturbance levels within five years. Therefore, discussion of direct and indirect effects related to treatment units has a temporal scale of five years. As used in this analysis, “long-term” effects would be expected to last greater than 5 years (e.g. physical obliteration of closed roads). Beneficial effects of application of BMPS and design features may persist longer than the short-term. Overview of Issues Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on hydrology were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Comments indicated concern that roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, road reconstruction, and use of existing roads would adversely impact water quality. See the Transportation section for more information about roads. Affected Environment Introduction This section describes the affected environment for water resources. Much of the information presented in this analysis comes directly from field examination of the Stonewall Project area, including a stream-by-stream sediment source survey and a road sediment and culvert survey. In addition, project units that have the potential to adversely affect water quality were examined in the field. Table 131 displays watershed information used in this analysis. Table 131. Watersheds, stream miles, and acres of watershed area SIXTH-HUC WATERSHED NAME SIXTH-HUC WATERSHED NUMBER STREAM MILES AREA (ACRES) PERCENT OF WATERSHED IN PROJECT AREA Watershed Project Area Watershed Project Area Beaver Creek 170102030303 34 23 11,617 8846 76 Keep Cool Creek 170102030304 70 23 22,834 9270 41 Lincoln Creek 170102030305 21 13 7552 5777 77 Total 125 59 42,003 25,898 57 Lincoln Creek (170102030305) The Lincoln Creek watershed is 7,552 acres in size and flows into the Blackfoot River about a mile downstream of the Forest boundary. This is a 1st-order drainage with 13 miles of streams on the Forest. Lincoln Creek appears to be a losing stream28 near the Forest boundary. The average annual precipitation is 26 inches, with approximately 35-40 inches at upper elevations, and 15-20 inches at lower elevations; the wettest months are May and June. Historic land use activities in the drainage are predominantly 28 A losing stream is one that typically loses flow at the edge of the valley because the water in the stream infiltrates to ground water mining, forestry, and agriculture. Approximately 77 percent of this watershed is within the project boundary, and proposed treatment units occupy about 30 percent. There are no water quality listings in the Lincoln Creek watershed. Lincoln Creek exhibits a typical snowmelt-dominated hydrograph that can occasionally have multiple peaks during the spring due to rain events or warmer periods. The headwaters area consists of glaciated mountainous terrain while the lower portions of the watershed are comprised of mountain slopes and ridges and valley floor, all underlain by Proterozoic sedimentary rock. The stream bottoms run through compact loamy glacial till, moraines and glaciated mountain slopes in the upper portion of the watershed, and colluvial and alluvial flood plains and terraces and mountain slopes and ridges in the lower portion. Beaver Creek (170102020303) The Beaver Creek watershed is 11,617 acres in size and is a tributary to the Blackfoot River. The stream is connected to the Blackfoot River through a series of mostly beaver created ponds and lakes located mostly on private lands. This is a 2nd -order drainage with a mixture of 34 miles of intermittent and perennial streams. Theodore, Klondike, and Yukon Creek are mostly perennial headwater streams. Annual average precipitation for the watershed is about 31 inches from PRISM, with 35-40 inches in the upper elevations and about 15-20 inches at lower elevations. May and June are the wettest months. Beaver Creek exhibits a typical snowmelt-dominated hydrograph that can occasionally have multiple peaks during the spring due to rain events. Proterozoic sedimentary rock and Pleistocene glacial deposits underlie the Beaver Creek subwatershed. The predominant landforms are steep mountain slopes and ridges and valley floors. Historic land use activities in the drainage are predominantly mining and forestry. Approximately 76 percent of this watershed is within the project boundary, and about 17 percent is occupied by proposed treatment units. There are no streams in the Beaver Creek watershed with water-quality-limited segments (WQLS) on the Montana 303(d) list (DEQ 2008). Keep Cool Creek (170102030304) The Keep Cool Creek watershed is 22,834 acres in size and is a tributary to the Blackfoot River, which is located about half mile below the National Forest boundary. This second-order drainage exhibits a typical snowmelt-dominated hydrograph that can occasionally have multiple peaks during the spring due to rain events. The average annual precipitation is approximately 35-40 inches at higher elevations and 15-20 inches at lower; the wettest months are May and June. Annual average precipitation for the watershed is about 28 inches from PRISM. The drainage is characterized by steep mountainous terrain. The predominant landform is steep mountain slopes and ridges with the lower watershed consisting of alluvial flood plains and terraces. Proterozoic sedimentary rock and Pleistocene glacial deposits underlie the portion of the Keep Cool Creek 6th-HUC watershed covered by the project area. Historic land use activities in the drainage are predominantly forestry and mining. Approximately 41 percent of this watershed is within the project boundary, and proposed treatment units occupy about 16 percent. There are no water quality listings in the Keep Cool Creek watershed. Water Quality Project subwatersheds are in the Upper Blackfoot River Headwaters Total Maximum Daily Load planning area. The Blackfoot Headwaters TMDL for sediment was published by the Montana DEQ and cooperators in 2004. Attributes for each of the 6th-HUC watersheds covered by the project area are listed below. All of the project subwatersheds have large areas of beetle-killed trees.  Table 132. Summary of water quality impairments in project area 303(d)-listed streams 6TH-HUC WATERSHED STREAM SEGMENT LISTED IMPAIRMENTS Blackfoot River—Little Moose Creek Blackfoot River Alteration in streamside vegetation, sedimentation, metals Sedimentation Roads Analysis Process There are roughly 86 miles of National Forest System roads in the project area. This project includes up to 2.6 miles of roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal. These proposed road segments are generally in upland locations and would likely not pose a risk for sediment delivery to streams. The proposed road segment number 5, accessing units 10 and 11, crosses a small drainage of a headwater tributary basin to Lincoln Creek. This apparent crossing was reviewed in the field—there is an old abandoned irrigation ditch at this site, but no stream channel or evidence of overland flow. Flow may occur in the ditch during snowmelt. If the decision is made to construct this segment, then appropriate mitigations must be in place (adequate culvert, proper road drainage, and sediment fencing if appropriate) and the segment should be obliterated soon after the project ends, in order to minimize sediment impacts. Many of the existing roads used to access the project area are known sources of sediment to streams, and were characterized as moderate-to high-risk in the HNF Roads Analysis Process. The use of these roads for project-related log hauling and other traffic would exacerbate their current sediment delivery. These roads present good opportunities for mitigation of potential sediment delivery from project activities in the form of road maintenance and improvements (e.g. gravel surfacing) and replacing undersized culverts. Mitigation measures sufficient to offset any project-related sediment delivery (from treatment units and haul routes) in the form of road BMPs and project design features have been incorporated into the project action alternatives. Sedimentation from Roads A detailed road sediment survey was conducted for the project area watersheds. The survey identified road segments that were hydrologically linked to stream channels and thus had the potential to deliver sediment to channels during runoff events. Road segments identified as such in the survey were modeled using the WEPP Roads model. The model’s output consists of predicted annual average sediment yield from the road prism, in terms of tons per year, based on site-specific climate data and road characteristics. The concept of an average annual sediment load is somewhat misleading in that sediment delivery varies widely from year to year. In WEPP, the average annual value is equivalent to a two-year-return-interval flow event; there is an equal probability that the sedimentation could be greater or less than this value. Comprehensive sediment management begins by identifying the existing primary sources of sediment and developing a strategy that preferably minimizes or eliminates sources of sediment or the erosive action in the first place. This can be accomplished by first reviewing all existing road segments posing sediment delivery risk to the stream system, planning preventive measures that reduce or eliminate road-derived sediment, and then implementing those measures. Identification of primary sediment delivery sources to streams on many roads in the Stonewall Project Area has been accomplished and they are detailed in this analysis. The next step involves evaluating all proposed road reconstruction and roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal to determine the magnitude of potential risks to the stream system. Certainly roads in valley bottoms, roads paralleling streams and within 300 feet of the stream, and roads with live stream crossings generally pose the highest risk. Recommended action can vary from eliminating the road building to relocating or modifying the road design. The sediment mitigation for the project area requires close coordination and support from engineering and watershed specialists in reducing sediment delivery by applying various BMP standards. Sediment mitigation measures have been developed for all alternatives to reach the goal of no net increase or preferably, a reduction in sediment delivery from current levels for the proposed project. Costs associated with erosion or sediment control measures should be included in the project area plan as well as an implementation schedule. Given the magnitude of other cumulative effects that may arise from ongoing and foreseeable activities, keeping sediment delivery below existing levels may be very difficult—especially during the first 1 to 3 years as the magnitude of ground disturbance required to bring roads up to standard may in itself result in some short-term sediment delivery. Reducing sediment delivery below current levels over the long term would likely require that some roads be brought up to BMP standards—especially roads rated as high risk to watersheds and fisheries in the Helena National Forest Roads Analysis (map locations available in GIS data files), and in the project area where sediment source surveys have identified problem areas. BMP maintenance should emphasize surfacing of the roads near stream crossings with washed gravel, improved surface drainage of roads, improved cross drainage of roads, and providing for 100-year flood flows for culvert crossings. Upgrading culverts to ensure they have the capacity to pass 100-year flows reduces risk for culvert failure and subsequent loss of road fill material to streams. Culvert crossings of perennial streams in this project area may need to be upgraded to provide for 100-year flows as well as provide for fish passage. Sedimentation from Stream Bank Erosion Stream bank erosion was noted in the PFC survey. Streams were surveyed in the Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek watersheds. Areas of accelerated erosion were located on a map, described, and photographed. There are no areas with bank alteration over the standard specified in INFISH, which requires streambanks to be 80 percent stable. Table 133. Road information for the project area by 6th-HUC watershed 6TH-HUC WATERSHED NAME SYSTEM ROADS (MI) SYSTEM ROAD DENSITY (MI/MI2) RAP* HIGH-RISK ROADS (MI) RAP* MODERATE-RISK ROADS (MI) ROAD SEDIMENT DELIVERY POINTS CULVERTS (#) FORDS (#) Beaver Creek 33 1.8 9 16 14 13 0 Keep Cool Creek 36 1.0 2 9 24 19 2 Lincoln Creek 24 2.0 11 8 3 3 0 Total 93 -- 22 33 41 35 2 *RAP: Helena National Forest Roads Analysis Process Report (USDA Forest Service 2004) Sedimentation from Other Sources In addition to accelerated stream bank erosion, other sources of sediment have been assessed in project watersheds. Other than the occasional elk wallow the only other notable sources of sediment are located downstream of Helena National Forest lands. Agriculture including cattle grazing, forestry, and mining occurs on private and State lands in project watersheds, and these activities may be a source of sediment to streams. Stream Substrate Analysis Sediment substrate analysis was done to determine cumulative sediment impacts in streams and to evaluate existing levels of fine sediment in stream substrates. Cumulatively, the impacts of disturbances (both natural and human related) throughout the watershed are reflected in the character of stream substrates. The percentage of fine sediment less than 6 mm diameter is used as a measure of condition. Use of sediment as a measure of risk to fisheries is appropriate for this project as it is generally accepted in watershed practice that the stream channel reflects the sum of land use activities; including natural disturbances in a watershed. Fine sediment (less than 0.25 inches diameter) levels for various streams within the project area are in table 134. Natural mean sediment levels from Helena National Forest reference cores from various drainages combined is about 32 percent with 0.66 percent (one standard deviation) of the overall range established near 10 percent each side of the mean). It is likely that reference drainages throughout the Helena National Forest may have mean sediment values of 28 to 30 percent rather than 32 percent. Specifically for streams sampled in roadless areas, sediment levels averaged 31.9 percent on the Helena National Forest. Consequently, for fisheries management goals, 32 percent likely represents a reasonable sediment level to maintain with an objective to reduce further toward the 28 to 30 percent range. As shown in table 134, several streams sampled within the project area have average sediment levels above the 32 percent level and three streams are above 40 percent. Table 134. Summary of mean percent fines (less than 0.25 inches diameter) in select streams as an indicator of cumulative effects from past and ongoing activities by 6th-field HUC 6th Field HUC sub-watershed  (name) Stream(s) Sampled for Sediment Analysis Mean Percent Fines in Spawning Habitat * USEPA reference Standard (%) ** Roadless Area reference (%) 17010203  (Beaver Creek) Beaver Creek 30.9 32.5 31.9 Yukon Creek 34.2 Tributary to Yukon Creek 35.1 Theodore Creek 32.2 Klondike Creek 32.7 17010203  (Stonewall/Park) Stonewall Creek 31.6 32.5 31.9 Park Creek 45.4 17010203  (Lincoln Gulch)  Not sampled as no fishery present in most of the drainage 32.5 31.9 17010203  (Sucker/Liverpool) Liverpool sw 1/4 Liverpool nw . Sucker Creek Keep Cool Creek 42.7 25.4 Not sampled 47.2 32.5 32.5 32.5 32.5 31.9 31.9 31.9 31.9 ** Reference standard developed from Helena National Forest Data in the Lake Helena Watershed Water Yield Past effects to the hydrology of forested areas in the project area was estimated using the equivalent clearcut area (ECA) methodology on lands managed by the Helena National Forest for existing conditions in the Lincoln Creek, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek watersheds. The current, pre-project existing condition water yield from project sub-watersheds is a result of forest clearing, past fires, insect mortality, forest roads and other activities. There are no stream gauges in project subwatersheds; as a result pre-project baseline stream flows cannot be reliably determined. Equivalent clearcut area can give a general estimate, based on the available literature, what the water yield increases from project activities may be. This estimate is based on comparable paired watershed studies completed in other parts of the intermountain west that investigated water yield effects of timber harvest and other fuels treatments. Observed changes in the water yield after beetle kill or forest removal in snowmelt-dominated areas in the intermountain west are due to both a decrease in winter interception and a reduction in growing season soil moisture depletion (Potts 1984;Troendle 1987). In the upper part of project subwatersheds, precipitation accumulates over the winter as snow pack, with minimal melt over this accumulation period. When the snowpack begins to melt in spring, the meltwater first recharges the soil by replacing the water depleted during the previous growing season. Once soil moisture storage is filled, the excess meltwater is available to become streamflow. Paired watershed studies have shown that approximately 30 percent of the increase in water yield can be attributed to the decrease in interception and resultant increased amount of water contained in the snowpack. The reduced evapotranspiration during the previous summer also reduces the amount of meltwater needed for soil moisture recharge in the clearcut. This process accounts for approximately 50 percent of the increase in water yield. The remaining 20 percent of the observed increase in water yield results from the reduction in evapotranspiration losses during April and May (Troendle and King 1985). Primary sources of water yield increase for project subwatersheds include past timber harvest on Helena National Forest System lands and other land ownerships, as well as beetle-killed trees. Riparian and Wetland Areas Physical riparian habitat conditions were recorded for streams within the project area as part of the pollutant-source survey. For the most part, streams within the project area were rated to be in proper functioning condition (PFC) with the exceptions of one reach on Beaver Creek and three sites on Keep Cool Creek, which were rated functioning-at-risk. Other wetlands may exist within treatment unit boundaries, although none have been identified. Table 135. Riparian condition and bank alteration information for the project area, by 6th-HUC watershed 6TH-HUC WATERSHED NAME RIPARIAN CONDITION*  ALLOTMENT(S) EXCEED PFC FAR NF BANK ALT. STANDARDS (# REACHES) (# REACHES) (# REACHES) (# REACHES) Beaver Creek 2 1  None Stonewall Keep Cool Creek  3  None Keep Cool-Liverpool 6TH-HUC WATERSHED NAME RIPARIAN CONDITION*  ALLOTMENT(S) EXCEED PFC FAR NF BANK ALT. STANDARDS (# REACHES) (# REACHES) (# REACHES) (# REACHES) Lincoln Creek not assessed  Not every riparian reach was surveyed in 2009—numbers should be considered minimum values. *PFC: Properly Functioning Condition, FAR: Functioning-At-Risk, NF: Non-Functioning Environmental Consequences Alternative 1 – No Action Sedimentation from Roads Road work proposed under the action alternatives would not occur under the no-action alternative. Table 136. Estimated average annual sediment delivery from roads to stream channels for existing condition Watershed Sediment Delivered for Total Road Length (Tons) Lincoln 1 Keep Cool 6 Beaver 4 Total 11 Since there would be no additional disturbance to roads under alternative 1, there would be no direct short-term (less than 5 years) or long-term (greater than 5 years) detrimental sediment effects to water quality. Roads would remain in their existing conditions. Project-related road maintenance work would not occur to existing roads. There would be no sediment or water quality impacts from ground disturbing activities such as landings, tractor harvesting, road reconstruction or building, or from increased haul traffic. Indirectly, the existing road system would continue in the short and long term to risk sediment contribution to streams, currently modeled as 11 tons per year within the project watersheds (table 136). Although old, infrequently used roads would continue to revegetate, reducing the amount of sediment produced and possibly contributed to streams; all of these old roads would continue to have varying degrees of impact to watershed hydrology and water quality. Stream channel and road fill scour, channel aggradations, and risk of sediment contribution from failure of undersized stream crossings would persist until otherwise addressed. The no-action alternative would likely not contribute to cumulative sediment-related effects to water quality. Existing trends in water quality would likely be maintained. No mitigation would be required under the no action alternative. The no-action alternative is consistent with Regulatory and Forest Plan direction and would maintain existing watershed conditions Sedimentation from Streambank Erosion and Culverts There would be no direct long-term or short-term effects to stream channels from streambank erosion and culverts under the no action alternative. Indirectly, the presence of undersized culverts and their continued effects on stream channel stability at and near stream crossings would continue to be a resource concern. Undersized culverts are a long-term risk for sedimentation due to the possibility of failure. There are no conflicts with plans or policies with this alternative and no mitigation would be necessary. This alternative would meet Forest Plan and Regulatory guidance related to stream channels. Sedimentation from Other Sources There are several documented small sediment sources in the pollutant source survey, but these sites were determined to be minor sources of sediment to channels. There are no recent burns or other large-scale disturbances identified as sediment sources in the project area. There is no vegetation manipulation proposed in the Stonewall Project area under alternative 1; consequently, there would be no water yield increase over watershed baseline as a result of this alternative. Water Yield Methods for determining the effects of vegetation removal on water yield have been developed for the Helena National Forest (Pfankuch 1973), and reviewed, and refined for USDA Forest Service Region 1. The methods developed were for areas with snowmelt-dominated runoff. The equivalent clear-cut area (ECA) model is a key component of these methods. The basis of the ECA analysis is that water yield increases when vegetation is removed, whether by natural disturbance such as fire, or by human disturbance. The project area harvest history was used to determine the existing, baseline ECA and runoff values on Forest Service lands in the project area by watershed. The GIS database for the Helena National Forest was queried to obtain all records of documented timber harvest. USGS HUC 6 watersheds were used to delineate the tributary watersheds. The model was then re-run to estimate forest canopy and run-off changes after the proposed treatments are completed (see alternatives 2 and 3). Table 137. Existing condition equivalent clearcut area (ECA) due to past alterations in vegetation cover in the project area WATERSHED EXISTING EQUIVALENT CLEARCUT AREA Lincoln Creek Percent of Drainage Harvested: 16 Percent of Past Harvest Recovered: 31 Percent of Drainage as ECA: 7 Beaver Creek Percent of Drainage Harvested: 15 Percent of Past Harvest Recovered: 19 WATERSHED EXISTING EQUIVALENT CLEARCUT AREA Percent of Drainage as ECA: 4 Keep Cool Creek Percent of Drainage Harvested: 13 Percent of Past Harvest Recovered: 28 Percent of Drainage as ECA: 3 Peer-reviewed research has suggested that in areas such as the project area, roughly 20 to 30 percent of a watershed must be treated in order to begin to attain a statistically significant increase in streamflow (MacDonald and Stednick 2003). The percent area in ECA in the Lincoln Creek drainage under current conditions is about 7 percent, and Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek watersheds are 4 and 3 percent respectively. Minor streamflow increases may have occurred under existing conditions within the project area watersheds. However, in drier mountains such as the project area, research has suggested that streamflow increases are reduced in that remaining trees after treatment tend to make use of most additional water made available through the reduction in transpiration brought about by tree removal (MacDonald 1987). This same concept applies to both action alternatives to some degree, especially for thinning and salvage harvest of dead trees. Clearcut harvest may have the largest potential water yield increases. Acres of vegetation removal from timber harvest, roads and fire are converted to ECAs to provide a common datum to compare activities based on the amount of cleared area. ECAs are calculated by summing the appropriate acreage, evaluating the percentage of crown removal then assigning a hydrologic recovery value based on stand age. National Forest System roads are not recovered hydrologically and therefore are assigned a recovery value of zero. For timber harvest there is a continuum of recovery values as the stand ages. Water yield increase is greatest immediately following vegetation removal. In years subsequent to vegetation removal, the ECA (and water yield increase) declines, or “recovers” because of vegetation regrowth. The rate of regrowth and thus ECA recovery is based on evapotranspiration, snowfall accumulation related to patch dynamics, and the relationship between water yield and changes in vegetation interception. This regrowth relationship is expressed as a recovery curve. There are limitations of ECA and water yield analysis. Removal of existing vegetation may demonstrate increases in water yield over existing conditions, however the ECA method does not account for the fact that fire suppression has resulted in overstocked forest conditions that may have actually been reducing water yield below “normal” levels. ECA analysis assumes that stands prior to harvest are fully stocked when in reality some stands at historic conditions were not fully stocked. In addition, this analysis does not accurately account for effects of vegetation removal on other land ownerships, which is a known activity, and it does not weight estimates based on elevation and aspect, which are known to influence water yield. ECA analysis is a relative index of change that might occur, not an absolute result. It is used in combination with other information to determine the effects that the proposed activities may have. Another method used to estimate flow increases is the W3 module of the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) Model (Laflen 2004). The W3 module is designed to specifically estimate surface water yield from a project. It evaluates drainage and precipitation patterns, and the interactions with watershed soils. The model does not accurately predict flow increases due to groundwater inputs. It is difficult to predict the water yield from water that infiltrates deeply into bedrock layers, which are tied more to groundwater yield. As a result, flow and water yield estimates are focused on surface flow increases Water yield increase values provided in this analysis are modeled approximations for the increase in runoff volume from vegetation removal. These values do not account for the effect the road system has on routing water and changes to the hydrograph. Although we did not model water yield impacts from roads, research has shown that roads can influence peak flows (Wemple and Jones 2003). Riparian and Wetland Areas The effects on physical riparian condition for the no action alternative would be similar to what is depicted in the affected environment. For the most part, streams within the project area were rated to be in proper functioning condition (PFC) with the exceptions of one reach on Beaver Creek and three sites on Keep Cool Creek, which were rated functioning-at-risk. No wetlands have been identified within the project boundaries. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments An irretrievable commitment represents a temporary loss of a resource that can be replaced over time. An irreversible commitment represents a total loss of a resource that cannot be replaced. An irretrievable commitment under the no action alternative would be continued erosion and sediment delivery from project area roads at existing levels, in the absence of road improvement work of the type specified in this project. Cumulative Effects Several past and present Federal and other ownership activities have affected and would continue to affect water quality, water yield, and riparian health and vigor in the cumulative effects analysis area for the foreseeable future. Federal and private roads and culverts constructed at road/stream crossings in the project area have affected streams and riparian areas. There are several sediment delivery points on existing roads as described previously, and culverts represent a permanent grade control in the stream channels where they reside. These existing roads also have several road/stream crossings. Culverts at road/stream crossings in the project area watersheds were analyzed for this analysis. Undersized culverts can affect the stream’s ability to convey water and sediment, and represent an increased risk of failure and subsequent erosion and deposition of sediment into stream channels. Culverts directly interact with channels and can affect channel morphology and channel migration patterns, and local hydraulics that may influence the stream channel. There has been past timber harvest activity in the analysis area. Land disturbed by prescribed burn and harvest activities with effective BMP application typically recovers within 5 years, based on observations of similar projects in the region. Dead trees cover a considerable area in the project area. Younger understory trees released by overstory tree mortality would eventually after a couple decades create a forest canopy and reduce evapotranspiration. Continued grazing in riparian areas and cattle trailing along streams within grazing allotments would likely continue to contribute elevated sediment levels to streams in the watershed; although, adaptive management provisions in allotment management plans should be implemented where necessary to reduce livestock impacts. In the absence of other non-project related activities designed to reduce sediment delivery in the watershed, streams in several of the watersheds where treatment is planned would continue to receive sediment from anthropogenic sources near current rates. In the past, mining has contributed sediment to stream channels in the watersheds. Additionally, abandoned mines can pose chronic or episodic water quality problems to forest streams. The Stonewall project-area watersheds may be affected by large-scale tree mortality due to insect infestations. Large-scale loss of live trees may affect water yield by reducing the volume of water removed from a watershed by transpiration. In addition, extensive tree mortality could remove the shade available and increase stream temperature in streams that cross the impacted stands. However, understory vegetation, generally unaffected by insect mortality, would continue to provide shade. Furthermore, understory and riparian vegetation exposed to increased levels of sunlight and moisture (due to overstory mortality or tree removal) can expand and provide additional shade (Gravelle and Link 2007). While an increase in incoming short-wave (solar) radiation is generally considered to be the dominant driver of stream temperature increase, numerous factors influence the extent to which a stream exposed to additional direct sunlight would have an increase in water temperature (Johnson 2004). Thus, the extent of water temperature changes resulting from overstory mortality is difficult to predict. Alternatives 2 and 3 Alternative 2 treats 8,564 acres within the project area, and alternative 3 treats 6,564 acres. Treatment consists of a mixture of regeneration harvest, commercial thinning, non-commercial thinning, and low and mixed severity prescribed burns. Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to hydrology and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed under soil, watersheds and fisheries in table 9 pertaining to hydrology are S/WS/F-18 through S/WS/F-26. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to all action alternatives. Design features that are applicable to hydrology include not only those listed above, designed specifically to protect water quality and water quantity, but also those designed to protect other resources.   Title: Map of sediment source areas in project watersheds - Description: Sediment source areas and proposed road treatments for alternative 2- project watershedsFigure 83. Sediment source areas and proposed road treatments for alternative 2- project watersheds Effects Common to All Action Alternatives Road maintenance and improvement best management practices (BMPs) would be applied to all roads used in the project, including application of aggregate at road/stream crossings and other sediment delivery points. Sedimentation from Roads WEPP Road models sediment delivery to streams mainly at road/stream crossings, often located at culvert crossings or bridges. Water concentrated on the road surface often flows down the road surface toward the low side of stream crossings, flows down the fill slope, and may enter the stream carrying sediment eroded from the road surface or fill slope. The model determines the amount of runoff that may occur from a road surface adjacent to a channel. There should be a short-term (up to 5 years) reduction in sediment transport from roads in the project area resulting from road improvements planned in both alternatives (table 138). Forty-eight miles of road used for alternative 2 and 44 miles of road under alternative 3 would receive BMP maintenance. Project-related road improvements include surface grading, re-establishment of drainage features (grade dips and ditch-relief culverts), and application of sorted gravel at stream crossings and other sediment delivery points. Table 138. Road obliteration and maintenance for project ACTION ALTERNATIVE ROADS BUILT FOR PROJECT USE THEN OBLITERATED (MILES) ROAD MAINTENANCE (MILES) TOTAL (MILES) Alternative 2 2.6 45.6 48.2 Alternative 3 0.4 43.8 44.2  Table 139. Estimated average annual sediment delivery from roads to stream channels by sub-drainage for existing conditions and alternatives 2 and 3 WATERSHED SEDIMENT DELIVERED FOR TOTAL ROAD LENGTH (TONS) ALTERNATIVE 2&3 SEDIMENT DELIVERED FOR TOTAL ROAD LENGTH PROJECT ROAD SEDIMENT AFTER BMPS MAINTENANCE Lincoln 1 2 1 Keep Cool 6 18 5 Beaver 4 11 3 Total 11 31 9 There are about 2.6 miles of roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal (new and “new specified”) planned in these alternatives. Most of these road segments are not predicted to convey sediment to stream channels, as they would be built in upland locations without surface hydrologic connection to any stream channel. The new roads would be obliterated immediately following timber removal. See the transportation report for more information regarding roads (Bielecki 2012). The proposed new road number 1 (see project area map) crosses the drainage of a headwater tributary basin to Lincoln Creek. This apparent crossing was reviewed in the field—there is a vegetated old roadbed at this site, but no stream channel or evidence of overland flow. Channel features were observed roughly 60 feet below the roadbed. Sediment that appeared to be from the old roadbed was observed in this channel, indicating that in the past, this road probably contributed sediment to the uppermost reach of this intermittent stream. If restored, this road represents a potential source of sediment to the stream channel, and should be accounted for in estimates of sediment impacts of the project. If the decision is made to construct this segment, then appropriate mitigations must be in place (adequate culvert, proper road drainage, and sediment fencing if appropriate) and the segment should be obliterated soon after the project ends, in order to minimize sediment impacts. The proposed new road number 5 crosses an intermittent channel and this road is a source of sediment to this stream. Efforts would be made in the construction of this new road to prevent sediment delivery to the channel (e.g. raised grade at crossing, sediment filters at drainage runouts) while the road is in place. Many of the existing roads used to access the project area are known sources of sediment to streams, and were characterized as moderate-to high-risk in the Helena National Forest Roads Analysis Process (USDA Forest Service 2004). Project-related log hauling and other traffic would exacerbate sediment delivery: therefore, these roads present good opportunities for mitigation of potential sediment delivery from project activities, in the form of road improvements (e.g., gravel surfacing) and replacing undersized culverts. All required State and Federal permits (e.g., SPA 124, CWA 402/404) would be obtained prior to construction of this new road. The total reduction in average annual sediment transport from using BMPs for project haul roads was modeled to be roughly 2 tons less than the existing conditions under this alternative, based on proposed BMP maintenance and road improvements. For the road segments to be obliterated, the reduction in sediment delivery would be permanent. Without repeated maintenance, conditions on open roads would likely trend toward pre-project conditions over the next several years once the project is complete. Sedimentation from Streambank Erosion and Culverts Proper functioning condition surveys did not identify any areas of unstable stream banks in project watersheds. Unstable stream banks may exist in project watersheds. Where these features exist, sedimentation from accelerated stream bank erosion would continue to occur under these alternatives. Inadequately sized culverts may have a potential for increasing stream sedimentation. Some stream crossing culverts are undersized, and have the potential for removal during large flood events. Sedimentation from Other Sources The probability and volume of sediment delivered to stream channels from treatment units was estimated using the Disturbed WEPP model in project alternatives. Sedimentation and delivery of sediment probability reflects the variability in slope, soil type, and treatment type among units. The estimated sediment yield and probability are for the first year following treatment, and would likely return to pre-project (near zero) values within 5 years. See the soils report for more information on sediment sources in project units (Walters 2011). Water Yield The project-related and cumulative equivalent clearcut areas and estimated percent water yield increase that would result from proposed activities under the action alternatives are listed in table 140, and table 141. On other drainages within the Helena National Forest the State DEQ has suggested water yield thresholds of concern of 8 percent for TMDL streams and 10 percent for non-TMDL streams (Blackfoot Headwaters Planning Area: Water Quality and Habitat Restoration Plan and TMDL for Sediment, 2003). Table 140. Equivalent clearcut area (ECA) by alternative  EQUIVALENT CLEARCUT AREA HUC 6 WATERSHED EXISTING ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Lincoln Creek Percent of Drainage Harvested: 16 42 32 Percent of Past Harvest Recovered: 31 12 16 Percent of Drainage as ECA: 7 14 11 Beaver Creek Percent of Drainage Harvested: 15 29 25 Percent of Past Harvest Recovered: 19 10 11 Percent of Drainage as ECA: 4 5 5 Keep Cool Creek Percent of Drainage Harvested: 13 20 18 Percent of Past Harvest Recovered: 28 18 21 Percent of Drainage as ECA: 3 4 3  Table 141. Estimated percent water yield increase by action alternatives  PERCENT WATER YIELD INCREASES WATERSHED ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Lincoln Creek 4.9 3.85 Beaver Creek 1.75 1.75 Keep Cool Creek 1.40 1.05 Overall for Project Watersheds 2.13 1.75 This equivalent clearcut area analysis considered all past harvest and watershed disturbances, and the effects of reduction in forest canopy. Table 140 shows that for the proposed action, alternative 2, ECA values range from 4 percent in Keep Cool watershed, to 14 percent in the Lincoln Creek watershed. For alternative 2, for all project watersheds 23 percent of the project watersheds are in equivalent clearcut condition. For alternative 3, 19 percent of project watersheds would be in equivalent clearcut condition. In areas such as the Stonewall Project area, 20 to 30 percent of a watershed must be treated in order to begin to realize a statistically significant measureable increase in streamflow (MacDonald and Stednick 2003). Furthermore, in drier mountains such as the analysis area, research has suggested that remaining trees tend to make use of additional water made available through the reduction in transpiration brought about by tree removal (MacDonald and Stednick 2003), reducing the likelihood that predicted yield increases would be detectable in any of the study basins. Given the number of acres that would be treated in the project watersheds under alternative 2 or 3, it is unlikely there would be a cumulative increase in water yield that would be detectable. The estimated water yield increase for project watersheds is below the DEQ-recommended threshold of 10 percent, and below the 15 percent stipulated in ARM 17.30.715. Streams emanating from project watersheds appear to lose flow as they move from steeper areas and encounter deep valley floor sediments. Considering the dry (losing stream) nature of the channels in the Stonewall Project area watersheds, the potential increase in water yield would be unlikely to cause any negative effects (i.e. accelerated bank erosion). In the event of an actual increase in water yield, the trout population could benefit from greater water availability. Table 142. Percent estimated cumulative water yield increase over baseline conditions (%) 6TH-HUC WATERSHED PERCENT CUMULATIVE WATER YIELD INCREASE OVER BASELINE ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Lincoln Creek 0 4.9 3.8 Beaver Creek 0 1.8 1.8 Keep Cool Creek 0 1.4 1.0 The equivalent clearcut area (ECA) method was used to calculate potential water yield increase given cumulative impacts in the Lincoln, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek watersheds. Table 142 shows that results for the action alternatives suggests an increase of 4 to 5 percent in the Lincoln watershed, about 2 percent in the Beaver Creek watershed, and 1 to 1.5 percent in the Keep Cool Creek watershed, depending on alternative. The project, when combined with other recent, past and reasonably foreseeable actions was predicted to result in a theoretical combined increase in water yield from project watersheds of 2.1 percent at the confluence with the Blackfoot River. Given the dry/losing character of the stream channels in the project area, any change in water yield as a result of the project would be difficult to detect, particularly considering that the majority of the ECA is from past or existing land use activities. Recent stream flow records at the nearby Helena National Forest Deep Creek monitoring site have not shown clear evidence of higher stream flow under the existing conditions. The small incremental potential increase posed by this project would likely not measurably change flow conditions. However, if a water yield increase were detectable, it would almost certainly be within acceptable limits for TMDL streams. In other drainages within the Helena National Forest, the State DEQ has suggested water yield thresholds of 8 percent for TMDL streams and 10 percent for non-TMDL streams (Montana DEQ 2004). The W3 module of the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) Model was used to estimate unit discharges for different treatment types for the project. Results provide a rough estimate of potential flow increases. The model evaluates drainage and precipitation patterns, and the interactions with watershed soils. The model does not accurately predict flow increases due to groundwater inputs. It is difficult to predict the water yield from water that infiltrates deeply into bedrock layers that are tied more to groundwater yield. As a result, flow and water yield estimates are focused on surface flow increases. These estimates are based on the hydrology of headwater areas in each of the project watersheds, and are likely less than what was calculated in the model. None of these results exceeds Forest Plan standards. Table 143. WEPP W3 module predicted flow increases for the project area WATERSHED RUNOFF (ACRE-FEET/YEAR) ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 AVERAGE ANNUAL SURFACE RUNOFF PERCENT RUNOFF FROM PROJECT Lincoln Creek 1,611 1,255 15,844 8 Beaver Creek 2,175 569 24,372 2 Keep Cool Creek 2,191 1,793 47,906 4 Riparian and Wetland Areas For both action alternatives, riparian areas would have at least a 50-foot no-ignition buffer around ephemeral, intermittent, and perennial channels for slopes less than 35 percent, and a 100-foot buffer for slopes more than 35 percent. Additionally, the standard SMZ-law protection prohibits the operation of ground-disturbing equipment within riparian areas. Therefore, activities proposed under these alternatives would not adversely affect riparian areas. Streams within the project area would generally remain at proper functioning condition. The notable exceptions would be the functional-at-risk stream segments. These stream segments are expected to remain in that condition under this alternative. No wetlands have been identified within the project area boundaries. If wetlands are identified during unit marking, they would be avoided by heavy equipment unless during winter conditions. Wetlands over one acre connected to stream channels would be protected by a no-harvest SMZ buffer. As noted above there would likely be small increases in water yield in project-area streams under this alternative. However, these minor changes are not expected to change the PFC ratings for any of the streams within the Stonewall Project area. Irreversible/Irretrievable Commitments An irretrievable commitment represents a temporary loss of a resource that can be replaced over time. An irreversible commitment represents a total loss of a resource that cannot be replaced. Any sediment delivery to streams resulting from implementation of this project would be an irretrievable commitment, in that the stream would recover from the influx of additional sediment over a period of years to decades. However, if all appropriate harvest and road BMPs are carefully and consistently applied, it is unlikely that any irretrievable commitments would result from project implementation (Montana DNRC 2008). Furthermore, reductions in sediment delivery due to project road improvements were estimated to exceed the potential sediment delivery related to project activities. Cumulative Effects Past, present and reasonably foreseeable Federal and other ownership actions within the analysis area are described previously in the section for alternative 1, and can be found in volume 2, appendix C. These impacts include mining, wildfires, timber harvest, and recreation. The cumulative impact of alternatives 2 and 3 in concert with other impacts in the analysis area would be a net reduction in short-term and long-term sediment delivery to stream channels. The short-term reductions would come from road surfacing and drainage improvements. Long-term reductions would result from road obliteration. These reductions in sediment delivery would more than offset the low-probability of the predicted short-term increase from treatment unit erosion, as well as any sediment delivery associated with road improvements and obliteration. Conclusions The proposed project identifies two action alternatives. Alternative 2 treats 8,564 acres, and alternative 3 treats 6,564 acres with a range of harvest and burning prescriptions. Primary water resource concerns stemming from this project include potential sediment conveyance to streams from project treatment units, and potential increased water yield due to removal of vegetation. Field sediment surveys identified road segments that were capable of delivering sediment to ephemeral, intermittent, or perennial stream channels. The WEPP:Road model was used to predict the average annual sediment conveyance for each road segment, as well as the probability that sediment would be delivered from the road segment in a given year. The model was run for existing conditions as well as conditions under each action alternative. Under all project alternatives, overall reductions in sediment delivery to stream channels due to application of road BMPs and road obliteration are expected. Results suggest that under existing conditions, roughly 11 tons of sediment is delivered from roads to Lincoln, Beaver, and Keep Cool Creeks in an average year (table 139). With design features proposed in this project, sediment delivery from roads would remain one ton per year for Lincoln Creek, reduced by about one ton each for Beaver and Keep Cool Creeks. Overall sediment delivery reduction for alternatives 2 and 3 during the project is estimated to be about 2 tons. While road improvement and road obliteration activities may temporarily increase sediment delivery to stream channels, the design features proposed in this project would reduce sediment delivery to project area tributaries of the Blackfoot River over the long term (alternatives 2 and 3), leading to improved conditions in project watersheds. The project has the potential to increase water yield in Lincoln Creek, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek. A water yield increase above 10 to 15 percent may be of concern in that the flow increase could accelerate bank erosion. Water yield increase is less likely to be an issue in the project area due in part to lower annual precipitation levels, to the dry/losing character of the streams in these watersheds, and to the relatively small footprint of the project. The Equivalent Clearcut Area (ECA) and the WEPP W3 method was used to calculate potential water yield increase given cumulative impacts in the Lincoln, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek watersheds. Results suggested an increase of up to 8 percent in the Lincoln watershed, 2 percent in the Beaver Creek watershed, and up to 4 percent in the Keep Cool Creek watershed, depending on alternative (table 142 and table 143) and analysis method. The project, when combined with other recent past and reasonably foreseeable actions was predicted to result in a theoretical combined increase in water yield from project watersheds of about 5 percent at the confluence with the Blackfoot River. These levels are within State DEQ recommendations for TMDL and non-TMDL streams elsewhere on the Helena NF. If predicted water yield increases did occur, the modest additional flow would likely improve stream temperature and in-stream physical habitat, rather than cause any degradation. The project is unlikely to significantly affect the condition of riparian areas in the project area, given the 50- to 100-foot riparian no-ignition buffers in place for all action alternatives. The project is unlikely to affect the condition of any wetlands found in the project area, in that these areas would either be avoided entirely, or would be treated only by hand crews or by equipment during winter operating conditions. In summary, the proposed project would have relatively minor impacts to water resources in the project watersheds under the action alternatives. Through implementation of design features and application of BMPs, the project alternatives would most likely reduce short- and long-term sediment delivery to stream channels, improving or maintaining water quality in the Blackfoot River headwaters watershed. Alternatives 2 and 3 would also reduce long-term sediment delivery through improving road BMPs at stream crossings. Water yield change due to proposed project activities is predicted to be at the margins of detectability and is not anticipated to have any deleterious effects on channel stability or water quality Fisheries Introduction This section documents existing condition and environmental consequences to aquatic resources from the proposed Stonewall Vegetation Project, and also discusses the potential effects to Forest Service sensitive, management indicator species (MIS), and Endangered Species Act (ESA) listed aquatic species westslope cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki lewsi), bull trout (Salvelinus confluentus), and western pearlshell mussel (Margaritifera falcata). Table 144. Analysis area species SPECIES SPECIES STATUS PRESENT IN PROJECT AREA: HABITAT OR DETECTIONS Fishes   westslope cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki lewsi)    bull trout (Salvelinus confluentus) USFS Sensitive    ESA Threatened Yes Habitat and Detections   Yes Invertebrates   western pearlshell mussel (Margaritifera falcata) USFS Sensitive No Overview of Issues Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on fisheries were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Comments indicated concern that roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, road reconstruction, and use of existing roads would adversely impact fisheries. See the Transportation section for more information about roads. Indicators Indicators are defined to analyze data regarding the potential for increases to sediment delivery and changes to the timing of peak flows from project activities that may affect cutthroat trout habitat. Change in stream habitat conditions for westslope cutthroat trout (MIS), bull trout and other aquatic species 12. Changes in stream function e. Change in sediment delivery to streams f. Change in fines by depth g. Change in the timing or increases in the magnitude of stream flows Change in characteristics of riparian areas 13. Change in miles of motorized routes in RCAs 14. Acres of riparian treatments Affected Environment Introduction This section presents existing conditions and trends for aquatic resources within the Stonewall Vegetation Project planning area. Information is organized under two major subsections: fish populations and fish habitat. The first discusses the status and distribution of fish populations inhabiting the planning area; this includes discussions about nonnative and native fish populations. The second subsection provides an overview of fish habitat including land-use activities that influence trends in stream habitat conditions. Analysis Area The Stonewall Project area encompasses three sub-watersheds (tributaries) of the Blackfoot River watershed. Natural processes and land-use activities unique to each sub-watershed influence local fish populations and their habitats independently of other watershed units of the same scale. The geographic area of preference is the watershed scale delineated at the 6th field hydrologic unit code (HUC), namely Lincoln Gulch, Beaver Creek, and Keep Cool Creek. These boundaries are appropriate for addressing direct, indirect and cumulative effects upon fish populations occurring within each of these 6th field HUCs (sub-watersheds). The cumulative effects area, however, extends to mainstem Blackfoot River because it receives waters from the project planning area. Existing Condition Salmonid fishes present within the project area include westslope cutthroat trout, bull trout, brown trout, brook trout and mountain whitefish. Other fish species present include sculpins and suckers. Historically, most project area perennial streams suitable to support a fishery were likely occupied by various native fish. The introduction of nonnative salmonids, including brook, brown and rainbow trout, within portions of the Blackfoot River drainage, has changed the fish species composition somewhat in the project area. The current salmonid fish species composition within the project area is summarized by streams in table 145 that follows. The upper limits of salmonid fish distribution by species, as determined from sampling by Forest Service personnel, is depicted on fish distribution maps included in the project file, and reflected in geographic information system (GIS) maps included with this analysis (Fisheries Report Rief 2012). Table 145. Fish species by stream in the Stonewall Project area Stream Salmonid Fish species present on forest based on sampling * WCT genetic status Comments Lincoln Gulch  Unnamed tributary NW . S 20 T14N R9W  Unnamed tributary SW . S8 T14N R9W  Unnamed tributary SW . S9 T14N R9W No fish on forest  No fish, but does have perennial flow  No fish; intermittent flows   eb  Intermittent flows and extensive mining impacts limit fishery throughout much of the Lincoln Gulch drainage Beaver Creek  Theodore Creek  Yukon Creek  Klondike Cr  Unnamed tributary to Yukon Creek Wct, eb, bt, LL  Wct,eb  Wct, eb and bt  Wct  Wct Genetically pure  Assumed pure  Assumed pure  Assumed pure  Assumed Pure Bull trout are known to be present in Beaver Creek and Yukon Creek. The probability of bull trout to be present is low in other streams, but because habitat is suitable to support them bull trout are assumed present Stonewall Cr Wct Genetically Pure Probability of bull trout to be present is low on Forest but because habitat is suitable to support them bull trout are assumed present. Bull trout may be present off forest. Brook and brown trout present on nonfederal lands. Park Creek Wct Genetically Pure Probability of bull trout to be present is low on Forest but because habitat is suitable to support them bull trout are assumed present. Bull trout may be present off forest Liverpool Creek Wct Genetically Pure Probability of bull trout to be present is low on Forest but because habitat is suitable to support them, bull trout are assumed present. Bull trout may be present off forest Sucker Creek Wct Assumed pure Probability of bull trout to be present is low on Forest but because habitat is suitable to support them bull trout are assumed present. Bull trout may be present off forest Keep Cool Creek Wct and eb Genetically pure Bull trout are known to be present on nonfederal lands below the Forest. * Fish Species: wct –westslope cutthroat trout, eb- eastern brook trout, LL-brown trout, bt- bull trout, wf-moutain whitefish Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Aquatic Species Bull Trout On July 10, 1998 bull trout (Salvelinus confluentus), were listed as Threatened within the Columbia River Basin by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1998). Section 7(a) (2) of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973 as amended requires all federal agencies to review actions authorized, funded, or carried out by them to ensure such actions do not jeopardize the continued existence of listed species. The distribution of bull trout is limited to drainages west of the continental divide on the Helena National Forest with the strongest populations being present in the Blackfoot River drainage. Bull trout are present in extremely low numbers within the Little Blackfoot River drainage. Table 145 lists the streams known currently to support bull trout in the project area. The Inland Native Fish Strategy (USDA 1995), established priority drainages for bull trout, however, none are found within the project area. Importantly, special emphasis watersheds for bull trout were later designated throughout Region 1 of the Forest Service to supplement the INFISH priority watersheds, but none are found within the project area. Designated critical habitat for bull trout includes reaches of the Blackfoot River and several tributaries in the Blackfoot drainage. All critical habitat for bull trout in the Blackfoot River is located downstream of the project area. Under the Draft Recovery Plan (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 2005), bull trout within various drainages are organized by core populations and then by local populations within those core population areas. It is important to note that there are no local populations of bull trout located currently within the project area, but it is likely that some bull trout from Beaver Creek contribute to the overall Blackfoot Core Population. The information on the bull trout core population that follows is based on information from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as well as knowledge from local fishery biologists from the Forest Service, and Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks. Blackfoot Core Bull Trout Population Bull Trout in the Blackfoot River are included as a core population in the Draft Bull Trout Recovery Plan (2005). There are several local populations identified within the Blackfoot Core Bull Trout Population; including the North Fork of the Blackfoot River, Monture Creek, Landers Fork/Copper Creek, Cottonwood Creek, Belmont Creek, and Gold Creeks. Based on redd counts and limited electro-fishing efforts, it is likely that there are somewhere between 400 to 500 adult bull trout between the 5 local populations. Additional adult bull trout are in numerous other streams throughout the core population area, and in some of the designated INFISH Priority Watersheds and Special Emphasis Watersheds, as well as in undesignated streams. The overall number of bull trout adults included in all of the streams throughout the Blackfoot drainage is probably less than 800 when combined with the adults in the local populations. Recent redd surveys suggest that four of the five Local Populations are declining somewhat while the Copper/Landers population is improving. Bull trout may suffer from some competition with brown trout and predation in the main stem Blackfoot River, although there is no field documentation of this hypothesis. Both species occupy some of the same habitat and eat some of the same foods and both species are highly piscivorous. Consequently, the hypothesis seems reasonable. With temperatures in the main stem Blackfoot rising based on information collected by the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks over the last 10 years (Pierce et al. 2008, pp. 32 and 33); brown trout may be gaining some competitive edge over bull trout. Interactions of bull trout with brook trout occur mostly in tributary streams rather than the main stem Blackfoot River. Brook trout are present in some of the local bull trout populations and many of the other streams in the Blackfoot River drainage, so there is some additional threat of decreased bull trout production due to hybridization. Additional discussion on aspects of bull trout biology and interactions with other species as a function of proposed project activities are addressed further in the biological assessment. Westslope Cutthroat Trout Westslope cutthroat trout (WCT) are a designated sensitive fish species by the Forest Service and are included as a management indicator species in the Helena Forest Plan. Westslope cutthroat trout are found within all the streams in the project area known to support a fishery with the exception of the tributary to Lincoln Gulch, which is known to support only brook trout. There is a strong WCT fluvial population functioning in the Blackfoot River drainage. Fluvial WCT may also be using the reaches of other streams in the project area below the Forest Service boundary. Several publications from the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks between the mid-1990s and 2007 provide extensive discussions of WCT movements and life history in the Blackfoot drainage. It is important to maintain viability of the westslope cutthroat trout conservation populations to reduce the risk of the species being listed under the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Currently, the WCT in the Blackfoot River are a conservation population, and with the exception of those above Nevada Creek Reservoir, function as a single meta-population. The population consists of both fluvial and resident components (Pierce et al. 1997, p. 73). Radio tracking of WCT indicates wide-ranging movements and use of various tributaries for spawning (Pierce et al. 2004, pp. 63-78). The potential for loss of viability for the Blackfoot River WCT conservation population is presumed to be low due to the extensive distribution of WCT throughout the drainage, and the presence of a functioning fluvial population. However, nonnative fish especially brook trout and to some degree brown trout, are likely competing with and sometimes preying on WCT in portions of the Blackfoot River and selected tributaries. Western pearlshell mussels Western pearlshell mussels (Margaritifera falcate) may be one of the longest living freshwater invertebrates and animals. Specimens have been aged at greater than 90 years (Vannote and Minshall 1982). The western pearlshell mussel has an elongate shell, typically 2.5-4 inches long with a concave ventral edge. The interior shell has a purple to pink hue as the outside shell is dark brown to black. These mussels are found in cool, stable running, generally low to moderate gradient streams and rivers. Swift stream velocities can limit where mussels can occur in streams. They are most commonly found in stable gravel and pebble benthic substrate, but can occur in sand or gravel among cobble and boulders in moderate to higher gradient larger rivers. They usually occupy reaches of stream where the riparian zone is dominated by willows or alders. The larval stage of this mussel (glochidia) briefly parasitizes a host fish, westslope cutthroat trout, by attaching to the gills. They fall off the host as a juvenile mussel. The larval parasitism on fish enables upstream transport to habitats otherwise difficult to reach by relatively immobile adult mussels. Western pearlshell glochidia are considered highly host specific (Bauer 1987) as they are typically restricted to salmonid fishes. The western pearlshell mussel continues to experience significant range reductions over the last 100 years. The primary cause of stream habitat deterioration in Montana is high fine sediment load, related to agricultural practices, which is one of the most serious pollutants of streams systems. Excess fine sediment can degrade mussel habitats by decreasing substrate permeability. This has a smothering effect on juvenile mussels and limits successful recruitment (Stagliano 2010). The Montana Natural Heritage database contains no records for this species in the project area, although they have been found in the Blackfoot River downstream of the project area. Habitats suitable for mussels are present in the project area where Westslope cutthroat trout are present. Based on this information, we believe pearlshell mussels may be present in the analysis area. Aquatic Habitat Streams currently known to support fisheries located within this analysis area include Beaver Creek, and tributaries to Beaver Creek which include Yukon Creek, Theodore Creek and Klondike Creek. Stonewall Creek also supports a fishery. The lower reaches of Beaver Creek and Stonewall Creek are located on private and State land. Both flow into the Keep Cool drainage within 3 miles above the confluence with the Blackfoot River. Lincoln Gulch Lincoln Gulch is a second-order tributary that enters the Blackfoot River at river mile (rm) 103.6. The upper 4.4 miles of Lincoln Gulch watershed is located on the Forest. Lincoln Gulch drains the eastern slopes of Black Mountain. The lower 2.6 miles flows through private agricultural land and a residential housing area. Lincoln Gulch shows impacts from mining, grazing and agricultural activities. In the headwater areas mining impacts and channelization are extensive. Fish surveys found brown trout and sculpin at mile 0.1. Surveys conducted higher in the watershed found no fish (Pierce and Podner 2006). Beaver Creek This stream forms near Reservoir Lake and is a third-order tributary to Keep Cool Creek, entering 0.7 miles upstream of the Keep Cool Creek confluence with the Blackfoot River (rm 105.2). Beaver Creek has a total of 20.1 stream miles of which 14.3 miles are perennial. In the Beaver Creek drainage on NFS land, past and present road construction, timber harvest and livestock grazing have influenced habitat conditions by increasing the sediment delivered to the stream. The lower reaches of Beaver Creek are located on private and State lands that support agricultural uses. There are some reaches where livestock grazing has negatively influenced bank stability (Peters 1990) and some isolated bank damage occurs from livestock grazing on the Forest. Bank trampling from livestock is limited in the higher reaches due to the inherent resistance of the stream channel type and the vegetation adjacent to the streambank. A water diversion is present just below the Forest boundary which partially dewaters the stream. This diversion was recently upgraded to provide fish passage. Beaver Creek maintains a moderate gradient originating at Reservoir Lake. Fish habitat is in relatively good condition with good quality cover for fish present throughout the reaches evaluated. The amount of cover present is somewhat low on some of the reaches with quality pools estimated to be present at around 15 to 20 percent. Past beaver activity has been very important in the formation of habitat on selected reaches of stream downstream of Yukon Creek. Spawning gravels contain an average of 30.5 percent fines. Recreational fishing does occur on this stream within the Forest, but the intensity of fishing and the amount of harvest is unknown. Downstream of NFS lands, Beaver Creek is at least partially dewatered for irrigation and the stream gradient drops to near 1 percent in the vicinity of beaver activity (USDA 1995b). Discharge was 10.7 cfs 0.50 mile above the mouth on August 31, 1989. Fine sediment levels in spawning gravels were found to average 33 percent in Beaver Creek with a range of 17 to 55 percent. In comparison, an unmanaged drainage of similar geology that had undergone high sediment delivery from fire averaged 27 percent with a range of 19 to 32 percent (Peters 1990). Theodore Creek The Theodore drainage shows past timber activity in the lower reaches. The lower reaches are located in the Stonewall allotment. This stream is a tributary to Beaver Creek that originates south of the Scapegoat Wilderness. The entire drainage lies within the Forest. Electro-fishing evaluations have shown that the lower reaches are dominated by cutthroat trout with a few brook trout also present. The upper reaches were found to support cutthroat trout exclusively. Fish distribution extends upstream into section 21 (T15N R9W). Abundance of salmonids over 6 inches in length was estimated at 160 per mile of stream while the maximum size obtained was around seven inches. It is likely that some of the cutthroat trout from Theodore Creek recruit downstream to Beaver Creek. Habitat conditions on the reaches evaluated were very good in Theodore Creek. Much of the pool habitat in the stream is formed by large rubble cascades and woody debris. Spawning gravels were found to average 32.1 percent fines. Theodore Creek is too small to support much if any recreational fishing and no evidence of use by anglers was noted during survey evaluations (USDA Forest Service1995b). Yukon Creek This drainage is entirely within the Forest and is a tributary to Beaver Creek. The lower reaches show evidence of some timber harvest activity. The lowest reaches are within the Stonewall allotment. Yukon Creek is dominated by cutthroat with some brook trout present in the lower reaches. Abundance was estimated at 220 fish per mile of stream over 6 inches in length. Fish distribution extends upstream into section 17 with the headwater reaches likely supporting only cutthroat trout. This stream is important for providing recruitment of cutthroat trout to Beaver Creek. Walk-through evaluations indicate that habitat is in good condition. Some sediment delivery to the stream is still occurring at the upper culvert site which was constructed several years ago, however seeding the site has helped to mitigate the delivery. Spawning substrates contain 34.2 percent fine sediment on the average. Yukon Creek is large enough to support some recreational fishing, but no evidence of fishing use was observed. In 1992, two instream pool structures were constructed to increase fish habitat capability (USDA Forest Service 1995b). Unnamed Tributary to Yukon Creek This stream is a tributary to Yukon Creek and is located entirely on the Forest. This drainage shows evidence of past timber harvest activity. Only the lowest reach containing the confluence with Yukon Creek is located in the Stonewall allotment. This is a very small stream that was found to support only cutthroat trout. Abundance of fish over 6 inches in length is 70 per mile of stream. The distribution of fish extends upstream in section 19 (T15N R9W). This stream probably provides for recruitment of cutthroat trout to Yukon and Beaver Creeks. Walk-through evaluations indicate that habitat is in relatively good condition. Spawning gravels measure 35.1 percent fines (USDA Forest Service1995b). Klondike Creek This drainage shows evidence of past timber harvest activity. The lower reaches are located within the Stonewall allotment. This stream is a tributary to Beaver Creek and is entirely located on the Forest. The stream is dominated by cutthroat trout with an occasional brook trout. Fish distribution likely extends upstream into section 20. The maximum size of fish obtained during sampling was just less than 7 inches in length. Abundance of fish over 6 inches in length was estimated at 120 per mile of stream. This stream also provides recruitment of cutthroat to Beaver Creek. Walk-through evaluations indicate that habitat conditions are relatively good with numerous small pools formed by large rubble and woody debris. Spawning gravels averaged 32.7 percent fines. Klondike Creek is too small to support recreational fishing, but in an attempt to increase habitat capability eight instream pool structures were constructed in 1992 (USDA Forest Service 1995b). Stonewall Creek Stonewall Creek has a total stream length of 9.0 miles of which 3.8 miles are perennial. The Stonewall drainage shows evidence of past timber harvest in the middle reaches. A portion of the lower reaches is located in the Stonewall allotment. A small active patented mine is still under operation in the upper reaches. The lowest reaches are located on private ranch land and are likely to be dewatered before reaching the Blackfoot. In Stonewall Creek, fine sediment levels were found to average 31 percent with a range of 21 to 50 percent as compared to an undisturbed stream of similar geology having an average of 20 percent with a range of 11 to 26 percent. Other habitat parameters have not been measured. Cutthroat trout are common in the drainage (USDA Forest Service 1995b). On private land, Stonewall Creek shows effects from agricultural uses. Stonewall Creek flows through a large wetland on private land before its confluence with Keep Cool Creek. Park Creek Park Creek is a second-order tributary to Stonewall Creek. Park Creek has a total stream length of 6.1 miles, of which 2.9 miles are perennial. The headwaters and upper reaches of Park Creek are located on the Forest; the lower reaches are located on private land. The creek may be dewatered in the lower reaches. Spawning gravel quality has not been measured. Cutthroat trout have been determined to be genetically pure but are uncommon in Park Creek. Liverpool Creek The headwaters and upper reaches of Liverpool Creek are located on the Forest, and the lower reaches are located on private land. This drainage is located within the Keep Cool Liverpool allotment. The stream has been channelized by mining on the Forest. Eight drop-log structures have been built in the creek to provide much needed pool habitat. One downed tree was placed in the creek to provide for rearing habitat. A portion of the area mined has been reclaimed, but occasional suction dredging continues in the channel. Spawning gravels are common in the stream. Below the area mined spawning gravel quality measured 42.7 percent fines. Above the mined area spawning gravels measured 25.4 percent fines. Obviously, mining has had negative effects on the quality of spawning habitat in Liverpool Creek. Cutthroat trout are common both above and below the mined area (USDA Forest Service 1995b). Sucker Creek Sucker Creek has a total length of 3.0 miles, of which 2.5 miles are perennial. Only the headwaters of Sucker Creek are located on the Forest. The middle and lower reaches are located on private land. Timber harvest and road construction has taken place in the drainage. Sucker Creek drainage is located in the Keep Cool Liverpool allotment. Spawning gravel quality has not been measured. Cutthroat are rare, but presumed genetically pure in Sucker Creek (USDA Forest Service 1995b). Keep Cool Creek Keep Cool Creek is the largest spring creek in the Lincoln Valley. It forms north of Lincoln from both an alluvial groundwater aquifer and small basin-fed streams in its headwaters. It is joined at the mouth by Beaver Creek (mile 0.7) and Lincoln Spring Creek (mile 0.5) before entering the Blackfoot River at mile 105.2. The combined flow of this stream system provides a significant percentage of the upper Blackfoot River flow during low flow periods. Excessive livestock access to riparian areas has degraded portions of Keep Cool Creek and its tributaries. Other mainstem fisheries-related impairments include channel alterations and irrigation practices. Keep Cool Creek has a total length of 10.7 miles, of which 2.0 are perennial. The upper and middle reaches of Keep Cool Creek are located in the Helena Forest. The lower reaches are located in private land. The upper elevations of the drainage show evidence of timber sale activity and are heavily and roaded. The drainage is within the Keep Cool Liverpool allotment. Spawning gravels just above the Forest boundary measure 47.2 percent fines. Spawning gravels are common in this area; however, the flows become very low early in the season. Cutthroat trout are common in Keep Cool Creek (USDA Forest Service 1995b). Recently, radio telemetry confirmed bull trout from the Blackfoot River use the lower portion of Keep Cool Creek (Pierce et al. 2004). Water temperature monitoring at two locations found maximum summer temperatures of 75.2 oF in upper Keep Cool (at the Sucker Creek road) compared to a high of 62 oF at the Beaver Creek Road. This cooling results from large inflows of groundwater between these two sites (Pierce et al. 2004). Table 146 that follows, lists streams that support resident fish populations in the project area that have been sampled for sediment (less than 6.4 mm) by depth using McNeil core sampling methods to quantitatively establish estimates of fines in fish reproductive habitat. Table 146. Summary of mean percent fines (<1/4 inch dia.) in spawning habitat of select streams as an indicator of cumulative effects from past and ongoing cumulative effects by 6th-field HUC 6th-Field HUC sub-watershed (name) Stream(s) sampled for sediment analysis Mean % fines in spawning habitat * USEPA reference Standard (%) ** Roadless Area reference (%) 17010203 (Beaver Creek) Beaver Creek 30.9 32.5 31.9 Yukon Cr 34.2 Tributary to Yukon Cr 35.1 Theodore Cr 32.2 Klondike Cr 32.7 17010203 (Stonewall/Park) Stonewall Cr 31.6 32.5 31.9 Park Cr 45.4 17010203 (Lincoln Gulch)  Not sampled as no fishery present in most of the drainage 32.5 31.9 17010203 (Sucker/Liverpool) Liverpool sw 1/4 42.7 32.5 31.9 Liverpool nw 1/4 25.4 Sucker Cr Not sampled Keep Cool Cr 47.2 *Averages for individual years are detailed in Fish Information for Stone Dry Watershed Analysis (Burns 2006). ** Reference standard developed from Helena National Forest Data in the Lake Helena Watershed Summary of Fish Habitat Fish habitat in the planning area is basically the product of interactions among underlying geologies, soils, topography, vegetation, climate and hydrology unique to the watershed (Meehan 1991, p. 5; Swanston 1991, p. 139). These drainage characteristics and processes remain fairly constant, setting up conditions for optimum productivity of aquatic life forms (Meehan 1991, p. 5). When natural disturbance reshapes stream channels, the actual effects of such changes on aquatic organisms are often short term. In their natural context, accessory processes like fire, flood flows, insect infestations, and animal activities (e.g. beaver) operate on the stream system to produce improved habitat quality and productivity in the long term (Swanston 1991, p. 139-142). Human land-use activities can disrupt the balance of these interactions producing persistent changes in habitat that can reduce natural fish production and population viability (Meehan 1991, pp. 1-6; Waters 1995, pp. 1, 17). The Stonewall Project area has historically implemented projects such as timber harvest, livestock grazing, mining, recreation and transportation. Cumulatively, these activities impair stream structure and function to varying degrees by increasing erosion and sedimentation, impacting water quality, altering flows, reducing vegetation cover, and destabilizing or degrading channels. Past and ongoing actions, including the transportation system that has been assessed for hydrologically connected sediment delivery sites and culvert crossings, cumulatively set the stage for existing conditions of sediment in fish reproductive habitat. Without mitigation or other corrective actions to protect and recover habitat, these factors suppress the natural fish production capabilities (carrying capacity) of streams (Hicks et al. 1991, pp. 484-485). Environmental Consequences Alternative 1 Direct and Indirect Effects Under alternative 1 there would be no new road or ground based timber harvest to change the level of sediment delivered to streams. Sedimentation levels may change due to ongoing management. Taking “no action” to address motorized roads and trails in managed watersheds (like those in the project area) almost always results in the same or increased levels of sedimentation over time. Hydrologically linked roads, a significant unnatural source of chronic sedimentation, would remain untreated contributing 11 tons of sediment in excess annually within project watersheds. Although old, infrequently used roads would continue to revegetate, reducing the amount of sediment produced and possibly contributed to streams; all of these old roads would continue to have varying degrees of impact to watershed hydrology and water quality. Stream channel and road fill scour, channel aggradations, and risk of sediment contribution from failure of undersized stream crossings would persist until otherwise addressed. No timber harvest is proposed under the no-action alternative, and therefore no change in the timing or magnitude of peak flows is expected. Alternatively, there would be no measures taken to promote change in function for any stream within the project area that is not currently at desired conditions. Alternative 1 would fail to promote improvement in stream habitat conditions for Westslope cutthroat trout (MIS), bull trout or for other aquatic populations that exist in streams. Thus, certain aquatic populations would remain at lower densities than those in streams that are functioning properly and where habitat quality and quantity are nearer potential. Average fine sediments in trout spawning habitat would remain elevated in some of the project area streams (table 146) in contrast to approximately 33 percent average fine-sediment levels determined for reference streams across the Helena National Forest. Alternative 1 would fail to promote improvement in riparian habitat conditions in the project area. Because there would be “no action” there would be no measures taken to change the function for any riparian area within the project area. Alternatives 2 and 3 The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to fisheries and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed under soil, watersheds and fisheries in table 9 pertaining to hydrology are S/WS/F-15, S/WS/F-16, and S/WS/F-17. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to all action alternatives. Design features that are applicable to fisheries include not only those listed above, designed specifically to protect fish and fish habitat, but also those designed to protect other resources such as soils and water quality/quantity. Effects Common to All Action Alternatives Roads Road maintenance and improvement best management practices (BMPs) would be applied to all roads used in the project, including application of aggregate at road/stream crossings and other sediment delivery points. Project design features apply to all action alternatives (table 9). There would be a short-term (5-7 years) reduction in sediment transport from roads in the project area resulting from road improvements planned in this alternative. Forty-eight miles of road proposed for hauling in alternative 2 and 44 miles of road proposed for hauling under alternative 3 would receive BMP maintenance (table 138 in the Hydrology Section). Project-related road improvements include surface grading, re-establishment of drainage features (grade dips and ditch-relief culverts), and application of gravel at stream crossings and other sediment delivery points. Sediment levels would increase during the project as a result of ground disturbance during maintenance and when culverts are installed (table 139 in the Hydrology Section). There are about 2.6 miles of road that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal (new and “new specified”) planned in these alternatives. Most of these road segments are not predicted to convey sediment to stream channels, as they would be built in upland locations without surface hydrologic connection to any stream channel. After the project there would be an overall decrease in sediment sources from roads (table 139 in the Hydrology Section). The proposed new road to be built then obliterated number 4, which would provide access to units 20 and 21, crosses the drainage of a headwater tributary basin to Lincoln Creek (chapter 2). This crossing was reviewed in the field—there is a vegetated old roadbed at this site, but no stream channel or evidence of overland flow. Channel features were observed roughly 60 feet below the roadbed. Sediment that appeared to be from the old roadbed was observed in this channel, indicating that in the past, this road probably contributed sediment to the uppermost reach of this intermittent stream. If restored, this road represents a potential source of sediment to the stream channel, and should be accounted for in estimates of sediment impacts of the project. If the decision is made to construct this segment, then appropriate mitigations must be in place (adequate culvert, proper road drainage, and sediment fencing if appropriate) and the segment should be obliterated soon after the project ends, in order to minimize sediment impacts. The proposed new road to be built then obliterated number 5, which is between units 10 and 11, crosses an intermittent channel and is a source of sediment to this stream (chapter 2). Efforts would be made in the construction of this new road (e.g. raised grade at crossing, sediment filters at drainage runouts) to prevent sediment delivery to the channel while the road is in place. The total reduction in average annual sediment transport from using BMPs for project haul roads was modeled to be roughly 2 tons less than the existing conditions under this alternative, based on proposed BMP upgrades and road improvements. The long-term benefits from decreased annual sediment loads would outweigh the short-term increases during road maintenance activities. For the road segments to be obliterated, the reduction in sediment delivery would be permanent. BMPS INFISH (USDA Forest Service 1995) standards would need to be met. A key component of INFISH for this project includes measures to address roads that have high risk for sediment delivery to surface waters, see the Transportation Report (Bielecki 2012) and Hydrology Report (McNamara 2012) in the project file for specific roads and BMP details. Riparian Areas Additional measures to reduce risk for negative effects to native fisheries entail restrictions on removal of trees from riparian habitat conservation areas to ensure the potential for woody debris recruitment, pool formation and floodplain function is maintained (table 9) As provided for with INFISH standard RA-2, trees to be removed as part of salvage, that are not needed for woody debris recruitment or floodplain needs, can be removed. “Green commercial trees within the RHCA that have not been attacked by beetles and are not otherwise at risk of dying in the immediate future cannot be removed unless site-specific rationale discussing why it would be beneficial to fish and watershed is developed for each specific unit. Log landings should not be located in RHCAs.” Category 1 - Fish bearing streams: The RHCA width is 300 feet on either side of the stream or the 100-year floodplain whichever is greater. Category 2 - Perennial streams not supporting fish: The RHCA is 150 feet on either side of the stream. Category 3 - Lakes or wetlands greater than one acre: The RHCA is a minimum of 150 feet but can be larger and extend to the outer limits of riparian vegetation, the extent of seasonally saturated soil, the extent of highly unstable areas, or the distance equal to the height of one site-potential tree. Category 4 - The project area is not within INFISH priority drainage: For seasonally flowing or intermittent streams, wetlands less than 1 acre, landslides and landslide prone areas, the RHCA boundary is one-half site potential tree from the edges of the stream channel, wetland or landslide, landslide prone area or a 50-foot slope distance, whichever is greatest. For both action alternatives, riparian areas would have at least a 50-foot no ignition buffer around ephemeral, intermittent, and perennial channels for slopes less than 35 percent, and a 100-foot buffer for slopes more than 35 percent. Fire would be allowed to back into INFISH buffers. Alternatives 2 and 3 would allow for dead trees to be removed from RHCAs. These trees are not providing shade to the stream and not in a position (across the road) to become woody debris. Removal of dead trees and allowing fire to back into RHCAs would allow riparian shrubs and trees to reestablish. Roads to be built and then obliterated are short segments that would be temporary in nature and not likely to change the character or function or the RHCAs. Therefore, activities proposed under these alternatives would not adversely affect riparian areas. Streams within the project area would generally remain at proper functioning condition. Fish Trout use redds (nests dug by fish in streambed gravels) in flowing waters for their reproductive strategy. When excessive sediment accrues to spawning and rearing sites, trout embryo and fry success decline below natural rates. Additionally, other trout life history elements such as juvenile survival, growth, and adult survival also can be at risk if excess sediment reduces cobble spaces in riffle areas and pool volumes. Everest et al.1987, p. 133 concluded that salmonid species can cope with the natural variability in sediments, but their populations can be reduced substantially by persistent sedimentation that exceeds the natural levels under which they evolved. Average fine sediments in trout spawning habitat within project area streams may show short-term increases in fines at depth. In the long term, stream channels would show measurable decreases in the levels of fines as project area roads would deliver roughly 2 tons less sediment per year. Given the number of acres that would be treated in the project watersheds under alternatives 2 or 3, it is unlikely there would be a cumulative increase in water yield that would be detectable. The estimated water yield increase for project watersheds is below the DEQ-recommended threshold of 10 percent. Streams emanating from project watersheds appear to lose flow as they move from steeper areas and encounter deep valley floor sediments. Considering the dry (losing stream) nature of the channels in the Stonewall Project area watersheds, the potential increase in water yield would be unlikely to cause any negative effects (i.e., accelerated bank erosion). Therefore, this vegetation treatment proposal may result in short-term impacts to fisheries resources from road maintenance treatments. The project incorporates special design elements that reduce sedimentation risk by incorporating RHCA buffers and use of low-severity burns. Most importantly, long-term sediment reduction (improvement) in trout reproductive habitat is predicted due to road BMP measures and culvert upgrades that also reduce flood hazard risks at these critical road/stream intersections. Cumulative Effects A list of past, present and reasonably foreseeable future activities is available in appendix C. Management activities that are most likely to influence aquatic species abundance, distribution and possibly persistence of populations are discussed in this section. Livestock grazing: This affects aquatic species because it alters stream morphology and vegetative conditions in the uplands and riparian areas. This changes the capabilities of hydrologic processes and stream morphology changes, reducing stream function. The result is a reduction and simplification in habitats. Irrigation diversions: The effects on aquatic species occur through the loss of instream flows and possibly temperature increases and loss of individuals in irrigation ditches. In some cases, diversion may benefit WCT because it is limiting upstream movement of nonnative species that would hybridize and/or compete with them. Noxious weed treatment: Beneficial effects are expected from reversing trends in vegetative conditions. Potential negative effects if herbicides contact individuals directly. Risk is low for this; the HNF weed treatments provide mitigations to reduce risks of introduction of herbicide into streams and other water bodies. We expect the balance of effects related to this management to be beneficial. Mining: Historic mining has had major affects to water quality and stream function in the project area, but there are no known water quality or stream channel conditions caused by historic mining that would be affected by the proposed activities. Placer operations have altered the physical function of some stream channels through the removal of stream gravels and channelization. Suction dredge mining operations are proposed or on-going at this time. Prescribed burning: This has some risk of increasing short term sediment delivery because of the temporary loss of vegetative cover that occurs. This, however, is effectively mitigated in most situations through the application of treatment buffers around streams and other water bodies. Benefit would occur through longer-term improved vegetation cover in riparian and uplands, which would reduce sediment delivery. Dispersed recreation: This is common across the analysis area and would continue – and probably increase – in the future. Effects to aquatic species are likely minor. Even though most dispersed camping and other activities occur in close proximity to water, the length of streams disturbed is relatively small. Sediment delivery from dispersed recreation can occur but it is limited enough in scope in most cases to keep it from being a notable concern relative to aquatic populations. Angling probably results in a limited amount of mortality, even though state regulations prohibit anglers from keeping bull trout from streams in the analysis area. Range improvements: These are expected to help with livestock distribution, decreasing impacts to streams, and so limiting negative effects on stream channel morphology and stream function. Road and trail construction and maintenance: To support timber removal Alternative 2 proposes approximately 2.6 miles of roads to be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal; alternative 3 proposes 0.4 mile. No permanent roads or trails are proposed. Required maintenance on roads for the project would reduce sources of sedimentation in the long term by 2 tons per year that are negatively affecting aquatic species and habitat. Hazard Tree Removal: This activity is limited to certain road and trail corridors and recreation sites. Effects to aquatic populations are likely minor. Alternative 1 (no action) would not promote a change in existing conditions within the analysis area. While this alternative meets the Forest Plan direction of “no measurable effect”, it does nothing to help ensure movement toward desired conditions. Because many streams are currently nonfunctioning or functioning at risk, alternative 1, when considered with other current, past and reasonably foreseeable actions could work cumulatively with the management activities/natural events discussed above to limit the potential to achieve healthy population densities in certain populations. Alternatives 2 and 3 would promote improvement in stream conditions through long-term reductions in sediment delivery and physical impacts to stream channels, which would promote positive shifts in stream function across the analysis area. Therefore, the effects of the Stonewall Vegetation Project proposed actions when considered cumulatively with other past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions should promote the attainment of better habitat conditions, and more abundant and resilient aquatic populations. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Alternatives 2 and 3 comply with the Helena National Forest Plan, and other State and local laws, regulations, policies and plans. Other Relevant Mandatory Disclosures There are no other relevant mandatory disclosures for the aquatic resources in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Species Determinations The Biological Effects Determination for westslope cutthroat trout and western pearlshell mussel, if implementing alternative 2 or 3 is: May impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss of viability to the population or species. The Biological Analysis Determinations for bull trout and bull trout critical habitat is: May effect, not likely to adversely affect. WCT Population Viability at the Project Level: Westslope cutthroat trout are the fish “management indicator species” for the Helena National Forest. They represent a measure of the effects of management activities on habitat with the objective of ensuring population viability (Forest Plan p. II-17). Westslope cutthroat trout are found in Stonewall planning area, and therefore, serve as the proxy population for viability analysis in fulfillment of the NFMA viability requirement. This analysis uses a practical approach outlined in Ruggiero et al. (1994) and Region 1 guidance (Draft 01/30/2004) in conjunction with criteria established by Rieman et al. (1993). Simply put, “…an analysis of population viability is about birth, death, immigration, and emigration rates and how environmental or ecological factors affect these rates over time” (Ruggiero et al. 1994, p. 366). In this exercise, select habitat attributes considered both ecologically significant to fish and sensitive to land management disturbances are borrowed from Overton et al. 1995, p. 1), and Region 1 guidance (USDA Forest Service Draft 1/30/2004). Table 147 displays these habitat attributes and which ones are affected by this proposal. Projections of change in any habitat attribute provide an indication whether negative effects to species or habitat is occurring. Table 147. WCT habitat variables from Overton and Region 1 guidance that may be influenced by proposed management in the Stonewall Project area HABITAT FEATURE EFFECTS OF ACTION COMMENTS MAINTAIN DEGRADE IMPROVE Bank Stability X   Special guidance within stream buffers, SMZ regulations Bank Undercut X   Special guidance within stream buffers, SMZ regulations Water temperature X   Special guidance within stream buffers, SMZ regulations Width-to-depth ratio X   Special guidance within stream buffers, SMZ regulations Width-to-maximum depth ratio X    Substrate composition  X X Degrade yr-1; improve yr 3+ Large woody debris (LWD) X   Special guidance within stream buffers, SMZ regulations Pool frequency X   Special guidance within stream buffers, SMZ regulations Invasive species X    Sediment in stream substrates was described being the attribute most responsive to disturbance from this project. Other attributes of fish habitat (bank stability, temperature, LWD, etc.) were excluded from further consideration due to specific project design elements—300-foot stream buffers in conjunction with state SMZs and low-severity burn prescriptions that restrict disturbance from important stream corridors. Research has shown how increasing and decreasing levels of sediment in trout reproductive habitat affect trout embryo and fry survival rates negatively or positively respectively. When fine sediments elevate beyond natural levels in trout spawning habitat, the reproductive quality of that habitat diminishes resulting in a corresponding decrease in fry production. Mathematical equations to estimate existing and predicted embryo survival as a function of changes in sediment suggest success rate of hybrid WCT fry survival for this stream drops to 57 percent (from 62 percent) in year-one, and then improves to 78 percent after year-three as a result of sediment source reduction treatments to road # 423 and 423-D1. Estimates of changes in the rates of embryo survival are not necessarily accurate, but are meant to help determine the amount of changes in sediment yield upon WCT populations in question. This analysis, therefore, predicts a short-term change in substrate composition risks, some minor downward trend in incubation and fry emergence success (birth rate) to the population before recovering to an improved trend over baseline after 3 years. WCT recruitment is likely more than adequate to offset minor short-term sediment increases near the populations in Beaver Creek and Keep Cool Creek. In the long term, treating hydrologically connected roads helps recover gravel quality slightly over baseline conditions. Therefore, there is some minimal risk to viability for this WCT population in the short-term with a long-term trend of maintaining reproductive habitat within the acceptable range of variation (32.7% ±9.9%). Recreation Introduction This analysis describes the existing recreation activities, settings and opportunities within the Stonewall Vegetation Project area, and describes the potential effects to recreation from proposed activities. Portions of the Stonewall Project area are within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan and Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs). The potential effects to roadless and wilderness characteristics of the IRAs and unroaded lands contiguous to the IRAs are in a separate section beginning on page 596. Overview of Issues Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on recreation were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Indicators Indicators are defined to analyze data regarding the potential for impacts of vegetation treatments and prescribed fire on recreation opportunities within the project area, and the impacts of prescribed fire on trail conditions within the project area · Loss of recreation opportunity, displacement of users, or a change in recreation experience due to vegetation treatments/prescribed fire activities (i.e. temporary closure of areas/visitors avoiding the area during the vegetation treatments/prescribed fire, or changes in scenery following the vegetation treatments/prescribed fire that affect the recreation setting) . Measure: Life of the project · Increased trail maintenance needs following prescribed fire (i.e. increased erosion due to runoff or fallen trees) . Measure: Miles of trail affected Methodology An interdisciplinary team meeting and field tour of the proposed project area was attended in Lincoln, Montana by specialists on September 20-24, 2010. Analysis was accomplished using ArcMap and relevant Geographic Information System (GIS) data layers from the Helena National Forest, Lincoln Ranger District, including trails, roads, recreation sites, inventoried roadless areas, summer and winter ROS classes, winter use, and management areas. Online visitor information provided by the Helena National Forest and other local organizations provided an overview of the recreation opportunities and trends within the analysis area. A review of existing law, regulation and policy relevant to recreation resources within the project area was completed and are referenced where appropriate. Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis The potential direct and indirect effects to recreation resources were considered within the Stonewall Project area boundary. The direct effects would be short term and temporary, occurring during project implementation. The longer-term indirect effects would relate to ecosystem restoration, changes in visual qualities, and other items within the project area that would influence the recreation setting. Cumulative Effects Process Cumulative effects to recreation within the Stonewall Project area boundary would relate to other administrative or Forest management activities occurring within or immediately adjacent to the project area. Cumulative impacts would result if other activities take place during implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation Project or until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the vegetation treatment activities and prescribed fire, approximately 3-5 years. A complete list of past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities is in appendix C. Affected Environment Existing Condition The Forest Fire suppression and moist growing conditions through much of this century resulted in a loss of open forest conditions and seral species (aspen, ponderosa pine and western larch). This has created a uniform landscape comprised of dense forests susceptible to insect and wildfire mortality (Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine). In addition, a large-scale mountain pine beetle epidemic has killed most of the mature lodgepole pine and ponderosa pine. These conditions are elevating fuel levels, which poses a wildfire threat to nearby homes and communities in the wildland urban interface (WUI). Recreation The project area provides access to a variety of recreation opportunities. While hunting and snowmobiling are the predominate recreation activities, other recreation uses include: camping, fishing, driving for pleasure, off highway vehicle (OHV) travel and horseback riding, hiking, firewood gathering, berry picking, cross-country skiing and wildlife viewing. The following recreation facilities are located within the project area: Dry Creek Trailhead, Arrastra Creek Trailhead and Pine Grove dispersed camping area and trailhead. The Lincoln Ranger District receives most recreation use during the fall hunting season. Winter and summer visitation is slightly lower, and spring is the least used period. The National Visitor Use Monitoring Results from data collected in 2008 indicate that the Helena National Forest serves a mostly local client base with nearly 70 percent of visitor use coming from people who live within 50 miles of the Forest. A majority of this is day use. Approximately 60 percent of Forest visitors listed the following as their main recreation activities on the Forest: hunting, hiking/walking, cross-country skiing, viewing natural features, snowmobiling, and driving for pleasure (USDA Forest Service 2009). The Lincoln Ranger District issues special Use Permits for special events and commercial outfitters and guides. Several commercial outfitters are authorized to operate within the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex; these outfitters likely pass through the project area to access the Scapegoat Wilderness area during their operations. The southern boundary of the Scapegoat Wilderness is approximately 3 miles north of the Stonewall project area. The Scapegoat Wilderness is part of the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex. It is referred to as “The Crown Jewel of the National Wilderness Preservation System” and is a very popular place to visit for people from all parts of the country (USDA Forest Service 1986, FEIS Appendix C-29). The Arrastra Creek and Dry Creek trailheads are popular access points for the Scapegoat Wilderness and heavily used during the fall hunting season. The project area is also within the area known as the Southwest Crown of the Continent. The Crown of the Continent at a landscape level is an area that links the Canadian Rockies with the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem and the Selway-Bitteroot Wilderness areas to the south. The Southwestern Crown Collaborative (2010) describes this area as “…one of the most biologically diverse and intact landscapes in the western United States. The Crown has been described as one of the premier mountain regions of the world and contains many of the largest remaining blocks of roadless lands in the contiguous US. The presence of expansive open space in the Southwestern Crown provides an abundance of outdoor recreational opportunities, from hunting and fishing to hiking and snowmobiling. Public access to streams, lakes, and private and public lands is highly valued.” Roads and Trails The primary motorized access into the project area is National Forest System Road #4106, Beaver Creek Road. It provides access to the Dry Creek Trailhead, Arrastra Creek Trailhead and Pine Grove dispersed camping area and trailhead, Huckleberry Pass, and serves as an important snowmobile trail. The road is popular with local residents who want to harvest huckleberries and firewood. Additional National Forest System roads that provide motorized access into the project area are Lincoln Gulch Road #626, Lone Point Road #1824, Lincoln Ditch Road #4043, and Park Creek Road #607. Other access into the project area is on designated National Forest System trails including Dry Creek Trail #483, Porcupine Basin Trail #488, Arrastra Creek Trail #482, Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail #485, Stonewall Mountain Trail #418, and Stonewall Trail #417. The last three trails identified are open to motorized travel. Table 148 displays information for other motorized and nonmotorized trails as well as groomed29 and ungroomed snowmobile trails within the project area. The entire project area is currently open for snowmobile use in the winter. 29 The groomed trails are as indicated on the Lincoln Area Snowmobile Trails Map compiled by the Ponderosa Snow Warriors Snowmobile Club (available in the project record) Table 148. Stonewall Project area trails Forest Trail Name Miles within Stonewall Project Area Trail Type Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail #485 1.5 miles Forest System Trail – motorized & nonmotorized Stonewall Mountain Trail #418 2.5 miles Forest System Trail – motorized & nonmotorized Stonewall Trail #417 3 miles Forest System Trail – motorized & nonmotorized Snowmobile Trails Miles within Stonewall Project Area Trail type (groomed/ungroomed) Route 2, Beaver-Dry Creek Trail 7 miles Groomed Route 1, Sucker Creek Road 1 mile Groomed Stonewall Mountain Trail 3 miles Ungroomed Trail near Reservoir Lake 1 mile Ungroomed The Lincoln Ranger District is currently developing the Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter) that would designate motorized public access routes on a Motor Vehicle Use Map and the Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel Plan that would provide for a variety of motorized and nonmotorized winter recreational opportunities. The plans are under analysis and being developed in accordance with 36 CFR 212, Subpart B, Designation of Roads, Trails, and Areas for Motor Vehicle Use. Recreation Opportunity Spectrum The Forest Service uses the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) to inventory and describe the range of recreation opportunities available based on the following characteristics of an area: physical (characteristics of the land and facilities), social (interactions and contact with others), and managerial (services and controls provided). The recreational settings are described on a continuum ranging from Primitive to Urban. The Summer ROS classes within the Stonewall Project area include Semi-Primitive Motorized (SPM) and Roaded Modified (RM) (figure 84). The Winter ROS classes within the Stonewall project area include Semi-Primitive Motorized (SPM), Roaded Natural (RN), and Roaded Modified (RM) (figure 85). The Helena Forest Plan includes the following ROS Class definitions: Semi-Primitive - A classification of recreation opportunity spectrum that characterizes a predominately natural or natural appearing environment of a moderate to large size. Concentration of users is low, but there is often evidence of other area users. The area is managed in such a way that minimum onsite controls and restrictions may be present, but subtle. In areas designated as Semi-Primitive Motorized, motorized use may occur on primitive roads and motorized trails. Roaded Natural - A classification of the recreation opportunity spectrum where timber harvest or other surface-use practices are evident. Motorized vehicles are permitted on all parts of the road system (USDA Forest Service 1986). Roaded Modified - A subclass of Roaded Natural that has typically been defined as areas exhibiting evidence of Forest management activities that are dominant on the landscape (USDA Forest Service 2003).  Title: Summer Recreation Opportunity SpectrumFigure 84. Summer Recreation Opportunity Spectrum  Title: Winter Recreation Opportunity SpectrumFigure 85. Winter Recreation Opportunity Spectrum Environmental Consequences Alternative 1 – No Action Direct and Indirect Effects If the no-action alternative is chosen, there would be no direct effects from proposed activities to recreation resources. However, the risk of severe wildfire would remain because the ecosystem restoration and fuel reduction project would not occur. In the long term, this may result in indirect effects to recreation resources, potentially resulting in changes to the recreation setting or scenic quality of the project area. The beetle killed, dead and dying trees would eventually fall to the ground making cross-country foot travel more difficult for hunting and hiking. In the long-term, this may result in displaced users as trees fall across trails and folks find other places to hunt, hike and walk. The effects to the recreation resource would continue over the next 10 to 15 years as dead trees fall to the ground and vegetation begins to reestablish. Cumulative Effects There are no known cumulative effects to recreation resources from alternative 1. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Alternative 1 would have no irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources relevant to the recreation resources within the project area. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to recreation and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed in table 9 pertaining to recreation are REC-1 through REC-8. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to all action alternatives. Direct and Indirect Effects Activities from the proposed vegetation treatments including regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, precommercial thinning, and prescribed burning may directly affect recreation activities and experience in the project area. The vegetation treatments may require temporary road or trail closures or limited access to the immediate area to protect public safety. In addition, visitors may choose to avoid areas during the harvesting, hauling, or prescribed burning activities. These effects would be both temporary and short term. The project design features, listed in table 9 in chapter 2, limit hauling logs during hunting season and on weekends and holidays (see table 9, Rec-1 and Rec-2) and would minimize impacts to the majority of recreational users. Public notification at trailheads, on the Forest website and in the local media would allow adequate notice for those planning trips into the area to adjust their plans (See table 9, Rec-3). Commercial outfitters operating in the area during project implementation may also be directly affected by limited access or trail closures. The public notification efforts would allow them to adjust their schedules. The proposed vegetation treatments may indirectly affect the recreation setting within the project area by changing the scenic qualities within the treatment areas. The harvest activities would reduce stand density, and the cut tree stumps would remain visible to visitors passing through the project area. The prescribed burning activities would create blackened areas on the landscape. These effects would be short term. The long-term benefits of the proposed action, including a more diverse, resilient and sustainable forest ecosystem, and reduction in the risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire or insects and disease, have the potential to indirectly benefit recreation by helping to maintain the settings and opportunities currently valued by the public for recreation within the project area. Studies suggest that less intense fires may have beneficial economic effects on outdoor recreation, whereas intense fires may have detrimental effects (Vaux, Gardner and Mills 1984). Regeneration Harvest, Intermediate Harvest, Precommercial Thinning The direct impacts to recreation from the harvest activities would be to the sights and sounds of equipment including chainsaws, feller bunchers, and cable logging equipment within the harvest units, and log truck traffic on the haul routes. Indirect affects to recreation would result from changes to the scenery following the harvest activities Removal of beetle-killed trees would reduce the amount of standing dead trees that would eventually fall. The harvest activities would reduce safety concerns and make cross-country travel by foot easier for dispersed recreational activities such as hunting and hiking. The Pine Grove dispersed camping area and trailhead is located within unit 46, which is proposed for intermediate harvest to restore open habitat, leaving a mature forest and the largest trees behind. After treatment, trees would be spaced 20 to 40 feet apart. This would result in short-term affects to recreation opportunities during the harvest activities, but the more open forest conditions would likely enhance opportunities for dispersed camping in the long term. A proposed haul route would also pass through this dispersed camping area. Project design features are in place to minimize impacts to the dispersed camping opportunities. They include prioritizing treatments adjacent to the dispersed camping area to limit the amount of time the area may be closed to the public, not permitting hauling on weekends and holidays, providing public notification of treatment schedules and protecting recreation facilities (See table 9, REC-2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8). Several of the groomed snowmobile routes have been identified as haul routes for the harvest activities. Approximately 3 miles of Route 2 - Beaver-Dry Creek Trail (along Roads 4106 and 607), approximately 4 miles of Route 2A – Beaver Trail (not on Forest System land, along Road 4106) and approximately 4 miles of Route 1 – Sucker Creek Road Trail (along Road 1800, 3 miles, not on Forest System land), would be used as haul routes. Route 2 passes through units 46, 47 and 51 and runs along the borders of units 75, 48, 49, and 50 proposed for intermediate harvest or precommercial thinning. The 1-mile segment of Route 1 on Forest System land is located within unit 57 where the mountain pine beetle has caused high mortality. This unit is proposed for regeneration harvest that would leave behind live trees to provide shelter and seed, and establish a new stand of young trees. The Forest would coordinate with local snowmobile groups to identify alternative routes if winter operations would affect the use of the groomed trails (See table 9, REC-4). Skid trails left by ground-based harvest and removal methods may open access to areas for off highway vehicles where vegetation previously prevented access. Design features are in place to minimize the appearance of skid trails where they intersect with existing roads and trails to reduce the likelihood of unauthorized motorized use (See table 2, Fuel-3). The ongoing Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter) and the Blackfoot – North Divide Winter Travel Plan, when completed, would designate public motorized access and motorized and nonmotorized recreational opportunities on the Lincoln Ranger District. The Stonewall Vegetation Project proposed action would not change any motorized route designations. The entire project area is currently open to cross-country travel by snowmobiles; the creation of more open forest conditions that would result from implementation of the proposed action could enhance the opportunities for snowmobiling within the project area. Cross-country travel by snowmobiles within the Stonewall Project area would be evaluated in the winter travel planning process. Following the vegetation treatments, opportunities for firewood gathering would be enhanced (see table 9, FUEL-1). Huckleberries may see an increase in regeneration, therefore, picking opportunities may be fewer in the short term following treatments, but enhanced in the long term as plants start to reestablish (see the Wildlife Specialist Report (Reitz 2012) for additional information). Prescribed Burning The direct impacts to recreation from the prescribed burning activities during project implementation would be the sights and sounds of people and equipment, including chainsaws and vehicles, and smoke in the air. Smoke in the air during the prescribed burns may have a direct affect to the quality of the recreation experience within the project area and in the adjacent dispersed camping areas by temporarily reducing air quality and visibility. Coordination with the Montana Airshed Group to ensure compliance with the Clean Air Act would minimize this impact (see table 9 AIR-1 and additional discussion in the Air Quality Report (USDA Forest Service 2012g). Indirect affects to recreation would result from changes to the scenery following the prescribed burning activities. There is potential for prescribed fire to affect Forest System trails by causing increased runoff and erosion or debris on the trails. There may be an increased incidence of burnt trees falling across the trails for several years following the prescribed burns. The Stonewall Mountain Trail #418 runs along the eastern boundary of units 80 and 82. The Stonewall Trail #417 runs along the northern boundary of the project area and units 82 and 83. The Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail #485 runs along the western boundary of unit 85 and passes through the eastern edge of unit 84. All of these units are proposed for prescribed burning activities. The designated National Forest System trails on the Lincoln Ranger District receive regular maintenance. Specific trail maintenance requirements would be addressed as needed based on trail conditions. The proposed prescribed fire activity would include construction of hand fire lines. The fire lines may open access for OHVs where vegetation previously prevented access. Design features are in place to minimize the appearance of fire lines where they intersect with existing trails to reduce the likelihood of unauthorized use (see table 9, FUEL-3). The ongoing Blackfoot winter and summer travel plans discussed previously, when completed would guide motorized access on the Lincoln Ranger District. The proposed action would not change any motorized route or area designations. Recreation Opportunity Spectrum A majority of the proposed treatment units fall within the summer and winter ROS classes of Roaded Modified, while the only treatment proposed within the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class is hand slashing of small diameter trees and prescribed fire. The proposed harvest and prescribed burning activities, including the short-term disturbance, would be consistent with Roaded Natural and Roaded Modified ROS classes where timber harvest or other surface use practices are evident. The proposed hand slashing of small diameter trees and prescribed fire would maintain a predominately natural or natural appearing environment and would be consistent with Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class (see page 5). There are no anticipated long-term effects on recreation opportunities or settings for the Stonewall Project area under alternative 2. Table 149 that follows shows the units and treatments proposed with potential impacts to specific recreation resources: Table 149. Alternative 2 – proposed treatments and potentially impacted recreation resources Unit Number Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Treatment Description Potentially Impacted Recreation Resource 46 Description Group 1 - Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests; Prescribed Fire - Underburn Pine Grove Dispersed Camping & groomed snowmobile route (2) 47 Description Group 1 - Intermediate Harvest to Promote Mature Open Forests; Prescribed Fire - Underburn Groomed snowmobile route (2) 48 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; Underburn Groomed snowmobile route (2) 49 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; Underburn or slash treatment along private Groomed snowmobile route (2) 50 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; No fuels treatment Groomed snowmobile route (2) 51 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Groomed snowmobile route (2) Unit Number Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Treatment Description Potentially Impacted Recreation Resource Young Forests; Underburn or slash treatment along private 57 Description Group 3 - Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Seed and Shelter Trees; Jackpot Burn Groomed snowmobile route (1), adjacent to trailhead #418, Stonewall Mountain Trail 75 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; Underburn Groomed snowmobile route (2) 80 Description Group 7 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 5, 10, or 20 Acres Trail #418, Stonewall Mountain Trail 82 Description Group 8 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Trail #417 - Stonewall Trail , #418 - Stonewall Mountain Trail 83 Description Group 8 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Trail #417 - Stonewall Trail 84 Description Group 8 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Trail #485 - Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail 85 Description Group 6 - Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 Acres Trail #485 - Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources In alternative 2, proposed action, there would be no irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources relevant to the recreation resources within the project area. Alternative 3 The activities proposed in alternative 3 differ from those of alternative 2 - proposed action, relevant to the analysis of recreation resources. The relevant changes include fewer units proposed for intermediate harvest and fewer units proposed for prescribed fire and hand slashing of small diameter trees within inventoried roadless areas (IRAs). Alternative 3 has no activities planned within the Lincoln Gulch IRA or in the unroaded area contiguous to this IRA. In addition, alternative 3 proposes fewer units for treatment in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA. The relevant unit changes in alternative 3 are as follows: Units 46 and 47 change from intermediate harvest with underburn treatments in Group 1 for alternative 2, to units 46a and 47a in a new group, Group 10 for alternative 3. Treatments would be designed in a mosaic pattern to maintain cover and forage for wildlife while promoting ponderosa pine and aspen, and reducing ladder fuels. Portions of the stand would be thinned to reduce understory competition from around large ponderosa pine trees, thin heavily stocked groups of trees on sites historically dominated by ponderosa pine, and remove conifer competition from within and around quaking aspen. Units 49 and 75 proposed for intermediate harvest are removed. Units 76 and 77 proposed for prescribed fire are removed from the Lincoln Gulch IRA and the unroaded area contiguous to the IRA. The mixed severity prescribed fire proposed for unit 80 changes to unit 80a, jackpot burn. Units 81 and 86 proposed for mixed severity prescribed fire are removed from the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA and the unroaded area contiguous to the IRA. Direct and Indirect Effects Regeneration Harvests, Intermediate Harvests, Precommercial Thinning The Pine Grove dispersed camping area and trailhead is located within unit 46a proposed for intermediate harvest with jackpot burning in alternative 3. There would be short-term impacts to recreation opportunities during these activities, but the more open forest conditions would likely enhance opportunities for dispersed camping in the long term. A proposed haul route would also pass through this dispersed camping area. Project design features are in place to minimize impacts to the dispersed camping opportunities. They include prioritizing treatments adjacent to the dispersed camping area to limit the amount of time the area may be closed to the public, not permitting hauling on weekends, providing public notification of treatment schedules and protecting recreation facilities (see table 9, REC-2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8). Several of the groomed snowmobile routes have been identified as haul routes for the harvest activities. Approximately 3 miles of Route 2 - Beaver-Dry Creek Trail (along Roads 4106 and 607), approximately 4 miles of Route 2A – Beaver Trail ( not on Forest System land, along Road 4106) and approximately 4 miles of Route 1 – Sucker Creek Road Trail (along Road 1800, 3 miles, not on Forest System land), would be used as haul routes. Route 2 passes through units 46a, 47a and 51 and runs along the borders of units 48, and 50 proposed for intermediate harvest or precommercial thinning. Alternative 3 would have slightly less potential to impact Route 2, since two of the units proposed for treatment (75 and 49) were removed from consideration in this alternative. The 1-mile segment of Route 1 on Forest System land is located within unit 57 where the mountain pine beetle has caused high mortality. This unit, proposed for regeneration harvest, would leave behind live trees to provide shelter and seed to establish a new stand of young trees. The Forest would coordinate with local snowmobile groups to identify alternative routes if winter operations would affect the use of the groomed trails (See table 9, REC-4). Prescribed Burning Alternative 3 proposes fewer acres of prescribed burning; therefore, the potential impacts of noise from people and equipment would be less than those described in alternative 2. Smoke in the air during the prescribed burns may have a direct affect to the quality of the recreation experience within the project area and in the adjacent dispersed camping areas by temporarily reducing air quality and visibility. Coordination with the Montana Airshed Group to ensure compliance with the Clean Air Act would minimize this affect (see table 9, AIR-1 and additional discussion in the Air Quality section). Indirect affects to recreation would result from changes to the scenery following the prescribed burning activities, but fewer changes can be expected in this alternative compared to alternative 2 because fewer acres are proposed for treatment. There is potential for prescribed fire to affect Forest System trails by causing increased runoff and erosion or debris on the trails. There may be an increased incidence of burnt trees falling across the trails for several years following the prescribed burns. The Stonewall Mountain Trail #418 runs along the eastern boundary of units 80a and 82. The Stonewall Trail #417 runs along the northern boundary of the project area and units 82 and 83. The Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail #485 runs along the western boundary of unit 85 and passes through the eastern edge of unit 84. All of these units are proposed for prescribed burning activities. The designated National Forest System trails on the Lincoln Ranger District receive regular maintenance. Specific trail maintenance requirements would be addressed as needed based on trail conditions. Recreation Opportunity Spectrum A majority of the proposed treatment units fall within the summer and winter Recreation Opportunity Spectrum classes of Roaded Modified, while the only treatment proposed within the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class is hand slashing of small diameter trees and prescribed fire. The proposed harvest and prescribed burning activities, including the short-term disturbance, would be consistent with Roaded Natural and Roaded Modified ROS classes where timber harvest or other surface-use practices are evident. The proposed hand slashing of small diameter trees and prescribed fire would maintain a predominately natural or natural appearing environment and would be consistent with Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class (p.5). There are no anticipated long-term effects on recreation opportunities or settings for the Stonewall Project area under alternative 3. Table 150 that follows shows the units and treatments proposed with potential impacts to specific recreation resources: Table 150. Alternative 3 – proposed treatment and potentially impacted recreation resources Unit Number Alternative 3 –Treatment Description Potentially Impacted Recreation Resource 46a Description Group 10 – Intermediate Harvest – Improvement Cut; Jackpot burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles Pine Grove Dispersed Camping & groomed snowmobile route (2) 47a Description Group 10 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; Low Severity Prescribed Fire Groomed snowmobile route (2) 48 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; Underburn Groomed snowmobile route (2) 50 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; No fuels treatment Groomed snowmobile route (2) 51 Description Group 2 - Intermediate Harvest to Thin Young Forests; Underburn or slash treatment along private Groomed snowmobile route (2) 57 Description Group 3 - Regeneration Harvest in Areas of High Mortality Retaining Seed and Shelter Trees; Jackpot Burn Groomed snowmobile route (1), adjacent to trailhead #418 - Stonewall Mountain Trail 80a Description Group 9 - Low Severity Prescribed Fire Trail #418 - Stonewall Mountain Trail 82 Description Group 8 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Trail #417 - Stonewall Trail, #418 - Stonewall Mountain Trail 83 Description Group 8 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Trail #417 - Stonewall Trail 84 Description Group 8 - Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Trail #485 - Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail 85 Description Group 6 - Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 Acres Trail #485 - Stonewall/Copper Creek Trail Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources In alternative 3, there would be no irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources relevant to the recreation resources within the project area. Cumulative Effects Common to All Action Alternatives Cumulative effects to recreation within the Stonewall Project area boundary would relate to other administrative or Forest management activities occurring within or immediately adjacent to the project area. Cumulative impacts would result if other activities take place during implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation project or until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the vegetation treatment activities and prescribed fire, approximately 3-5 years. The effects of past actions within the Stonewall Project area are incorporated into the description of the existing condition. The present and reasonably foreseeable future actions within the project area have been reviewed for potential cumulative effects when the direct or indirect effects of the alternatives are added to them. The projects occurring within the spatial and temporal boundaries described in this analysis for recreation resources cumulative effects analysis are considered here. Since there would be no direct or indirect effect to the ROS classes, there would be no cumulative effects to the ROS classes within the project area. Recreational activities such as hunting, camping, hiking, OHV travel on primitive roads, and snowmobiling and cross-country skiing in the winter would continue within the analysis area. Other ongoing and reasonably foreseeable activities that would be occurring within the analysis area include hazard tree removal, weed treatments, road and trail maintenance, commercial guided recreation and special events, firewood cutting and continued use of grazing allotments. All of these activities, when added to the activities proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project have the potential to cumulatively affect the recreation experience within the project area. The primary impacts would be due to the increased presence of people, vehicles and associated noise that would directly affect the ability of recreational visitors to enjoy their desired experience, and may lead to the short-term displacement of visitors who choose to avoid the area during implementation of the various activities. The longer-term impacts of ongoing and reasonably foreseeable activities, such as hazard tree removal and weed treatments, when added to the activities proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation project, have the potential to cumulatively impact the recreation setting by causing changes to the scenic qualities within the project area and creating a setting where resource modifications and utilization practices are evident, but harmonize with the natural environment as indicated in a Roaded Natural ROS setting (p.5). Most of these effects would be beneficial because they would increase the resiliency of forest conditions, and reduce the risk of potential negative impacts from severe wildfire, therefore, maintaining the recreation settings currently valued by the public. A complete list of past, present and reasonably foreseeable future activities in the project area is in appendix C. Summary of Effects of All Alternatives Alternative 1, no action would have no direct or cumulative effects to recreation resources. The purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project “…improving the mix of vegetation and structure across the landscape so that it is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects; modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape; enhancing and restoring aspen, western larch and ponderosa pine species and habitats; utilizing the economic value of trees through removal; and integrating restoration with socioeconomic considerations” would not be addressed. Potential long-term indirect effects to recreation resources would be due to the ongoing risk of severe wildfire that could lead to changes in the recreation settings, visual qualities and naturalness within the roadless expanse. Alternative 2, proposed action would have short-term direct effects to recreation resources during project implementation such as limited access to specific areas and increased presence of people and noise within the project area. Project design features are in place to limit potential affects (table 9). The proposed treatments would address the purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, resulting in a more diverse, resilient and sustainable Forest ecosystem with reduction in risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire. The long-term indirect effects to recreation would be generally beneficial and help to maintain the existing recreation settings and scenic qualities within the project area. Cumulative effects to recreation resources would generally be short term, occurring during project implementation, and would relate to an increased presence of people, vehicles and the associated noise that may affect the recreation experience. Longer-term cumulative effects would impact the Pine Grove dispersed camping area, such as hazard tree removal and fence construction for a riparian exclosure, in addition to the actions proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project. These effects would remain until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the vegetation treatment activities, approximately 3-5 years, but would remain consistent with Roaded Natural ROS class (p.5). The effects of alternative 3 relative to recreation resources would be similar to those described for alternative 2, but the impacts would occur on fewer acres. There would be no affects to the Lincoln Gulch IRA and fewer acres treated within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA (see the Inventoried Roadless Area Report (Valentine 2012a) for additional analysis). Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The proposed alternatives are consistent with the following: · Helena National Forest Plan 1986, Recreation Standards for Management Areas: M-1, T-1, T-2, T-3, T-4, and W-1. Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2300 – Recreation, Wilderness and Related Resource Management, guides management of recreation and wilderness resources on National Forest System lands.Inventoried Roadless Areas Introduction This analysis describes the existing condition in portions of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan (BMSS) and Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) that are within the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. In addition, this roadless analysis describes the potential effects from the proposed activities identified in the alternatives of the Stonewall Project to the roadless area characteristics and wilderness attributes of the Inventoried Roadless Areas, as well as the unroaded lands contiguous to them. Additional detailed information is contained in the Inventoried Roadless Area report (Valentine 2012a), incorporated by reference. Overview of Issues Addressed During the public scoping process, five comments were received regarding IRAs. The comments were identified as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7). Specific responses to the comments and explanations of how the comments were addressed either in the analysis or through project design features, are included in this DEIS in Appendix A – Public Involvement. The following issue is relevant to the roadless resources within the analysis area and is addressed by the analysis in this section: · Prescribed fire activities may affect roadless area characteristics within the project area. Indicators Indicators are defined to analyze data regarding the potential for impacts to the roadless resource from project activities that may affect roadless characteristics and wilderness attributes. Impacts to the roadless area characteristics as described in 36 CFR 294.11 – Roadless Area Conservation, Final Rule and wilderness attributes of roadless areas as described in Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 1909.12 (72.1) – Wilderness Evaluation. Measure: Acres affected and duration of the impact Roadless Analysis Background and Direction Classification of roadless areas began with the Roadless Area Review and Evaluation (RARE) study in 1973 and the subsequent RARE II study in 1978. The 1983 Helena Forest Plan included evaluation of 23 roadless areas (USDA Forest Service 1986c, FEIS ROD). This met the direction in 36 CFR 219.17 regarding evaluation of roadless areas, and was in compliance with a 1982 decision of the Ninth Circuit Court that found RARE II study to be inadequate. As a result of this evaluation, the Forest Plan provides management direction for 79,200 acres of undeveloped area outside of Wilderness to remain undeveloped, and the remaining 203,900 acres of undeveloped areas were assigned to other resource management goals (USDA Forest Service 1986b, c). The two IRAs within the Stonewall Project area (Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan and Lincoln Gulch) were among those areas assigned to other resource management goals, as described in the Affected Environment section of this section. On Jan 12, 2001, the Roadless Area Conservation Rule was published (36 CFR 294); the rule became effective on March 13, 2001. The 2001 rule prohibited road construction, road reconstruction and timber cutting, sale and removal in inventoried roadless areas with some exceptions. On July 13, 2003, the 2001 Roadless Rule was enjoined by U.S. District Court Judge Brimmer in Wyoming, after which the Forest Service established Interim Directives for the management of roadless areas. In May 2005, the 2005 State Petitions Rule was established, which allowed governors to petition for individual, state-specific rules to manage IRAs in national forests and grasslands in their states. In October 2006, Judge Laporte (Northern District Court of California) set aside the State Petitions Rule and reinstated the 2001 Roadless Rule (California ex rel. Lockyer v USDA). In December 2008, the Court limited its injunction to states within the Ninth Circuit and New Mexico (excluding Idaho). In August 2009, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the Northern District Court of California’s opinions. On Jan 12, 2007, the state of Wyoming again challenged the 2001 Roadless rule in Wyoming. On August 12, 2008 in the District Court of Wyoming, Judge Brimmer issued a ruling enjoining the 2001 Roadless Rule for the second time (Wyoming v. USDA). This opinion was appealed to the 10th Circuit Court of appeals. On May 28, 2009, Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack issued Memorandum 1042-154, which reserves “to the Secretary the authority to approve or disapprove road construction or reconstruction and the cutting, sale, or removal of timber in those areas identified in the set of inventoried roadless area maps contained in Forest Service Roadless Area Conservation, Final Environmental Impact Statement, Volume 2, dated November 2000.” The Secretary's Memorandum 1042-154 is intended to assure careful evaluation of actions in inventoried roadless areas while long-term roadless policy is developed and relevant court cases move forward. On August 3, 2009, the Forest Service received re-delegation of authority from the Secretary to authorize · Approval of any necessary timber cutting or removal or any road construction/reconstruction in emergency situations involving wildfire suppression, search and rescue operations, or other imminent threats to public health or safety in Inventoried Roadless Areas. The local line officer is delegated authority to make these decisions. · Approval of any timber cutting, sale, or removal in inventoried roadless areas incidental to the implementation of an existing special use authorization. Road construction/ reconstruction are not authorized through this re-delegation without further project specific review. The local line officer is delegated authority to make these decisions. On October 16, 2009, the Secretary re-delegated authority to the Forest Service for the cutting, sale, or removal of generally small diameter timber when needed for one of the following purposes: · To improve threatened, endangered, or sensitive species habitat a. To maintain or restore the characteristics of ecosystem composition and structure, such as to reduce the risk of uncharacteristic wildfire effects within the range of variability that would be expected to occur under natural disturbance regimes of the current climatic period b. For administrative and personal use, as provided for in Title 36, Code of Federal Regulations 223, where personal use includes activities such as Christmas trees and firewood cutting and where administrative use includes providing materials for activities such as construction of trails, footbridges, and fences On May 28, 2010 and again on May 30, 2011, Secretary Thomas J. Vilsack renewed his reservation of final decision authority over certain forest management and road construction projects in inventoried roadless areas. The new Secretary’s Memorandum 1042-155 and 1042-156 include the same re-delegations of authority to the Forest Service as described above. On October 21, 2011, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit decided Wyoming v. USDA and found the Forest Service’s adoption of the 2001 Roadless Area Conservation Rule (Roadless Rule) does not violate Federal law. The Tenth Circuit ordered the District of Wyoming Court to vacate its earlier ruling and lift its nationwide injunction of the Roadless Rule. Pending action by the District Court to vacate the permanent injunction, the Forest Service continued to follow the direction in the letter dated August 18, 2008 signed by the Deputy Chief for NFS (see Holtrop 2008) and the direction provided in the Secretary’s Memo 1042-156, described in Pena (2011). On March 2, 2012, Judge Brimmer (Wyoming) lifted his injunction on the 2001 Roadless Rule. Lifting the injunction paves the way for implementation of the 2001 Roadless Rule nationwide, and in Region 1 (except for Idaho) provides much needed consistency regarding the management of Inventoried Roadless Areas. On May 30, 2012, the Secretary’s Memorandum 1042-156 requiring review and approval of certain activities in Roadless Areas expired. In order to provide a smooth transition, the Chief is requiring review of certain activities (see Chiefs Letter dated May 31, 2012, and the associated attachments describing the Review Process, and Talking Points. Some activities will require review by the Chief and others by the Regional Forester. In Region 1, the Regional Forester review process has been delegated to Deputy Regional Forester Jane Cottrell, per the Regional Forester’s letter dated June 8, 2012. The Chief’s letter dated May 31, 2012 implements the following process for review of certain activities in Roadless Areas: Except as noted below, the Chief will review all projects involving road construction or reconstruction and the cutting, sale, or removal of timber in those areas identified in the set of inventoried roadless area maps contained in the Forest Service Roadless Area Conservation, Final Environmental Impact Statement Volume 2 dated November 2000. Regional Foresters will review the following activities: a. Any necessary timber cutting or removal or any road construction or road reconstruction in emergency situations involving wildfire suppression, search and rescue operations, or other imminent threats to public health and safety in inventoried roadless areas. b. Timber cutting, sale, or removal in inventoried roadless areas incidental to the implementation of an existing special use authorization. Road construction or road reconstruction is not authorized through this re-delegation without further project specific review. c. The cutting, sale, or removal of generally small diameter timber when needed for one of the following purposes: 1) To improve threatened, endangered, proposed, or sensitive species habitat; 2) To maintain or restore the characteristics of ecosystem composition and structure, such as to reduce the risk of uncharacteristic wildfire effects within the range of variability that would be expected to occur under natural disturbance regimes of the current climatic period; or, 3) For the administrative and personal use, as provided for in 36 CFR 223, where personal use includes activities such as Christmas tree and firewood cutting and where administrative use includes providing materials for activities such as construction of trails, footbridges, and fences. The activities proposed within the Stonewall project fall within the activities requiring Regional Forester review, as explained in c. 2, above. To fulfill this requirement, a briefing paper was prepared for the Regional Forester dated November 30, 2009 that included a project description and maps. On February 13, 2012, the Regional Roadless Coordinator reviewed and commented on the Draft Roadless Resource Specialist Report. Additional discussion regarding compliance with the 2001 roadless rule is included in the “Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans” section. Methodology An interdisciplinary team meeting and field tour of the proposed project area was attended in Lincoln, Montana by specialists on September 20-24, 2010. Analysis was accomplished using ArcMap and relevant Geographic Information System (GIS) data layers from the Helena National Forest, Lincoln Ranger District, including trails, roads, recreation sites, inventoried roadless areas, summer and winter ROS classes, winter use, and management areas. On-line visitor information provided by the Helena National Forest and other local organizations was used as an overview of the roadless values and wilderness attributes within the analysis area. A review of existing law, regulation and policy relevant to roadless resources within the project area was conducted and relevant section of the Forest Plan and Forest Service Handbooks are referenced. Roadless Analysis Methodology The purpose of the analysis on the roadless resource is to disclose potential effects to roadless area characteristics and wilderness attributes from the Stonewall Project proposed activities, and determine if, or to what extent these effects might influence future consideration for wilderness recommendations. This analysis focuses on the potential effects of project activities on roadless characteristics as defined in 36 CFR 294.11 – Roadless Area Conservation, Final Rule and wilderness attributes as defined in the Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 1909.12 (72.1). Roadless area characteristics, as defined in 36 CFR 294.11 – Roadless Area Conservation, Final Rule and evaluated in this analysis include the following: · High quality or undisturbed soil, water, and air · Sources of public drinking water · Diversity of plants and animal communities · Habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate, and sensitive species, and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land · Primitive, semi-primitive nonmotorized and semi-primitive motorized classes of dispersed recreation · Reference landscapes · Natural appearing landscapes with high scenic quality · Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites · Other locally identified unique characteristics Wilderness attributes, as defined at FSH 1909.12 (72.1) and evaluated in this analysis include the following: Natural – The extent to which long-term ecological processes are intact and operating Undeveloped – The degree to which the impacts documented in natural integrity are apparent to most visitors Outstanding opportunities for solitude or primitive unconfined recreation – Solitude is a personal, subjective value defined as the isolation from sights, sounds, and presence of others and from developments and evidence of humans. Primitive recreation is characterized by meeting nature on its own terms, without comfort and convenience of facilities. Special features and values – Unique ecological, geographical, scenic, and historical features of an area Manageability – The ability to manage an area for wilderness consideration and maintain wilderness attributes The following table shows the crosswalk between the wilderness attributes identified in Forest Service Handbook 1909.12 and the 1964 Wilderness Act; and the roadless area characteristics defined in the 2001 Roadless Area Conservation Rule (36 CFR 294.11).  Table 151. Wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics crosswalk WILDERNESS ATTRIBUTES ROADLESS AREA CHARACTERISTICS Natural  Ecological systems are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization and generally appear to have been affected primarily by forces of nature High quality or undisturbed soil, water, and air; Sources of public drinking water: Diversity of plant and animal communities; Habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate, and sensitive species and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land; Reference landscapes Undeveloped  Degree to which the area is without permanent improvements or human habitation Natural appearing landscapes with high scenic quality Outstanding Opportunities for Solitude or Primitive and Unconfined Recreation  Solitude: opportunity to experience isolation from the sights, sounds, and presence of others from the developments and evidence of humans  Primitive and unconfined recreation: opportunity to experience isolation from the evidence of humans, to feel a part of nature, to have a vastness of scale, and a degree of challenge and risk while using outdoor skills Primitive, semi-primitive non-motorized and semi-primitive motorized classes of dispersed recreation Special Features and Values  Capability of the area to provide other values such as those with geologic, scientific, educational, scenic, historical, or cultural significance Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites; and Other locally identified unique characteristics. Manageability  The ability of the Forest Service to manage an area to meet size criteria and the elements of wilderness No criteria Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis The potential direct and indirect effects to roadless resources were considered within the Stonewall Project Area boundary. The direct effects would be short term and temporary, occurring during project implementation. The long-term indirect effects would be related to ecosystem restoration, changes in visual qualities, and other items within the project area that would influence several of the areas roadless characteristics. Cumulative Effects Process Cumulative effects to roadless resources were considered within the entire 866,330-acre Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA that is managed by the Helena, Flathead, Lolo, and Lewis and Clark National Forests, the entire 17,261-acre Lincoln Gulch IRA that is managed by the Helena National Forest and unroaded lands contiguous to these IRAs. Potential cumulative effects to roadless resources would be related to other activities occurring within the roadless expanse that have the potential to impact roadless area characteristics or wilderness attributes. Cumulative impacts to roadless resources would result if other activities take place during implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation project, or until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the hand slashing of small diameter trees and hand firelines, approximately 3-5 years. Connected Actions, Past, Present, and Foreseeable Activities Relevant to Cumulative Effects Analysis The effects of past actions within the Stonewall Project area are incorporated into the description of the existing conditions. A list of past, present and foreseeable actions relevant to the cumulative effects analysis for roadless resources within the Stonewall analysis area is in volume 2, appendix C. Actions that overlap the roadless areas include: Helena National Forest, Lincoln Ranger District: · Helena National Forest Roadside Hazard Tree Removal · Blackfoot North Divide Winter Travel Planning · Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter) · Alice Creek Wildlife Enhancement Project · Dry Creek Prescribed Fire · Southwest Crown Weed Treatments · Grazing Allotments (ongoing) Flathead National Forest, Spotted Bear Ranger District: · Soldier Addition II EA · Spotted Bear River Project Lewis and Clark National Forest, Rocky Mountain Ranger District: · Benchmark Fuels EA · Rocky Mountain Ranger District Travel Plan EIS, Badger Two Medicine Area · Rocky Mountain Ranger District Travel Plan EIS, Birch Creek South Area Lolo National Forest · Dick Creek Fuels · Swan Face Prescribed Burn Affected Environment Existing Condition Fire suppression and moist growing conditions through much of this century resulted in a loss of open forest conditions and seral species (aspen, ponderosa pine and western larch). This has created a uniform landscape comprised of dense forests susceptible to insect and wildfire mortality (Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine). In addition, a large-scale mountain pine beetle epidemic has killed most of the mature lodgepole pine and ponderosa pine. These conditions are elevating fuel levels, which poses a wildfire threat to nearby homes and communities in the wildland urban interface (WUI). Inventoried Roadless Areas The Stonewall Vegetation Project boundary encompasses portions of two IRAs, the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA (#A1485) and the Lincoln Gulch IRA (#1601). The portion of the BMSS IRA managed by the Lincoln Ranger District of the Helena National Forest is 53,995 acres in size and the project area overlaps with 12,254 acres. The Lincoln Gulch IRA is 8,246 acres in size and the project area overlaps with 3,193 acres (table 152 and figure 86). Table 152. Inventoried Roadless Area Acreage Name of IRA Total Acres in IRA* Total Acres in IRA managed by the Lincoln Ranger District Acres of IRA within the Stonewall Project Boundary Percent of total IRA acres within the Stonewall Project Boundary Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan 866,330 *53,995 12,254 1.4 Lincoln Gulch 17,261 17,261 3,193 18.5 Totals 883,591 71,256 15,447 1.7 *Portion of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA managed by the Helena National Forest, Lincoln Ranger District. Total acreage of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA managed by the Flathead, Helena, Lolo and Lewis and Clark National Forests is 866,330 acres (USDA Forest Service 1986, FEIS Appendix C-3).Figure 86. Associated inventoried roadless areas Title: Associated Inventoried Roadless Areas - Description: Map displays the Stonewall Vegetation Project boundary, and the Bear Marshall-Scapegoat Swan and Lincoln Gulch Inventoried Roadless Areas in conjunction with the project area. The Helena National Forest Plan established Forestwide multiple-use goals, objectives, and management area requirements as well as management area prescriptions. Roadless areas are well distributed throughout the Forest and managed to provide semi-primitive recreation opportunities (USDA Forest Service 1986a). The analysis of roadless lands, documented in Appendix C of the FEIS for the Forest Plan, described each roadless area, the resources and values considered, the range of alternative land uses studied, and the effects of management under each alternative (USDA Forest Service 1986b). As a result of the analysis, some roadless areas were recommended for inclusion in the National Wilderness Preservation System and others were assigned various nonwilderness prescriptions. The portion of the BMSS IRA that is within the project area is assigned primarily to Management Area (MA) M1 and W1 with small areas of T1, T3, and T4 along the southern edge of the IRA. The portion of the Lincoln Gulch IRA that is within the project area is assigned primarily to MA T3 with small areas of W1, T1, T2, and M1 (figure 87).  Title: Management Areas and Inventoried Roadless Areas - Description: Map showing the Stonewall Vegetation Project Management Areas with the Inventoried Roadless Area overlayFigure 87. Management areas in the inventoried roadless areas Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA The Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan Inventoried Roadless Area is located in the Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem. This roadless area surrounds the Bob Marshall, Great Bear and Scapegoat wilderness areas. It also contains portions of the Swan Mountain Range north of the Bob Marshall Wilderness. The Flathead, Helena, Lolo and Lewis and Clark National Forests manage this large roadless area, which provides habitat for many wildlife species including, grizzly bear and black bear, cougar, lynx, fisher, marten, elk, whitetail deer and mule deer, wolf, moose, mountain goat, and bighorn sheep. The higher elevations provide important summer range habitat for big game species. The Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan Inventoried Roadless Area is especially important to many members of the public because of its proximity to other wilderness areas, providing the opportunities for expansive hiking backpacking, hunting, cross-country skiing and equestrian travel. Livestock grazing, motorized recreation, timber harvesting, and oil and gas development represent other uses (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C3 – C5).Access to the Scapegoat Wilderness from the south requires travel through the Stonewall portion of this roadless area. Roadless Area Characteristics The roadless area encompasses 12 different locations; the Stonewall Mountain area, managed by the Lincoln Ranger District, is located along the southern boundary of the Scapegoat Wilderness. Most of the area west of Stonewall Mountain and Copper Creek is very steep and rocky. The area east of Stonewall Mountain to Copper Creek is steep and well-timbered on north facing slopes. It contains open growing stands of timber with small grassland parks on south and west facing slopes. Elevations range from 4,900 feet in the Blackfoot Valley to 9,411 feet on Red Mountain Snowmobilers use the Stonewall Mountain Trail to travel to the Upper Copper Creek Basin and use the Alice Creek/ Lewis and Clark Pass area. Most of the drainage bottoms have access trails with the Reservoir Lake Trail in Arrastra Creek receiving the most use (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C10-C-11). Wilderness Attributes Following is a list of the specific Wilderness Attributes defined in Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 1909.12 (72.1) – Wilderness Evaluation. The Roadless Area Characteristics defined in 36 CFR 294.11 – Roadless Area Conservation, Final Rule are also incorporated into the following descriptions: Wilderness Attributes and Roadless Area Characteristics Crosswalk in the Roadless Analysis Methodology section. The descriptive paragraphs that follow are from the analysis of roadless lands conducted by the Helena National Forest in 1986 during development of the Forest Plan. Following those paragraphs are descriptions of activities and changes that have occurred since the Forest Plan was developed. Natural – The extent to which long-term ecological processes are intact and operating Most of the plant and animal species that existed in this roadless area when the Lewis and Clark Expedition passed south of here nearly 200 years ago are still present. Most mammal species present then are still present now; however, some are considered threatened or endangered. The integrity of the fisheries has been altered by the stocking of grayling and rainbow trout, however, many miles of unaltered cutthroat streams remain. Some invasive plant species, such as spotted knapweed, leafy spurge, thistle, and clover have been introduced accidentally into the area through livestock use. These species are mainly along the trails. Off-trail, the plant community has changed little except for successional changes and those brought about by naturally occurring fires. To the untrained eye, the natural appearance of this area is high (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-11). Fire suppression and moist growing conditions through much of this century resulted in a loss of open forest conditions and seral species (aspen, ponderosa pine and western larch). This has created a uniform landscape comprised of dense forests susceptible to insect and wildfire mortality (Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine). In addition, a large-scale mountain pine beetle epidemic has killed most of the mature lodgepole pine and ponderosa pine. These vegetative changes have impacted fish and wildlife habitat, and spotted knapweed is present within the IRA, however, the IRA generally continues to provide high quality soil, water and air; diversity of plant and animal communities; and habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate, and sensitive species, and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land. See additional discussion of the roadless resources in volume 2, appendix D of this DEIS, Stonewall Roadless Characteristics Worksheet and in specific resource sections. Undeveloped – The degree to which development and uses are apparent to most visitors Human activities in some areas are evident, although most impacts are concentrated along road corridors and the exterior boundaries. In other areas, the only disruptions are trails, which access the adjacent Wilderness areas (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-11). There is some evidence of non-energy mineral mining exploration that occurred in the Cotter Basin, Copper Camp, Alice Creek and Stonewall Creek areas. Most of this activity lies on the fringes of the area. There are old roads associated with these activities and evidence of past earth moving activities is present. Some clearcuts are in the Alice Creek, Beaver Creek, and Arrastra Creek Drainages, along the edge of the roadless area. Silver King Lookout is the only Forest Service maintained structure in the area. One special use cabin is located in the Alice Creek drainage, as well as fences used for controlling livestock. Seismic exploration has occurred here in recent years (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-21). Since the 1986 analysis of roadless lands, The Helena National Forest, consistent with Forest Plan direction, has continued harvest and fuels activities within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, as shown in table 153 that follows. These activities have contributed to some evidence of human access within the IRA; however, the IRA has generally retains the undeveloped characteristics described above. Table 153. Past harvest and fuel activities since 1986 in the portion of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA managed by the Helena National Forest Activity Acres within IRA Prescribed Burning 5,869 Wildfire 433 Fuels Treatment (yarding, rearranging, piling) 1,587 Thinning (hazardous fuels reduction) 1,551 Range Improvement 871 Timber Harvest (stand clearcut, shelterwood establishment cut, single tree selection cut, sanitation salvage, precommercial thin) 271 Reforestation Needs Created by Fire 1,203 Reforestation/Planting/Regeneration activities 1,657 TOTAL 13,309 *Data from “SWCumEffectsPastHarFuActivitiesIRAs_080911.xlsx” Acres rounded for display Outstanding opportunities for solitude or primitive unconfined recreation – Solitude is a personal, subjective value defined as the isolation from sights, sounds, and presence of others and from developments and evidence of humans. Primitive recreation is characterized by meeting nature on its own terms, without comfort and convenience of facilities. In general, the BMSS IRA possesses high opportunities for solitude because of its size and the influence of the adjacent Bob Marshall, Great Bear and Scapegoat wilderness areas. Much of it contains highly dissected topography that easily screens people from one another in a short distance. Some portions are influenced by adjacent roads and other developments. The Stonewall area possesses very high opportunities for solitude. Screening of the more developed areas occurs over most of the area. Sounds of vehicles, chainsaws, and logging activity are screened from most of the area due to the topography and lay of the terrain. The area offers high opportunities for primitive recreation. A variety of topography challenges the visitor with its high mountaintops and steep valleys. The large size of the area offers the opportunity to get away from the man-influenced environment and experience excellent primitive recreation activities such as fishing, camping, hunting, backpacking, hiking, and horseback riding. People nationwide are attracted by the outstanding hunting and backcountry experiences here and in the adjacent wildernesses (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C11-12). The Stonewall area offers a variety of topographic features to challenge the visitor. The high peaks, steep slopes, flat valley bottoms, and numerous streams, offer a different primitive recreation experience to visitors (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-21). Recreational activities such as hunting, camping, hiking, off-highway vehicle (OHV) travel on primitive roads, and snowmobiling and cross-country skiing in the winter continue to be the primary recreation activities occurring within the IRA. Recreational use of the area has increased over time along with the corresponding increase in population and popularity of outdoor recreational activities. Implementation of various forest management activities and the associated increased presence of people, vehicles and associated noise over the years may have temporarily affected the opportunities for solitude and primitive and unconfined recreation. The IRA continues to provide outstanding opportunities for solitude and primitive recreation. The area has become highly valued due to its proximity to the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex, and its location within the Southwest Crown of the Continent, an area that links the Canadian Rockies with the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem and the Selway-Bitteroot Wilderness areas to the south. Special features and values – Unique ecological, geographical, scenic, and historical features of an area The Stonewall area is also noted for other features. Red Mountain is the highest peak from Lincoln to Glacier National Park, rising 9,411 feet above sea level. It is one of the few sites in the United States where limber pine and whitebark pine grow together. The Red Mountain Research Natural Area (RNA) is located approximately 3 miles north of the Stonewall Project area. The Lewis and Clark Trail passes up Alice Creek over Lewis and Clark Pass. This is of historical interest to many Forest users. The area also supports a small herd of Rocky Mountain goats near Red Mountain (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-22). Manageability – The ability to manage an area for wilderness consideration and maintain wilderness attributes. Because this area surrounds the Bob Marshall, Great Bear and Scapegoat Wilderness Complex, it consists of several long, narrow segments that are usually separated by road corridors. The boundary along the adjacent wilderness areas are usually well defined by high ridges and major topographic features. Other boundaries parallel existing roads or land survey lines which are sometimes difficult to identify (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-12). The Stonewall area is large enough and the topography is such that any person visiting the area would gain the feeling that they are in a natural area free from human activities and development. The high peaks afford the viewer with vistas of part of the Scapegoat Wilderness mountain ranges and many of the major drainages in the district. Some distant roads and timber harvesting areas can be seen from these high points (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C21). Lincoln Gulch IRA – Roadless Area Characteristics and Wilderness Attributes The Lincoln Gulch IRA is located approximately 6 miles northwest of Lincoln, MT. The area includes the Ward Creek, Arrastra Creek, and Lincoln Gulch drainages. The terrain is characterized by very steep and timbered slopes. Arrastra Creek, the major drainage, runs northeast to southwest and roughly divides the area in half. The elevation ranges from 4,800 feet on the west side near Patterson Prairie to 7,432 feet on the summit of Black Mountain. The steep terrain confines most use to ridgetops and stream bottoms (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-55). Wildlife species include elk, mule deer, whitetail deer, black bear, cougar, grizzly bear, wolverine, lynx, bobcat, coyote, other furbearers, numerous grouse species, and several nongame animals and birds. Deer and elk winter range is located along the southwest boundary (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-55). Recreation use of the area revolves around big game hunting. There are no lakes or major attractions, such as high mountain peaks, to attract large numbers of recreationists (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-55). Natural – The extent to which long-term ecological processes are intact and operating Most of the area has had little human influence. The naturalness of the area is similar to that described above for the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, with the exception of trail related impacts, since there are no trails within the Lincoln Gulch IRA. Undeveloped – The degree to which development and uses are apparent to most visitors The only disturbance within the area has been from scattered mining activity. The mining activity includes a ditch used for placer mining, which winds through the eastern finger of the area and terminates just south of the area at the old Lincoln Town site. The ditch was built at the turn of the century and has since been reclaimed by nature (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-56). There are several clearcuts adjacent to the area in the Lincoln Gulch and Beaver Creek drainages. An old logging road, which is no longer drivable, follows the bottom of Arrastra Creek about 200 yards into the area (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-56). Based on a recent review of management activities implemented by the Helena National Forest, no harvest or fuels activities have been conducted within the Lincoln Gulch IRA. Ongoing activities in the area include noxious weed treatments and livestock grazing. The area remains undeveloped. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or primitive unconfined recreation – Solitude is a personal, subjective value defined as the isolation from sights, sounds, and presence of others and from developments and evidence of humans. Primitive recreation is characterized by meeting nature on its own terms, without comfort and convenience of facilities. Even though this area is relatively small, it has a very high opportunity for solitude, due to rugged terrain that secludes the visitor from most outside disturbance. Occasional sounds of motorized vehicles or chainsaws can be heard. These sounds are associated with mining, logging, and hunting. The mining and logging would affect the area from spring breakup in May until early winter. Human activity is well dispersed throughout the area because there are no major attractions such as lakes to draw recreation use (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-56). This area provides excellent primitive recreation opportunities. Because of the heavy timber and lack of trails, there is no motorized access into the area. Hunting and hiking are the main recreation uses. Horseback riding is limited due to topography and vegetative cover. The Lone-Point-Black Mountain ridge provides most of the horseback riding opportunity in this area (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-56). Hunting and hiking continue to be the primary recreation activities within the IRA. Recreational use of the area has increased over time along with the corresponding increase in population and popularity of outdoor recreational activities. Very few Forest management activities have been implemented and the IRA continues to provide outstanding opportunities for solitude and primitive recreation. Special features and values – Unique ecological, geographical, scenic, and historical features of an area. Elk are abundant within this area and it has historically been a productive and primitive hunting area. Lincoln Gulch provides a large big game security area and the rugged terrain gives a hunter a unique challenge (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-57). Manageability – The ability to manage an area for wilderness consideration and maintain wilderness attributes. The entire area is on National Forest System land. There are presently no grazing permits or developments in the area. Conflicts might arise between wilderness use and mining or oil and gas exploration (USDA Forest Service 1986b, FEIS Appendix C-57). Other Unroaded Areas Geographical Information System (GIS) information was used to assess the Stonewall Project area to determine the extent of other unroaded areas located outside of the inventoried roadless areas. A majority of the project area outside of the IRAs is within 1/8- mile of existing roads. Unroaded areas exist adjacent to the southern boundary of the Lincoln Gulch IRA (two areas approximately 400-600 acres in size, intersected by unit 77), adjacent to the southern boundary of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA (several areas approximately 80-200 acres in size, intersected by units 79 and 86), and adjacent to the Forest boundary along the southern boundary of the project area (an area approximately 300 acres in size, intersected by units 46, 47, and 75). The unroaded lands adjacent to the IRAs have similar roadless characteristics and wilderness attributes as those described above and are considered in this analysis. The small area along the southern project boundary does not meet the inventory criteria in FSH 1909.12 71.1 and is not considered further in this analysis (USDA Forest Service 2010a). Environmental Consequences Alternative 1 – No Action Alternative Direct and Indirect Effects If the no action alternative is chosen, the proposed regeneration harvests, intermediate harvests, precommercial thinning and prescribed burning would not be implemented within the project area. There would be no direct effects from proposed activities to roadless resources. However, there would be a chance of an indirect effect under alternative 1, as the ecosystem restoration and fuel reduction project would not occur, and the risk of severe wildfire would remain. In the long term, this may result in indirect effects to roadless resources potentially resulting in changes to the recreation setting or scenic quality of the project area. An effect to wilderness attributes from taking no action would be to Naturalness (the extent to which long-term ecological processes are intact and operating). Fire would not be reintroduced into this fire-adapted ecosystem, fire suppression efforts would continue and the risk of large, severe wildfires would remain. This may detract from the characteristic of “naturalness” throughout the area, since conditions would not allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Cumulative Effects There are no known cumulative effects to roadless resources from the no action alternative. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources In the no action alternative, there would be no irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources relevant to the roadless resources within the project area. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action Under alternative 2, 8,562 acres are proposed for treatment. The proposed actions, outside of the IRAs, include using both commercial and noncommercial treatments to achieve the desired condition. These actions would include: regeneration harvests, intermediate harvests, precommercial thinnings, and prescribed burning. Implementing the proposed action could include the use of chainsaws, feller bunchers, and cable logging equipment. Approximately 2.5 miles of road would be built for project use then obliterated immediately following timber removal. Post treatment activities would include underburning, site preparation burning, jackpot burning, hand piling/ burning, tree planting, and monitoring of natural regeneration. The only action proposed within the two IRAs (BMSS and Lincoln Gulch) is prescribed fire and the associated hand slashing of small diameter trees. Commercial harvest and road construction would not occur in the two roadless areas. Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The FUEL-3 project design feature is relevant to minimizing unauthorized motorized use associated with proposed activities within roadless areas. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to all action alternatives. Direct and Indirect Effects – Roadless Resources The activities proposed within the IRAs include construction of fire-lines, hand slashing of small diameter trees and prescribed fire. Table 154 shows the units and treatments proposed within the roadless expanse: Table 154. Alternative 2 - Proposed treatment within inventoried roadless areas UNIT NUMBER ALTERNATIVE 2 – PROPOSED ACTION – TREATMENT DESCRIPTION ROADLESS AREA 76 123 acres, Description Group 6 – Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 Acres Lincoln Gulch IRA 77 541 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Lincoln Gulch IRA and unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA 79 257 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA and unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA 80 280 acres, Description Group 7 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 5, 10, or 20 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #418 81 607 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA 82 776 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #417,418 83 457 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #417 84 806 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #485 85 87 acres, Description Group 6 – Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #485 86 10 acres, Description Group 7 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 5, 10, or 20 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA and unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA UNIT NUMBER ALTERNATIVE 2 – PROPOSED ACTION – TREATMENT DESCRIPTION ROADLESS AREA 87 36 acres, Description Group 7 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 5, 10, or 20 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA 88 865 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA Effects to Roadless Area Characteristics and Wilderness Attributes for IRAs and Contiguous Unroaded Lands Roadless Areas: The Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) is 866,330 acres and managed by the Helena, Lewis and Clark, Lolo and Flathead National Forests. The portion of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA managed by the Lincoln Ranger District of the Helena National Forest covers 53,995 acres, and the Stonewall Vegetation Project area overlaps with 12,254 acres. The Lincoln Gulch IRA covers 8,246 acres, and the Stonewall Vegetation Project area overlaps with 3,193 acres. Natural – Reintroducing fire into this fire adapted ecosystem would begin reversing the trends caused from past fire suppression and reduce the risk of large, severe wildfires. This would enhance the characteristic of “naturalness” throughout the area, by establishing forest characteristics that would have been more typical of this area if fire had been allowed to play its natural role in landscape processes. Management-ignited prescribed fire, however, is a form of “modern human control or manipulation” and would to some extent affect the “untrammeled” and natural character within the roadless areas. There is disagreement about whether the effects of additional management actions such as prescribed fire (i.e. trammeling) to correct the effects of previous management actions such as the suppression of natural fire (i.e.: trammeling) is appropriate (Yung, undated). The proposed action would enhance or help to maintain the roadless resources including high quality soil, water and air; diversity of plant and animal communities; and habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate, and sensitive species, and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land. Undeveloped – There would be little evidence that the fires were initiated as a management tool versus natural ignition. The fire hand lines would create a linear disturbance within the roadless area. Stumps from the hand slashing of small diameter trees may remain visible for several seasons following the prescribed fire, which may detract from the undeveloped character for visitors traveling through the roadless area. There are also concerns that the hand lines could encourage unauthorized motorized use. Design features are in place to obliterate fire handlines adjacent to or that intersect existing roads and trails to reduce the potential for unauthorized motorized use (see project design feature: FUEL-3). Blackened trees from the prescribed burning would be noticeable; however, fire is a natural process and should not affect the roadless integrity. The proposed prescribed fire would help ensure the forest maintains a visual appearance characteristic of a wildfire within its natural regime as opposed to an unnaturally intense wildfire, thereby enhancing or helping to maintain the roadless characteristic of natural appearing landscapes with high scenic integrity. The creation of openings in the forest from low and mixed severity prescribed fire ranging from 5 to 75 acres in size would create a visually appealing mosaic in the landscape, enhancing the overall existing landscape character. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or primitive unconfined recreation – There may be short-term effects to “solitude” within the project area during project implementation due to the presence of Forest personnel managing the prescribed fire and noise associated with the use of chainsaws for the hand slashing of small diameter trees. The proposed activities would not affect opportunities for “primitive and unconfined type of recreation.” See additional discussion of the roadless resources in Attachment 1: Stonewall Roadless Characteristics Worksheet. Special features and values – The proposed action would not affect the special features or values of the BMSS IRA because there are no special features within the Stonewall project area. The proposed action would maintain the productive and primitive Elk hunting opportunities within the Lincoln Gulch IRA for approximately15-20 years and enhance these opportunities in the long term. Hand lines within sites could alter historic and prehistoric sites. Manageability – Overall, the effects to wilderness character within the IRAs would be minor and short term. The proposed action would not affect the suitability of the area for designation as Wilderness pursuant to the Wilderness Act of 1964. Table D-1 in volume 2, appendix D displays effects to roadless characteristics. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources In alternative 2, proposed action, there would be no irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources relevant to the roadless resources within the project area. Alternative 3 The actions proposed in alternative 3 differ from those of alternative 2 - proposed action, relevant to the analysis of roadless resources. The relevant changes include fewer units proposed for prescribed fire and hand slashing of small diameter trees within the IRAs. Alternative 3 has no activities planned within the Lincoln Gulch IRA or in the unroaded lands contiguous to this IRA and proposes fewer units for treatment in the BMSS IRA. The relevant unit changes in alternative 3 are: Units 76 and 77 proposed for prescribed fire are removed from the Lincoln Gulch IRA and the unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA. The mixed severity prescribed fire proposed for unit 80 is changed to unit 80a, Jackpot burn; and units 81 and 86 of mixed severity prescribed fire are removed from the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA and the unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA. Direct and Indirect Effects Alternative 3 proposes construction of fire handlines, hand slashing of small diameter trees and prescribed fire within the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA and unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA. There are no actions proposed within the Lincoln Gulch IRA or the unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA in alternative 3. Table 155 shows the units and treatments proposed within the roadless expanse:  Table 155. Alternative 3 - proposed treatment within inventoried roadless areas Unit Number Alternative 3 – Treatment Description Roadless Area 79 257 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA and unroaded area contiguous to the IRA 80a 280 acres, Description Group 9 – Low Severity Prescribed Fire Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #418 82 776 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #417,418 83 457 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #417 84 806 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #485 85 87 acres, Description Group 6 – Low Severity Prescribed Fire to Create Mortality Patches 5 to 10 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA, Trail #485 87 36 acres, Description Group 7 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 5, 10, or 20 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA 88 865 acres, Description Group 8 – Mixed Severity Fire to Create Mortality Patches up to 30 or 75 Acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA Effects to Roadless Area Characteristics and Wilderness Attributes for IRAs and Contiguous Unroaded Lands Alternative 3 does not propose any treatment within the Lincoln Gulch IRA or unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA, therefore, the impacts would be the same as described in alternative 1- no action. The impacts from alternative 3 on the BMSS IRA and unroaded lands contiguous to the IRA would be the same as described in alternative 2, proposed action, but would occur on fewer acres due to the elimination of the mixed severity prescribed fire in units 81 and 86. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources In alternative 3, there would be no irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources relevant to the roadless resources within the project area. Cumulative Effects Common to All Action Alternatives Cumulative effects to roadless resources were considered within the entire 866,330-acre BMSS IRA that is managed by the Helena, Flathead, Lolo, and Lewis and Clark National Forests, the entire 17,261 acre Lincoln Gulch IRA and the unroaded lands contiguous to the IRAs. Potential cumulative effects to roadless resources are related to other activities occurring within the roadless expanse that have the potential to impact roadless area characteristics or wilderness attributes. Cumulative impacts to roadless resources would result if other activities take place during implementation of the Stonewall Vegetation project, or until vegetation growth obscures the visible stumps from the hand slashing of small diameter trees and hand firelines, approximately 3-5 years. Past harvest and fuel activities (1954-2010) have been conducted on approximately 74,972 acres across the 866,330 acre BMSS IRA that is managed by four National Forests (37,288 on the Flathead NF; 13,888 on the Helena NF; 17,767 on the Lewis and Clark NF; and, 6,029 on the Lolo NF), or 8.6 percent of the total IRA acreage (see volume 2, appendix C, table C-6). Recreational activities such as hunting, camping, hiking, off-highway vehicle (OHV) travel on primitive roads, and snowmobiling and cross-country skiing in the winter would continue within the analysis area. Other ongoing and reasonably foreseeable activities that would be occurring within the analysis area include hazard tree removal, weed treatments, trail maintenance, commercial guided recreation, and ongoing use of grazing allotments. All of these activities, when added to the activities proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project have the potential to cumulatively affect the roadless values and wilderness attributes within the analysis area. The primary effects would be due to the increased presence of people, vehicles and associated noise that would directly affect solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation. The long-term impacts of other ongoing and reasonably foreseeable activities, such as noxious weed treatment and hazard tree removal, when added to the activities proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project, have the potential to cumulatively impact the natural and undeveloped characteristics by causing changes to the scenic qualities within the project area and creating a setting where “resource modifications and utilization practices are evident, but harmonize with the natural environment” as indicated in a Roaded Natural ROS setting. Most of these effects would be beneficial because they would increase the resiliency of forest conditions and reduce the risk of potential negative impacts from severe wildfire, therefore, maintaining the roadless and wilderness qualities that are currently valued by the public. A list of past, present and foreseeable actions relevant to the cumulative effects analysis for roadless resources within the Stonewall analysis area is in volume 2, appendix C, table C-7. Summary of Effects for All Alternatives Alternative 1, no action would have no direct or cumulative effects to roadless resources. The purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project “… improving the mix of vegetation and structure across the landscape so that it is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects; modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape; enhancing and restoring aspen, western larch and ponderosa pine species and habitats; utilizing the economic value of trees through removal; and integrating restoration with socioeconomic considerations” would not be addressed. Potential long-term indirect effects to roadless resources would be due to the ongoing risk of severe wildfire that could lead to changes in the recreation settings, visual qualities and naturalness within the roadless expanse. In alternative 2, prescribed fire is proposed within IRAs to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 4,182 acres (about 0.5 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan IRA and on 664 acres (about 3.8 percent) within the Lincoln Gulch IRA. The proposed action would have short-term direct impacts to roadless resources during project implementation such as increased presence of people and noise within the project area. Project design features are in place to limit potential effects. The proposed treatments would address the purpose and need for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, resulting in a more diverse, resilient and sustainable forest ecosystem with a reduction in risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire. The long-term indirect effects from alternative 2 to roadless resources would be generally beneficial and help to maintain the existing recreation settings and scenic qualities within the project area. Impacts would be stable or improving for a majority of roadless area characteristics and wilderness attributes with short-term impacts to the undeveloped character from the hand slashing of small diameter trees and construction of hand fire lines, short-term impacts to solitude during project implementation, and potential adverse effects to cultural resources. Cumulative effects to roadless resources would generally be short term and related to an increased presence of people, vehicles and the associated noise that may affect solitude. In alternative 3, prescribed fire is proposed within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan IRA to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. Prescribed fire is proposed on 3,565 acres (about 0.4 percent) within the Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan IRA. The Lincoln Gulch IRA would not be treated. The effects of alternative 3 relative to roadless resources would be similar to those described for alternative 2, but the impacts would occur on fewer acres. There would be no impacts to the Lincoln Gulch IRA and fewer acres treated within the BMSS IRA. The alternative comparison summary in chapter 2 provides a comparison of effects from project activities by alternative for roadless resources. Cumulatively there may be short-term impacts to solitude and undeveloped character with long-term benefits to naturalness throughout the IRA. Additional management activities within the IRA including travel planning, weed treatments and livestock grazing would also occur. These activities are compatible with the management of roadless resources and may cumulatively represent short-term impacts to solitude throughout the IRA due to the presence of people. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans The proposed alternatives are consistent with the following: · Helena National Forest Plan 1986, Management Goals for Management Areas: M-1, T-1, T-2, T-3, T-4, and W-1. · Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 1909.12 (72.1) – Wilderness Evaluation, that provides definitions for the wilderness attributes of Inventoried Roadless Areas. · 36 CFR 294.11 – Roadless Area Conservation, Final Rule and related Secretary’s Memorandum 1042-155 and 1042-156. · Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2300 – Recreation, Wilderness and Related Resource Management, guides management of recreation and wilderness resources on National Forest System lands. As of March 2, 2012, the 2001 Roadless Rule is in full effect after Judge Brimmer (Wyoming) lifted his injunction on the Rule (see the “Roadless Analysis Background and Direction” section in the Inventoried Roadless Area section), The Stonewall project complies with the 2001 Roadless rule, as follows: d. The cutting, sale, or removal of generally small diameter timber is needed for one of the following purposes and would maintain or improve one or more of the roadless area characteristics as defined in § 294.11. To maintain or restore the characteristics of ecosystem composition and structure, such as to reduce the risk of uncharacteristic wildfire effects, within the range of variability that would be expected to occur under natural disturbance regimes of the current climatic period (36 CFR 294.13(b)(1)(ii)). e. The cutting, sale, or removal of timber is incidental to the implementation of a management activity not otherwise prohibited by this subpart (36 CFR 294.13(b)(2)). The cutting of generally small diameter timber is needed to implement the proposed prescribed fire treatments. Consistent with 36 CFR 294.13(b)(1)(ii), prescribed fire is proposed within the Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRA) to promote ecological restoration of a mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape. The proposed actions would enhance or help to maintain the roadless characteristics, as defined in 36 CFR 294.11, including high quality soil, water and air; diversity of plant and animal communities; and habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate, and sensitive species, and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land, and natural appearing landscapes with high scenic quality. Consistent with 36 CFR 294.13 (b)(2), the cutting of generally small diameter timber is incidental to the implementation of the proposed prescribed fire, a management activity that is not otherwise prohibited by the Roadless Rule.Scenery Introduction The Forest Plan uses Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs) when setting objectives to manage the viewed landscape. The VQOs were determined using the Visual Management System (VMS) framework found in Agricultural Handbook (AH) 462, “National Forest Landscape Management Volume 2, Chapter 1, The Visual Management System”. Components of VMS used when analyzing effects from management activity on the visual resource are discussed in the Methodology section of this analysis. All VMS components referred to in this analysis are defined in the Glossary section. The Visuals Report (Bonnett 2012) was completed to determine compliance with the direction found in the Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans. Overview of Issues Addressed Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on the visual resource were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Indicators Indicators are defined to analyze data regarding the potential for impacts to scenery from project activities. · A landscape analyses should be completed to show the changes that would occur from the proposed actions. What are the visual impacts? · Measure: Effects to visual resources analyzed and VQO forest plan compliance disclosed. · A feathering of Timber harvest along the existing straight line harvested areas would benefit the existing visual condition. Property lines adjoining private inholdings, state and BLM lands should be considered for this type of timber harvest also. · Measure: Design features incorporated to reduce the appearance of lines in units adjoining private inholdings, state and BLM lands to meet the visual quality objectives. The public also submitted comments to consider effects of activities on the Continental Divide National Scenic Trail (CDNST) corridor. The CDNST lies outside the project area and no activities are proposed within a 5-mile distance of the CDNST. Additional comments from the public included the visual benefits of dead trees verses clearcuts as a personal preference and that smoke from burning reduces visibility and diminishes the appreciation for scenic vistas. Assumptions for viewing preferences were based on information in Forest Service handbooks and considered in this analysis. Smoke, reducing visibility within a viewshed, is short term, lasting only the duration of the burn. Therefore, the effect is considered minimal.   Title: Stonewall Visual Resource Base Map - Description: Stonewall visual resource map depicting visual quality objectives by management areas within the Stonewall Vegetation Project area.Figure 88. Stonewall Project visual resource Methodology The Forest used the Visual Management System (VMS) framework to develop their Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs). The VQOs are used as standards and guidelines when managing the visual resource. The VQO refers to “degree of acceptable alteration of the characteristic landscape” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 46). Acceptable alteration is analyzed qualitatively using “degree of alteration” and “duration of impact” components from the “Visual Management System” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 28 and 30). In addition, degree of acceptable alteration is determined through the use of other agency handbooks, and professional experience and judgment based on expected outcomes of similar activities elsewhere on the Forest. The current insect conditions (mountain pine beetle epidemic and high levels of western spruce budworm) found in the project area allow the opportunity for the rehabilitation management goal to be used when managing the visual resource (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 28 and 40). A detailed description of the method used when evaluating the visual resource to disclose effects and determine Forest Plan compliance follows. This methodology was developed under consultation with and approved by the Forest landscape architect. Seen area was determined per Forest Plan direction. The Forest Plan and information from the Forest landscape architect were used to identify sensitive travel routes, use areas, and water bodies used when determining seen area. The term sensitive area is used throughout this document when referring to sensitive travel routes, use areas, and water bodies. Forest Geographical Information System (GIS) layers and the Helena National Forest America’s Great Outdoors Montana 2006 map were used to locate these sensitive areas on a map used for field reconnaissance. All sensitive areas considered when determining seen area are listed in Table 156. ArcMap GIS was used to display distance zones (foreground, middleground, and background) from sensitive areas when determining seen area. Distance zones of foreground, middleground, and background, are defined in the Glossary section. In addition, views from private lands were considered when determining project seen area. When evaluating effects the most restrictive distance was assigned to a unit if the unit was viewed in more than one distance zone. Table 156 also shows the expected viewed distance zones and seen areas from the sensitive areas. Also, topographic relief displayed on field maps was used to assist in determining seen area during field reconnaissance. Views of the project area were photo documented and are displayed in this section. The Forest Plan adopted VQO acres for the project area were determined using the Forest VQO GIS layer in conjunction with addition direction per management area found in the Forest Plan. These VQOs are shown on figure 88. GIS analysis was used to determine VQO acres viewed within the project seen area. Effects from management activities are disclosed. Anticipated changes in the unit’s attributes (basic vegetation patterns, rock formations, and water forms) elements (line, form, color, and texture) were considered when determining direct and indirect effects of viewed management activity (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 8). This information was then used to determine Forest Plan VQO compliance. Cumulative effects were described in terms of changes in the characteristic landscape attributes (basic vegetation patterns, rock formations, and water forms). Existing viewed disturbances were documented to be used in the appropriate sections in the Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences sections of this analysis. Viewed management activities were analyzed to determine Forest Plan compliance. Distance zones were used when describing the viewed landscape being evaluated (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 7). Management area direction listed under the Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans section was considered for compliance. Whether the activity stayed within the “degree of alteration” and “duration of impact” acceptable range for the VQO from the perspective of the casual forest visitor was determined (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 28 through 32). The acceptable “degree of alteration” for a VQO was determined by comparing expected visual contrast with the surrounding natural landscape (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 28). The “duration of impact” was determined from estimating the length of time a management activity is expected to be visually evident to the casual Forest visitor (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 30). Design features were developed to reduce impacts to an acceptable level if it was determined the impacts would not allow the VQO to be met in the short-term. Design features were developed to decrease the time the disturbance would be viewed in the landscape and to assure Forest Plan compliance. If the short-term timeframe was not initially met upon implementation of an activity but it was possible to implement a design feature within that same short-term timeframe that allowed the VQO to be met in the long-term time frame then the VQO was considered met. This decision was based on the use of “should” in VMS when describing duration of impact for each VQO (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 30, 32, 34, and 36) and (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. II/14). In units where the proposed activity is expected to restore an undesirable visual impact to a desired visual quality, the rehabilitation goal was used (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 28). With the rehabilitation goal, VQO compliance was determined by first projecting the final outcome of the implementation of the design feature. Then a determination was made as to whether this expected outcome would achieve the assigned VQO. If the design feature applied allowed the disturbance to be minimized to an acceptable level for the VQO within the long-term timeframe of 20 years, then compliance was achieved (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. II/14). Twenty years is used as the long-term timeframe because it could take 20 years before new vegetation fills in created openings allowing areas to blend back into the landscape. Design features were also developed to allow the VQO to be met in the shortest timeframe allowing the desired visual quality to be achieved in the case where the rehabilitation goal is used (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 40). If design features could not be designed and implemented within the VQO “duration of impact” short-term timeframe, then the VQO would be considered not met (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 30). In determining design features the following were considered: · Professional Experience · Agriculture Handbook (AH) Numbers 434, 608, 462, 559, and 483 for technical guidance. · Forest specialists input · “Northern Region Scenic Resource Mitigation Menu & Design Considerations for Vegetation Treatments” dated March 12, 2009 (unpublished document) The inventory roadless areas (IRAs) scenic attribute is analyzed in the Inventory Roadless Area Report (Valentine 2012a). This section analyzes the VQOs of these areas where management activity is proposed. Indicators The viewed VQO assigned through the Forest Plan within seen areas provided the primary qualitative analysis indicator when determining direct and indirect effects. Consideration of an activity’s “duration of impact” and “degree of alternation” within the viewed VQO also provided qualitative analysis indicators. The degree of acceptable alteration (“degree of alteration” and “duration of impact”) for each VQO was determined considering natural disturbances found in the characteristic landscape (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 27-28). The size of a management activity is compared to the size of similar natural activities expected in the landscape. Activities mimicking natural disturbances or simulating vegetation patterns found or expected to be found in the landscape are said to be viewed similarly to their natural counterparts by the casual forest visitor. “Duration of impact is discussed in more detail in the Temporal Boundaries section of this report. Changes in the characteristic landscape attributes, when considering past, present, and reasonably foreseeable activities (natural or manmade) within all seen areas, provided the qualitative analysis indicator when determining cumulative effects. Viewed VQO acres within distances of sensitive areas affected by management activities were determined in order to provide additional quantitative analysis indicators for alternative comparisons (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 7). Spatial Boundaries Views extending beyond the project analysis area from sensitive areas were determined. In addition, views into the project area from sensitive areas and lands of other ownership (i.e., private lands) were determined. All sensitive areas used for this analysis are listed in Table 156. When assessing direct and indirect effects, the viewed units within the seen area, as determined from the sensitive areas show on figure 88, were considered the spatial boundary. When assessing cumulative effects all viewed lands within the seen area from sensitive areas listed in table 156 (including sensitive areas listed in the table notes) were considered the spatial boundary. Temporal Boundaries The temporal boundary used varied from “immediate upon project completion” up to 5 years (short-term) and up to 20 years (long-term) when analyzing effects from an activity. The short-term timeframes were determined by reviewing the VQO information provided below. The criteria below was considered short term when determining if the “duration of impact” was met for each VQO upon implementation of a management activity. · Retention – “Reduction in line, form, color, and texture contrast should be accomplished during operation or immediate upon project completion” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 30). · Partial Retention – “Reduction in line, form, color and texture should be accomplished as soon after project completion as possible or at a minimum within the first year” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 32). · Modification – “Reduction in line, form, color, and texture should be accomplished in the first year or at a minimum should meet existing regional guideline” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 34). · Maximum Modification – “Reduction of contrast should be accomplished in five years” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 36). · Rehabilitation – the VMS does not define a timeframe for duration of impact. In addition, the following concepts were taken into consideration when compliance with both the “degree of alteration” and “duration of impact” criteria per VQO was determined: · “Each landscape unit has its individual capacity to accept alteration without losing its inherent visual character” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 4). · “Visual impact of management activities increase as the viewer’s line of sight tends to become perpendicular to the slope upon which the management activity is to take place” (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 4). · Each objective describes a degree of acceptable alteration of the natural landscape based upon the importance of aesthetics (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 28). · Whether or not the disturbance from management activity is consistent with the natural disturbances viewed in the landscape is also considered when determining if a VQO was met (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 30). · “Generally, considerable change can take place in the positive or natural appearing elements even under Retention VQO if the change achieves desirable variety and follows the principles of landscape design, such as proper scale and arrangement of these elements” (USDA Forest Service 1980, p. 7). Incomplete and Unavailable Information The locations of existing and new landings were not available. Assumptions An entire unit was considered viewed if any portion of the unit was viewed from a sensitive area. It was assumed private property adjacent to the project area provided foreground views to the project area. The most revealing distance zone was assigned to the unit if that unit was viewed from multiple distance zones. The most restrictive VQO was assigned to a unit if more than one VQO existed for that unit. Effects to the most restrictive VQO (assigned through Forest Plan direction) from the most revealing distance zone were determined for viewed units. This allowed the greatest potential impact viewed in the landscape to be disclosed. Design features necessary to meet the most restrictive VQO from the most revealing distance zone were developed. It was assumed a design feature that decreased viewed effects to a VQO from the most revealing distance zone would also decrease the effects viewed from other lesser revealing distance zones. If a design feature was needed to meet a VQO in a viewed unit, it was assumed the design feature would be applied across the entire unit depending on topography and shape of that unit. Existing visual condition of the landscape described in the Affected Environment section and the Affected Environment section in the vegetation section (Amell 2012) was considered in the determination of whether cumulative effects may have adverse impacts on the characteristic landscape’s attributes. When determining if there would be adverse impacts upon analyzing cumulative effects it was assumed that design features would be implemented. The rehabilitation goal was used where it was determined proposed activities would not immediately achieve the assigned VQO due to the existence of one of the following scenarios: · A disturbance (natural or manmade) dominated the unit · The proposed activity allowed the desired future condition defined in the Silviculture section to be achieve sooner than with no action · The current existing condition hindered the desired future condition of the landscape to be met in the short-term Dead trees from insect infestations were considered obtrusive elements. It was assumed a landscape with less visible dead trees is a visually desired landscape. These assumptions are based on Forest Service handbook guidance, which states natural disturbances are considered alterations to the characteristic landscape and the characteristic landscape is defined as what visually represents the basic vegetative patterns, landforms, rock formation and water forms viewed (USDA Forest Service 1980, p. 55 and USDA Forest Service 1974, p.7). This assumption differs from some public comments received on personal preferences of viewing aesthetics. It was assumed existing and new landings may be viewed in units with proposed activities. Specific landing location information was not available. It is assumed that no catastrophic fires or additional fires would occur when analyzing effects for the no action alternative. Beetle caused mortality exists on approximately 40 percent of the existing mature lodgepole pine stands in the project area and is expected to increase. Affected Environment Components of the Visual Management System (VMS) used to describe the existing condition of the project area are characteristic landscape (vegetative patterns, landforms, rock formations, and water forms) within distance zones viewed from primary and secondary travel routes, use areas and water bodies (USDA Forest Service, 1974, p. 7 and p. 18). This description includes management activity (USDA Forest Service 1974, p.8). All travel routes, use areas, and water bodies listed in Appendix B of the Forest plan, identified in the Stone Dry Vegetation Treatment NFMA Report for Scenery and Recreation September 30, 2009 (USDA Forest Service 2009), incorporated by reference, and additional areas identified by the Forest landscape architect were taken into consideration when determining the existing condition for the project area. Additional affected environment information considered in this analysis can be found in the vegetation section (Amell 2012). Existing Condition Character Type “The mountains in the Columbia Rockies subregion (character type) are generally rounded and subdued where they have been severely glaciated. Valley floor elevations are about 2,000 feet above sea level and ridgetops range from about 7,000 to over 10,000 feet. Glaciers, permanent snowfields, and craggy topography are outstanding features. Vegetation is moderately varied, with some natural openings. This subregion (character type) contains sagebrush, grasslands, and ancient cedar groves. It is an area of high gradient streams and outstanding high mountain lakes. Hot springs are uncommon, but do occur. Portions of this subregion (character type) have been heavily impacted by past logging and mining practices; large portions are relatively untouched, roadless, and rugged. Natural fire processes are part of this landscape. The landscape character type of the project area is classified as Columbia Rockies” (USDA Forest Service 1980a, Visual Character Types & Variety Class Descriptions, R1 80-11, p.39). Seen Area Identification Figure 89 displays visual resource photo points that identify places within the project area where the photos depicted in figure 90 thru figure 99 were taken. It also shows the proposed units for alternative 2, boundaries for inventoried roadless areas and contains information for recreation.  Title: Stonewall Visual Resource Photo Points Map - Description: Map of Stonwall Vegetation Project area with most visual reasource photo points depicted. Figure 89. Stonewall Visual Resource Photo Points Map Mortality caused by beetles exists on approximately 40 percent of the existing, mature lodgepole pine stands in the project area and is expected to increase. These beetle-killed trees, which can be viewed in figure 90, figure 92, and figure 95, negatively impact the landscape. Large portions of the project area can currently be described as a contiguous fuel-bed, with heavy accumulations of dead and down timber.  Title: Photo point 1- - Description: view looking northwest toward Stonewall project area from Forest Route 1040, a location near the Aspen Grove Campground that is southeast of the project area.Figure 90. Photo Point 1-View looking northwest from Forest Route 1040 towards the project area (Approximately 5 miles east of Lincoln, near the Aspen Grove Campground. This is approximately 4 miles southeast of the project area, not displayed in figure 56)  Title: Photo Point 2- - Description: View looking north from State Highway 200 into unit 2Figure 91. Photo Point 2-View looking north from State Highway 200 into unit 2  Title: Photo Point 3 – - Description: View north looking down Forest Route 626, red needle trees evident.Figure 92. Photo Point 3-View north down Forest Route 626  Title: Photo Point 4 – - Description: View northeast into the project area from Lincoln Gulch cemeteryFigure 93. Photo Point 4-View northeast into the project area from Lincoln Gulch cemetery  Title: Photo Point 5 – - Description: View North from the Lincoln District Office.Figure 94. Photo Point 5-View North from the Lincoln District Office. Due to topography, distance, and vegetative screening, the project area is not seen from the Lincoln District Office.  Title: Photo Point 6 – - Description: View northwest on County Route 433 into the project area. Red needle trees evident. Figure 95. Photo Point 6-View northwest on County Route 433 into the project area  Title: Photo Point 7 - - Description: View west down State Highway 200 with the project area in the middlegroundFigure 96. Photo Point 7-View west down State Highway 200 with the project area in the middleground  Title: Photo Point 10 - - Description: View south from Forest Route 330 towards Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA. Shows moratily of hillslope north of the project area on the other side of ridgeline. Figure 97. Photo Point 10-View south from Forest Route 330 towards Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA. Due to topography, the project area is not seen from Forest Route 330.  Title: Photo Point 8 – - Description: View looking southwest from Forest road 330 of Snowbank Lake (Northeast of the project area, not displayed in figure 10). View shows mortality across the landscape.Figure 98. Photo Point 8-View looking southwest from Forest road 330 of Snowbank Lake Northeast of the project area, not displayed in figure 56. There are no views from the lake into the project units due to the surrounding topography.  Title: Photo Point 9 – - Description: View within Pine Grove campground. View shows mix of live and bug-killed trees within the campground area.Figure 99. Photo Point 9-View within Pine Grove campground  Seen areas for direct and indirect effects along with cumulative effects spatial boundaries were identified during field visits. Sensitive areas used were determine through a combination of areas listed in Management Areas R-1, R-2, areas listed in Appendix B of the Forest Plan and areas listed on page 2 and 6 of the Stone Dry Vegetation Treatment NFMA Report for Scenery and Recreation September 30, 2009. Additional sensitive areas given by the Forest landscape architect were also used in seen area determination. Table 156 lists the viewed distance zones into the project area determined from sensitive areas. This total seen area was used for cumulative effects purposes. The following sensitive areas did not provide views into the Stonewall project area, but were considered for total seen area determination for cumulative effects purposes: Forest System Road 330 (Forest Plan Appendix B), Copper Creek and Aspen Grove Campgrounds (R-2 and Appendix B), Lincoln Ranger Station (Forest Plan Appendix B) figure 6, Continental Divide Trail (Forest Plan), Snowbank Lake (Forest Plan Appendix B), Indian Meadows (R-1 and Forest Plan Appendix B), Silver King Mountain (R-1 and Forest Plan Appendix B), Scapegoat Wilderness (Forest Plan), Stonewall Subdivision (USDA Forest Service 2009). Table 156. Distance zones viewed into the project area from travel routes, use areas, and water bodies from sensitive areas Sensitive Areas (Travel Route, Use Area, or Water Body ) Foreground Views Middleground Views Background Views Management Direction State Highway 200 X X N/A Appendix B of the Forest Plan Lincoln Gulch IRA (#1601) X N/A N/A Forest Plan Bear-Marshal-Scapegoat-Swan IRA (#A1485) X N/A N/A Forest Plan Lincoln Springs Subdivision N/A X N/A USDA FS, 2009 Lincoln Gulch Cemetery X N/A N/A USDA FS, 2009 Lincoln Gulch Historic Site X N/A N/A USDA FS, 2009 Sensitive Areas (Travel Route, Use Area, or Water Body ) Foreground Views Middleground Views Background Views Management Direction Pine Grove Campground X N/A N/A USDA FS, 2009 Stonewall/Copper Trail X N/A N/A USDA FS, 1974 Stonewall Trail X N/A N/A USDA FS, 1974 Stonewall Mountain Trail X N/A N/A USDA FS, 1974 Distance zone information from table 156along with topography information was used to determine seen areas and viewed units in the field. Viewed units for the proposed action are shown in figure 100 and listed in table 157. All units listed are treated as completely viewed when determining VQO acres for compliance. Table 157. Proposed action viewed units and their VQO from travel routes, use areas, and water bodies Travel Route, Use Area, or Water Body Foreground View Unit/ (VQO) Middleground Viewed Unit/(VQO) State Highway 200 1/(R), 2/(R) *3/(R), *5/(R), *8/(R), *10/(R), *73/(R) 39/(PR), 40/(PR), 41/(PR), 20/(PR), 44/(PR) Lincoln Gulch IRA (#1601) 76/(PR), 77/(M) N/A Bear-Marshal-Scapegoat-Swan IRA (#A1485) 79/(R), 87/(R), 80/(R), 82/(R), 81/(R), 85/(R), 83/(R), 84/(R), 88/(R), N/A Lincoln Springs Subdivision N/A 39/(M), 40/(M), 41/(PR), 20/(PR), 44/(PR) Lincoln Gulch Cemetery 16/(MM), 17/(MM), 78/MM N/A Lincoln Gulch Historic Site 13/(M) N/A Pine Grove Campground 46/M N/A Stonewall/Copper Trail 84/(R) N/A Stonewall Trail 82/(R) N/A Stonewall Mountain Trail 82/(R), 80/(R) N/A Note: No units are expected to be viewed in the background that are not viewed in the foreground or middleground from the sensitive areas listed in table 3. The VQOs for units were determined using a combination of the Forest VQO map and Forest Plan information (USDA Forest Service 1986), Appendix B, p. B/2. R= retention, PR=partial retention, M=modification, MM=max modification. *The VQO for units 3, 5, 8 10, and 73 are Retention based on the Forest VQO map which assigned a higher VQO to these areas when compared to using the matrix found in appendix B of the Forest Plan. Environmental Consequences Environmental effects for each alternative were considered in detail and described from the expected perspective of the casual Forest visitor (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 30). Effects from management activities were described using dominant elements (line, form, color, and texture) viewed within distance zones (foreground, middleground, and background) from a travel route, use area, or water body (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 7 and p. 8). The degree of acceptable alteration (“degree of alteration” and “duration of impact”) for each VQO was determined considering natural disturbances found in the characteristic landscape (USDA Forest Service 1974, p. 27, and p. 28). The size of a management activity is compared to the size of similar natural activities expected in the landscape. Activities mimicking natural disturbances or simulating vegetation patterns found or expected to be found in the landscape are said to be viewed similarly to their natural counterparts by the casual forest visitor. All previous information was used when determining acceptable duration of impact and degree of alteration for all effects sections under all alternatives. In addition the “rehabilitation goal” was used, as described in the Methodology section of the Visual Report (Bonnett 2012) based on the criteria in the VMS and direction found in the Forest Plan. See the Stonewall Vegetation Project Visual Report (Bonnett 2012), incorporated by reference, for more detailed descriptions of effects. Alternative 1 – No Action There would be an increase in line, form, and color from viewing beetle infested trees as these trees lose their foliage in the short term. Effects of dead trees in the viewshed are added black lines in the landscape from the dead trees. Loss of these trees would equate to a decrease in the forest canopy followed by an increase in ground texture intermixed with the surrounding, remaining forest canopy leading to various size openings in the long-term. These effects would be noticeable in the foreground and middleground from sensitive areas by the casual forest visitor in the short and long term. Figure 90 shows dead trees in the middleground of the project seen area. Down woody material would increase as dead trees fall, increasing ground fuel density. The increase in fuel density would increase the potential for these areas to experience more intense forest fires. There would be no vegetation treatments or fuel treatments implemented for alternative 1. There would be no construction of landings or roads built then obliterated in the project area. Direct and Indirect Effects There would be no direct or indirect effects for alternative 1 because no project activities are proposed. Cumulative Effects There would be no cumulative effects because no project activities are proposed under this alternative. Conclusion There are no direct or indirect effects from project activities. Effects from no action, previously described, could lead to an altered viewed landscape in the foreground and middleground views from sensitive areas. These dead trees would provide an altered landscape expected to be viewed as part of a natural disturbance by the casual forest visitor. However, dead trees could be considered undesirable elements in the landscape by some viewers. It could take 20 years or more before areas with beetle mortality fill in with new vegetation, allowing these areas to blend back into the landscape. Visual quality objectives would be met since no management activity is proposed under this alternative and changes would be from ecological processes. The viewed vegetation patterns found in the characteristic landscape could undergo a change when effects from all infested trees viewed in the total seen area are considered. This alternative is in compliance with Forest Plan, policy, laws and regulations. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action The proposed action includes using both commercial and noncommercial treatments to address the purpose and need, and move the project area towards the desired condition. These actions would include: regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, and prescribed fire. The proposed action includes using prescribed fire and treating slash in inventoried roadless areas (Bear Marshall Scapegoat Swan and Lincoln Gulch). There would be approximately 2.6 miles of roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal under this alternative. In addition, there would be approximately 45.6 miles of road that would be maintained for use. Commercial harvest and road work would not occur in the two inventoried roadless areas. Implementing the proposed action could include the use of chainsaws, feller bunchers, skidders, and cable logging equipment. Post treatment activities would include underburning, site preparation burning, jackpot burning, hand piling/burning, treeplanting, and monitoring of natural vegetation. Treatment descriptions Groups 1 through 8 apply to alternative 2. Treatment descriptions for each group can be found in chapter 2. Table 158 lists activities included in the proposed action. Treatments, prescription, and logging systems are defined in the silvicultural report (Amell 2012). Viewed effects to the visual resource from proposed activities are disclosed. Effects to the viewed landscape (figure 100) were assessed to determine Forest Plan compliance. The visual quality objectives for this project include acres in retention, partial retention, modification, and max modification. The viewed units and their VQOs are listed in table 158. Table 159 shows the total VQO acres proposed for treatments for this alternative within foreground and middleground distances zones. Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to scenery and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed in table 9 pertaining to scenery/visual are VIS-1 through VIS-13, This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to all action alternatives.   Map of the proposed action viewed units with most visual resource photo points depicted. Figure 100. Stonewall visual resource proposed action viewed units  Table 158. Viewed treatment units with proposed vegetation treatment, prescriptions, logging systems, distance zone, and VQO for the alternatives 2 and 3 Treatment Prescription Unit *DZ/VQO Logging System Alt 2 Acres Alt 3 Acres Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 44 MG/PR skyline 97  Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 46 FG/M tractor 251  Intermediate Harvest Intermediate thin patches 46a FG/M tractor  223 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 8 MG/R skyline 62 62 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Underburn 46b FG/M tractor  27 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 73 MG/R HAND 33 33 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 16 FG/MM HAND 3 3 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 3 MG/R tractor 37 37 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 5 MG/R tractor 18 18 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 2 FG/R HAND 146 146 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 78 FG/MM HAND 38 38 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 85 FG/R HAND 143 143 Prescribed Fire Low-intensity and severity underburning 17a FS/MM HAND  38 Prescribed Fire Low-intensity and severity underburning 20a MG/PR HAND  24 Prescribed Fire Low-intensity and severity underburning 44a MG/PR HAND  97 Prescribed Fire Jackpot burn or pile and burn 46a FG/M HAND  223 Prescribed Fire Jackpot burn or pile and burn 80a FG/R HAND  326 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 76 FG/PR HAND 123  Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres 80 FG/R HAND 326  Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 77 FG/M HAND 709  Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 79 FG/R HAND 337 337 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 81 FG/R HAND 629  Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 84 FG/R HAND 831 831 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 88 FG/R HAND 865 865 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 87 FG/R HAND 36 36 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 82 FG/R HAND 776 776 Treatment Prescription Unit *DZ/VQO Logging System Alt 2 Acres Alt 3 Acres Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 83 FG/R HAND 457 457 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 17 FG/MM tractor 38  Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Underburn 10 MG/PR tractor 18 18 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 13 FG/M tractor 41 41 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 20 MG/PR tractor 32  Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 39 MG/PR skyline 42 26 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 40 MG/PR tractor 11 11 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 1 FG/R tractor 96 96 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn 41 MG/PR skyline 12 12 Grand Total 6,206 4,720 *DZ=Distance Zone, FG=Foreground, MG=Middleground, R=Retention, PR=Partial Retention, M=Modification, MM=Maximum Modification. Not all actions in a unit listed above are viewed. Table 159. Distance zone viewed VQO acres for alternatives 2 and 3 Distance Zone* VQO Alt 2 Acres Alt 3 Acres Foreground MM 78 78 Foreground M 1,000 291 Foreground PR 126 3 Foreground R 4,634 4,004 Middleground MM   Middleground M 16  Middleground PR 196 1898 Middleground R 151 151 R=Retention, PR=Partial Retention, M=Modification, MM=Maximum Modification Direct and Indirect Effects Proposed activities in treatment units expected to be viewed are displayed in table 158. Units viewed in the background were also viewed in the middle ground and foreground. Not all activities listed under each viewed unit are expected to be viewed as described further for each activity. Viewed effects from management actions are discussed below. Acres for viewed units listed in table 158 are not repeated throughout this section. Sensitive areas are listed in table 157 and are not repeated throughout this section. The discussion that follows addresses effects from proposed activities, determines compliance, and discusses design features necessary for compliance. Harvest Treatments Foreground Marked trees for retention and unit boundaries may be visible in foreground areas. No degree of alteration is expected from this activity. The duration of impact could be more than five years until the marking paint fades. Implementing VIS-10 and VIS-11 would decrease the possibility of painted trees being viewed in the landscape allowing both M and MM to be met. Upon completion, intermediate thinning, a more open forest at the ground plane and in the mid to upper canopy is expected to be viewed throughout these units. Remaining canopy cover would be less when compared to canopy cover prior to implementation. These effects are expected to last more than 20 years but would not dominate the landscape. Thinning activities would appear similar to other areas found in the landscape that are naturally established over time. The impact from thinning is not expected to be noticeable by the casual forest visitor. Intermediate thinning activities would be considered within the degree of acceptable alteration for both M and MM. Regeneration treatments (clear cutting, seed tree and shelterwood treatments) would create openings or more open canopy areas in the landscape. These openings and areas of open canopy are not expected to be continuous because the reserve tree technique would be utilized. Clearcut units would be less than 40 acres allowing the openings to mimic other similar size openings occurring naturally in the surrounding landscape. Creating openings could leave a wall of vegetation causing an edge effect that could be noticed by the casual forest visitor as an unnatural activity. When considering the size of the openings, the degree of alteration for MM is expected to be met. If an edge effect is created the duration of impact could last over 20 years. Implementation of design feature VIS-1 which allows the edge effect to be blended and appear natural in the landscape would allow MM to be met. Middleground Improvement cuts, precommercial thinning, and sanitation cuts are not expected to be viewed in the middleground from sensitive areas. No viewed effects from sensitive areas are expected upon implementation of these activities in this distance zone. Regeneration treatments viewed in the middleground would have effects similar to the ones previously described for foreground views. However, these effects would be less visible smaller size leaving for even smaller clearcut areas. Clearcut areas would also be broken up by reserve trees. The degree of alteration would be met even in PR. Implementing design feature VIS-1 would eliminate the edge effect also allowing the duration of impact for PR to be met. Prescribe fire (Low Severity and Mixed Severity) and Underburning Foreground Effects expected to be viewed in the foreground are fire line boundaries and burned ground vegetation with some small pockets of tree mortality with the low and mixed severity burn units and burned vegetation leaving some areas with little tree mortality with underburning. Fire line boundaries could add artificial lines. These boundary lines could look unnatural if straight lines and other geometric patterns are used during unit layout. The line/geometric effect could last more than a year until vegetation begins to grow and blend the unnatural lines into the landscape. The effects from the fire on the ground vegetation and tree mortality is not expected to be discernible as a management activity by the casual forest visitor when compared to effects from other natural fires found in the landscape. When considering the line effect, the degree of alteration based on the size of the activity in these units would be met for R, MM, and PR. Implementing Vis12/Fuel2 would eliminate artificial lines allowing the duration of impact to be met for all VQOs. This design feature would allow the fire line to look more like a natural fire occurrence. Handpiling and burning of the piles would add unnatural forms and texture to the landscape that would be viewed. These piles would be burned prior to the completion of the project allowing this effect to meet the duration of impact for M and MM. Upon handpile and jackpot burning, small pockets of tree mortality in close proximity to the burn piles and charred branches may be viewed from the implementation of this activity. The small pockets of dead trees are not expected to dominate the landscape and can be viewed as part of a natural disturbance. This effect is considered within the degree of acceptable alteration and duration of impact for both M and MM. Charred branches left over from the burning of piles are expected to be viewed in the landscape. Within five years new vegetation would have grown in, eliminating the possibility to view the burnt vegetation. The degree of alteration for both M and MM would be met. The duration of impact for MM would be met. The duration of impact for M would be met with the implementation of VIS-9 and S/WS/F-12. Burn activities would temporarily add smoke into the air obstructing foreground and middleground views from sensitive areas. This effect is short term and would subside upon completion of the burning activity. At which point M and MM would be met. Middleground The prescribed fire is not expected be viewed in the middleground from sensitive areas. Therefore, no viewed effects are expected from prescribed fire activities for this distance zone for any unit. After underburning is completed the effects from the activity is not expected to be viewed in the middleground due to the distance the proposed activity would be from sensitive areas and the canopy cover of these units. No viewed effects in the landscape from this activity are anticipated. Hand piling and burning of the piles are not expected to be viewed from sensitive areas because of the existing overstory in these units, distance to the units from sensitive area, and the undulating topography of the landscape between the sensitive areas and the units. Slashing is not expected to contribute to viewed effects in the landscape. Transportation There would be approximately 2.6 miles of road built then obliterated immediately following timber removal under this alternative shown in figure 100. In addition, there would be approximately 45.6 miles of road that would be maintained for use under this alternative. The road construction work associated with this alternative would not be viewed in the foreground or middleground due to the distance the proposed activity would be from sensitive areas (figure 100). Therefore, there would be no viewed effects from this activity in the landscape. Cumulative Effects The characteristic landscape is expected to continue to perpetuate. Management activity viewed disturbances would increase when considering all viewed units proposed for treatment. However, with the project design features the VQOs would be met. Units where dead trees would be removed would ultimately look similar to the end result of the natural decay cycle. This alternative would decrease the length of time the dead trees are viewed in the landscape. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Regulations Activities for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, when implemented with project design features and mitigation measures (chapter 2, table 9), would be in compliance with the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 1984) and National and Regional policies, standards, and guidelines in the Forest Service Manuals and Handbooks and the Northern Regional Guide. See the Visuals Report (Bonnet 2012) for more details. Alternative 3 Alternative 3 includes the same types of treatments and prescriptions as alternative 2 along with Groups 9 and 10 treatments. A complete description of each activity can be found in chapter 2. All effects to the visual resource from proposed activities are disclosed. Effects to the viewed landscape were used to determine Forest Plan compliance. The visual quality objectives for alternative 3 are retention, partial retention, modification, and maximum modification. Figure 101 displays the viewed units and their VQOs. The viewed units and their VQOs are shown in table 158. Table 159 shows the total VQO acres proposed for treatments for this alternative within foreground and middleground distances zones.  Stonewall Visual Resource Alternative 3 Viewed UnitsFigure 101. Stonewall visual resource alternative 3 viewed unitsDirect and Indirect Effects All units expected to be viewed and acres of proposed activities for these units are displayed in table 157. Not all activities listed under each viewed unit are expected to be viewed as described further for each activity. Viewed effects from management actions are discussed below. Acres for viewed units listed are not repeated throughout this section. Sensitive areas listed in table 156 are not repeated throughout this section. The discussion that follows addresses effects from proposed activities, determines compliance, and lists design features necessary for compliance. Harvest Treatments Foreground Marked trees for retention and unit boundaries may be visible in foreground areas. No degree of alteration is expected from this activity. The duration of impact could be more than five years until the marking paint fades. Implementing VIS-10 and VIS-11 would decrease the possibility of painted trees being viewed in the landscape allowing both M and MM to be met. Upon completion, intermediate thinning, a more open forest at the ground plane and in the mid to upper canopy is expected to be viewed throughout these units. Remaining canopy cover would be less when compared to canopy cover prior to implementation. These effects are expected to last more than 20 years but would not dominate the landscape. Thinning activities would appear similar to other areas found in the landscape that are naturally established over time. The impact from thinning is not expected to be noticeable by the casual forest visitor. Intermediate thinning activities would be considered within the degree of acceptable alteration for both M and MM. In foreground areas, when compared to alternative 2, fewer acres are proposed for intermediate thinning treatments in alternative 3. Regeneration treatments (clear cutting, seed tree and shelterwood treatments) would create openings or more open canopy areas in the landscape. These openings and areas of open canopy are not expected to be continuous because the reserve tree technique would be utilized. Clearcut units would be less than 40 acres allowing the openings to mimic other similar size openings occurring naturally in the surrounding landscape. Creating openings could leave a wall of vegetation causing an edge effect that could be noticed by the casual forest visitor as an unnatural activity. When considering the size of the openings, the degree of alteration for MM is expected to be met. If an edge effect is created the duration of impact could last over 20 years. Implementation of design feature VIS-1 which allows the edge effect to be blended and appear natural in the landscape would allow MM to be met. In foreground areas, when compared to alternative 2, fewer acres are proposed for regeneration harvest in alternative 3. Middleground Improvement cuts, precommercial thinning, and sanitation cuts are not expected to be viewed in the middleground from sensitive areas. No viewed effects from sensitive areas are expected upon implementation of these activities in this distance zone. In middleground areas, when compared to alternative 2, fewer acres are proposed for improvement cut in alternative 3. Regeneration treatments viewed in the middleground would have effects similar to the ones previously described for foreground views. However, these effects would be less visible smaller size leaving for even smaller clearcut areas. Clearcut areas would also be broken up by reserve trees. The degree of alteration would be met even in PR. Implementing design feature VIS-1 would eliminate the edge effect also allowing the duration of impact for PR to be met. In middleground areas, when compared to alternative 2, fewer acres are proposed for regeneration treatments than in alternative 3. Prescribe fire (Low Severity and Mixed Severity) and Underburning Foreground Effects expected to be viewed in the foreground are fire line boundaries and burned ground vegetation with some small pockets of tree mortality with the low and mixed severity burn units and burned vegetation leaving some areas with little tree mortality with underburning. Fire line boundaries could add artificial lines. These boundary lines could look unnatural if straight lines and other geometric patterns are used during unit layout. The line/geometric effect could last more than a year until vegetation begins to grow and blend the unnatural lines into the landscape. The effects from the fire on the ground vegetation and tree mortality is not expected to be discernible as a management activity by the casual forest visitor when compared to effects from other natural fires found in the landscape. When considering the line effect, the degree of alteration based on the size of the activity in these units would be met for R, MM, and PR. Implementing Vis12/Fuel2 would eliminate artificial lines allowing the duration of impact to be met for all VQOs. This design feature would allow the fire line to look more like a natural fire occurrence. In foreground areas, 326 acres less in the mix severity prescription in alternative 3 when compared to alternative 2. Handpiling and burning of the piles would add unnatural forms and texture to the landscape that would be viewed. These piles would be burned prior to the completion of the project allowing this effect to meet the duration of impact for M and MM. Upon handpile and jackpot burning, small pockets of tree mortality in close proximity to the burn piles and charred branches may be viewed from the implementation of this activity. The small pockets of dead trees are not expected to dominate the landscape and can be viewed as part of a natural disturbance. This effect is considered within the degree of acceptable alteration and duration of impact for both M and MM. Charred branches left over from the burning of piles are expected to be viewed in the landscape. Within five years new vegetation would have grown in, eliminating the possibility to view the burnt vegetation. The degree of alteration for both M and MM would be met. The duration of impact for MM would be met. The duration of impact for M would be met with the implementation of VIS-9 and S/WS/F-12. Burn activities would temporarily add smoke into the air obstructing foreground and middleground views from sensitive areas. This effect is short term and would subside upon completion of the burning activity. At which point M and MM would be met. Middleground The prescribed fire is not expected be viewed in the middleground from sensitive areas. Therefore, no viewed effects are expected from prescribed fire activities for this distance zone for any unit. After underburning is completed the effects from the activity is not expected to be viewed in the middleground due to the distance the proposed activity would be from sensitive areas and the canopy cover of these units. No viewed effects in the landscape from this activity are anticipated. Handpiling and burning of the piles are not expected to be viewed from sensitive areas because of the existing overstory in these units, distance to the units from sensitive area, and the undulating topography of the landscape between the sensitive areas and the units. Slashing is not expected to contribute to viewed effects in the landscape. Proposed underburning increases in overall amount of underburning in middleground for alternative 3 when compared to alternative 2; however, alternative 3 has fewer acres proposed for jackpot burning, when compared to alternative 2. Slashing is not expected to be viewed in any distance zone from any sensitive areas. Therefore, there would be no viewed effects from this activity in the landscape. Transportation There would be 0.4 miles of road constructed for use and then obliterated under this alternative. In addition, there would be approximately 43.8 miles of road that would be maintained for use under this alternative. The road construction work associated with this alternative would not be viewed in the foreground or middleground due to the distance the proposed activity would be from sensitive areas. Therefore, there would be no viewed effects from this activity in the landscape. Cumulative Effects The characteristic landscape is expected to continue to perpetuate. Management activity viewed disturbances would increase when considering all viewed units proposed for treatment. However, with the project design features the VQOs would be met. Units where dead trees would be removed would ultimately look similar to the end result of the natural decay cycle. This alternative would decrease the length of time the dead trees are viewed in the landscape. Cumulative effects for this alternative are expected to be similar to alternative 2, with fewer acres impacted by alternative3. Compliance with the Forest Plan and other Regulations Activities for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, when implemented with project design features and mitigation measures (chapter 2, table 9), would be in compliance with the Forest Plan for the Helena National Forest (USDA Forest Service 1984) and National and Regional policies, standards, and guidelines in the Forest Service Manuals and Handbooks and the Northern Regional Guide. See the Visuals Report (Bonnet 2012) for more details. Conclusions The action alternatives would be in compliance with the Forest Plan and other regulations with the implementation of the visual design features. Both action alternatives would allow the VQOs to be met.Cultural Resources Introduction Past human behavior and activities can be inferred through material remains observed in the present. Generally, cultural resources are the material manifestation of activities from the past but can also refer to places that are deemed sacred or significant to people in the present. They can be historical documentation, or oral evidence. These resources can be prehistoric, historic, architectural, structures, places, objects, and traditional cultural properties (Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2360.5). The following questions are addressed to determine effects on cultural resources in the Helena National Forest: · Are the cultural resources evaluated for eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)? · If the cultural resources are evaluated, are they eligible for inclusion in the NRHP? · Will eligible cultural resources be damaged or adversely affected? · Will cultural resources that are otherwise ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP, but have value determined by the forest to merit protection, be adversely affected by the proposed project. · Will cultural resources be protected and adverse actions mitigated? Overview of Issues The Forest Plan requires the integration of cultural resources in project planning and forest management. Compliance inventory, evaluation of site significance and project effect, consultation with the Montana State Historic Preservation Office and Tribal Historic Preservation Offices, and implementation of mitigation treatment plans for project affected cultural resources would comply with the NHPA and its implementing regulations in 36 CFR 800, as well as Helena National Forest Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) standards and guidelines. Comments pertaining to disclosing the effects of project activities on cultural resources were identified from public scoping as nonsignificant (40 CFR 1501.7), and are addressed by the analyses in this section. Please refer to volume 2, appendix A of this document for a complete listing of the issues and an explanation of how the agency determined their disposition. Ground disturbance and prescribed fire in the Historic Lincoln Townsite could result in loss of the historical integrity of this site. This is addressed with project design features to avoid adverse impacts to the known cultural resource sites. Methodology Effects to cultural resources are analyzed based on potential damage or adverse effects to all cultural sites within the project boundary by Helena National Forest standards. The best available science was used in preparation of this analysis. The most recent cultural GIS data for the Forest was analyzed and field work has been previously undertaken in support of this planning effort conducted in accordance with FSM 2360. Sources of information examined as part of the background research to identify previously identified cultural resources include the current Heritage GIS layers and reports documenting previous archaeological studies within the project boundary. Following the analysis described above, the consequences were analyzed as follows: All sites were assessed for possible adverse effects or damages. Incomplete and Unavailable Information The above methodology assumes that all known sites in the project area have been adequately identified. Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis The spatial context for analysis is the extent of the current project area. The temporal context for effects analysis is two-fold. The immediate temporal context is essentially the direct effects that the current proposed project would have on cultural resources; that is, immediate changes to site condition or integrity, or even National Register status, as a direct result of project actions. The long-term temporal context is essentially the indirect effects that the current proposed project would have on cultural resources, that is, long-term changes to site condition, integrity, or National Register status resulting from changes instigated by the project actions. Affected Environment The prehistory and history of the upper Blackfoot River Valley and analysis area are discussed in various historical records (i.e., Beck 1989; UBVHS 1994), cultural resources overviews (i.e., Knight 1989; Scott 2001) and agency heritage compliance inventory reports (i.e., Brumley et al. 1998; Davis and Godin 2003). People have inhabited the upper Blackfoot River Valley for millennia. American Indian groups once occupied, seasonally used or traveled through this large river valley and the adjacent foothills and mountain ranges. Today, the Salish (Flathead) in particular attach great cultural significance to the ancient campsites, hunting and plant food gathering places, tool stone quarries and paint pigment sources, vision questing sites and old trails found throughout the upper Blackfoot River Valley (Godin 2003) The Euro-American settlement of the upper Blackfoot River Valley mirrors that of Montana in general. The Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1804-1806 gave way to fur trapping and trading, then early military expeditions and railroad route explorations. A gold strike in Abe Lincoln Gulch near present day Lincoln brought permanent settlement. Nearby placer mining in Jefferson Creek Nevada Creek, and Washington Creeks attracted more people who eventually established small communities what were supported by mining, farming, ranching and logging. Early in the 20th Century, federal administration of mountain forests and surrounding lands, and increased public participation in outdoor recreation, added other dimensions to the rural life way. This natural resource and tourist oriented economy still characterizes the sparsely populated upper Blackfoot River Valley (ibid). Existing Condition The 36 CFR 800 regulations define an area of potential effect as: “…the geographic area of areas within an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties, if any such properties exist. The area of potential effects is influenced by the scale and nature of an undertaking and may be different for different kinds of effects caused by the undertaking “(36 CFR 800.16(d)). The area of potential effect for analysis is the Stonewall Vegetation Project area and treatment areas. All cultural resources located within the area of potential effect are included in the analysis. The area of potential effect for this project lies within the Lincoln Ranger District boundary of the Helena National Forest specifically in T14N, R9W, sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 17, 18, 20, and 29; T14N, R10W, section1; T15N, R8W, sections 19, 29, 30, 31 and 32; T15N, R9W, sections 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36; T15N, R10W, section 36. The Stonewall Project area is used for many recreation activities. These activities include hunting, snowmobiling, and fishing, off highway vehicle (OHV) travel, hiking, firewood, cross-country skiing, and camping. The area is busiest during the fall hunting season. The Helena National Forest provided the most up to date GIS layers with previous cultural resource inventories and site locations. The Helena National Forest provided the previous site forms and cultural resource inventories performed within the Stonewall project area. Twenty percent of the Stonewall project area has been previously surveyed for cultural resources. There have been 23 previous surveys totaling 4,732 acres within the Stonewall project boundary. The surveys were performed for timber sales, land exchanges, mining claims, and roads projects. The previous cultural resource inventories conducted in the Stonewall project area yielded eight known cultural resources within the areas of potential effects. These include six historic and two prehistoric cultural resource sites. According to previous cultural resource reports and site forms, two sites are considered Eligible for the NRHP, one site is unevaluated, and five sites are considered ineligible for listing on the NRHP. See table 160 for a list of archaeological sites within the project area. Table 160. Cultural resources within the Stonewall Vegetation project boundary STATE NUMBER SITE TYPE NRHP STATUS 24LC244H/24PW62 Historic Eligible 24LC421H Historic Ineligible 24LC425P Prehistoric *Unevaluated 24LC467H Historic Eligible 24LC828H Historic *Unevaluated 24LC840P Prehistoric Ineligible 24LC1114H Historic Unevaluated 24LC1274H Historic *Unevaluated 24LC1191/24PW622 Historic *Unevaluated *These sites have not received an official determination yet. Alternative 1 – No Action Under the no-action alternative, none of the proposed action activities would occur in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. Direct Effects and Indirect Effects Under alternative 1, no new direct or indirect effects would occur, because no project activities are proposed. Cultural resources would continue to be vulnerable to the effects of fuel loading within the project area, increasing the risk of wildfire. Cultural resources would continue to naturally deteriorate over time. Cultural resources would continue to be threatened by natural processes (wildfire, erosion) and simply from recreational activities that bring people in contact with cultural sites. Fire has a negative effect on cultural resources due to high temperatures, an inability to control the effects, and because resource inventories cannot be conducted in advance. Fire suppression activities such as bulldozer-created control lines, hand lines, and fire retardant drops all have the potential to destroy or damage cultural resources. In addition, wildfires cause erosion through vegetation loss resulting in resource deterioration. Vegetation loss may also inadvertently lead to increases in vandalism and looting of cultural sites. The high temperatures of wildfires cause rapid surface weathering of features and artifacts, accelerating loss. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects to cultural resources are potential impacts on cultural sites from past, present, and future activities. Previous activities would have been mitigated via cultural resources inventory and documentation, and subsequent mitigation of adverse effects. Future activities would require cultural resource inventory prior to implementation and proper mitigation measures to be implemented to avoid or minimize adverse effects to sites eligible for the National Register. Conclusions The no-action alternative would have an undesired effect on cultural resources. Most significant of these is the increased risk of damage to cultural resources from catastrophic wildfires resulting in artifact damage, wooden structure and feature loss, and loss of site integrity through erosion. Alternative 2 – Proposed Action The Helena National Forest proposes to reduce an over-abundance of fuels in the project area near communities and improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. Proposed treatments for alternative 2 includes include regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, precommercial thinning, and prescribed fire on approximately 8,562 acres. All of these actions have the potential to adversely affect cultural resources if mitigation measures are not implemented. Positive effects of the proposed action to heritage resources include an opportunity for the Forest to monitor eligible cultural sites, a reduction in fuel load, and the management of control lines to reduce the risk of wildfire. These actions all help in protecting the cultural resources of the Helena National Forest. Project Design Features The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been designed with features that are intended to minimize or avoid potential adverse effects while meeting project objectives. In addition to the proposed action treatments described in this section, design features would be implemented where applicable. A description of the project design features relating to cultural resources and other resources is displayed in table 9, chapter 2. The specific design features listed in table 9 pertaining to archaeological cultural resources are ARCH-1 and ARCH-2. This analysis is based on the implementation of all design features. Project design features apply to all action alternatives. If project design features are followed, then it is recommended that the project be allowed to proceed as a no adverse effect activity. Direct Effects and Indirect Effects Under alternative 2 new direct effects would likely occur without mitigation measures. Direct effects to cultural resources are those that physically alter, damage, or destroy all or part of a resource; alter characteristics of the surrounding environment that contribute to the resource’s significance; introduce visual or audible elements out of character with the property or that alters its setting; or resource neglect to the extent that it deteriorates or is destroyed (USDA Forest Service 2005: III-411). The proposed action has the potential to directly affect the cultural resources within the proposed project area. Several potential impacts to cultural resources were identified including: thinning projects, the construction of temporary roads, and burn treatments. Direct effects of tree thinning and road construction activities are mostly through ground disturbance caused by ground machinery disturbance, road grading, felling trees, and skidding logs or trees. Felled trees can also damage or destroy features and historic structures. Burn treatments have the potential to adversely affect cultural resources by burning historic structures and damaging or destroying artifacts and features within archaeological sites. Indirect effects under the current proposal are related primarily to reducing the risk of wildfires in the project area. Adverse effects to cultural resources tend to be greater in wildfire situations because of high temperatures, an inability to control the effects, and because resource inventories cannot be conducted in advance (USDA Forest Service 2005: III-413). In addition, wildfires cause erosion through vegetation-cover loss, resulting in resource deterioration. Vegetation-cover loss may also inadvertently lead to increases in vandalism and looting of cultural sites. The high temperatures of wildfires cause rapid surface weathering of features and artifacts, accelerating loss. Alternative 3 The Helena National Forest proposes to reduce an over-abundance of fuels in the project area near communities and improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. Proposed treatments for alternative 3 include regeneration harvest, intermediate harvest, precommercial thinning, and prescribed fire on approximately 6,562 acres. All of these actions have the potential to adversely affect cultural resources if mitigation measures are not implemented. Positive effects of the proposed action to heritage resources include an opportunity for the Forest to monitor eligible cultural sites, a reduction in fuel load, and the management of control lines to reduce the risk of wildfire. These actions all help in protecting the cultural resources of the Helena National Forest. Design Features and Mitigation Measures Same as alternative 2. Direct Effects and Indirect Effects Effects would be similar to alternative 2, with 2,000 fewer acres of potential impacts from proposed treatments. Alternatives 2 and 3 Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects to cultural resources are potential impacts on cultural sites from past, present, and foreseeable actions. Previous activities would have been mitigated via cultural resources inventory and documentation, and subsequent mitigation of adverse effects. Future activities may require cultural resource inventory prior to implementation and appropriate mitigation measures to be implemented to avoid or minimize adverse effects to resources. Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans All alternatives comply with the Forest Plan standards and guidelines for cultural resources. Forest Service Policy (FSM 2361.3) requires that projects with the potential to affect cultural resources, including lands that will leave Federal agency control through sale or exchange, be surveyed for cultural resources in order to comply with 36 CFR §800 – Protection of Historic Properties, Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended; the Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) of 1979, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, and the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978. Other Relevant Mandatory Disclosures As undertakings develop, the Forest is required to comply with the Section 106 process or follow protocol as established with the State Historic Preservation Office. Conclusions In summary, the proposed action alternatives 2 and 3 could have both negative and positive impacts on cultural resources within the project area. There would be no adverse or negative effects if the proposed project design features and mitigation measures are followed. The negative effects are the possibility of cultural resources damage from ground disturbance from the use of heavy machinery, log and tree removal, road construction, and the heat damage to resources from prescribed fires. The loss of vegetation can indirectly lead to vandalism to cultural resources because of the increased visibility. Project design features would mitigate adverse effects to cultural resources within the project area. Positive effects include the reduction of fuels that could result in fire damaged cultural resources and increased erosion of archaeological sites. Alternatives 2 or 3 would meet the Helena National Forest management goals for cultural resources by reducing the risk of fire. Damages to cultural resources from wildfires, suppression efforts and erosion, are irreversible losses of cultural resources. If any additional cultural resources are discovered during implementation of this project, work should cease in the area and a Forest Archaeologist would be contacted. Work in the area could only resume if mitigation measures can be determined and/or re-evaluated if necessary.Economics Introduction The management of the natural resources on the Helena National Forest (HNF) has the potential to affect local economies. People and economies are an important part of the ecosystem. Use of resources and recreational visits to the National Forests generate employment and income in the surrounding communities and counties, and generate revenues returned to the Federal Treasury or used to fund additional on-the-ground activities to accomplish resource management objectives. This section delineates the affected area, assesses potential environmental justice impacts, and outlines methods and results of analyzing the economic effects of the Stonewall Vegetation Management Project, including the project feasibility, financial efficiency, and economic impacts. Project feasibility and financial efficiency relate to the costs and revenues of doing the action. Economic impacts relate to how the action affects the local economy in the surrounding area. Methodology The economic measures used for this analysis are project feasibility, financial efficiency, economic impacts, and environmental justice. These measures, including methodologies, are described below. Project Feasibility Project feasibility is used to determine if a project is feasible, that is, will it sell, given current market conditions. The determination of feasibility relies on a residual value (stumpage = revenues - costs) feasibility analysis that uses local delivered log prices and stump to mill costs to determine if a project is feasible. The appraised stumpage rate from this analysis is compared to the base rate (revenues considered essential to cover regeneration plus minimum return to the Federal treasury). The project is considered to be feasible if the appraised stumpage rate exceeds the base rates. If the feasibility analysis indicates that the project is not feasible, the project may need to be modified. A project that is not feasible indicates an increased risk that the project may not attract bids and may not be implemented. Financial Efficiency Financial efficiency provides information relevant to the future financial position of the program if the project is implemented. Financial efficiency considers anticipated costs and revenues that are part of Forest Service monetary transactions. Present net value (PNV) is used as an indicator of financial efficiency and presents one tool to be used in conjunction with many other factors in the decision-making process. PNV combines benefits and costs that occur at different times and discounts them into an amount that is equivalent to all economic activity in a single year. A positive PNV indicates that the alternative, including all activities is financially efficient. Financial efficiency analysis is not intended to be a comprehensive analysis that incorporates monetary expressions of all known market and nonmarket benefits and costs. Many of the values associated with natural resource management are best handled apart from, but in conjunction with, a more limited financial efficiency framework. These nonmarket benefits and costs associated with the project are discussed throughout the various resource sections of this document. Costs for restoration activities are based on recent experienced costs and professional estimates. Activity costs not related to the timber sale are included in the PNV analysis, but they are not included in appraised timber value. Two PNV’s are calculated, one that includes all costs associated with each alternative and one which includes only those costs that are necessary to facilitate the removal of timber. Economic Impacts (Jobs and Labor Income) Economic impacts are used to evaluate potential direct, indirect, and cumulative effects on the economy. Economic impacts are estimated using input-output analysis. Input-output analysis is a means of examining relationships within an economy, both between businesses and between businesses and final consumers. It captures all monetary market transactions for consumption in a given time period. The resulting mathematical representation allows one to examine the effect of a change in one or several economic activities on an entire economy, all else constant. This examination is called impact analysis. The IMPLAN modeling system (MIG 2003) allows the user to build regional economic models of one or more counties for a particular year. The model for this analysis used the 2009 IMPLAN data. IMPLAN translates changes in final demand for goods and services into resulting changes in economic effects, such as labor income and employment of the affected area’s economy. The economic impact effects are measured by estimating the direct jobs and labor income generated by (1) the processing of the timber volume from the project, and (2) Forest Service expenditures for contracted restoration activities included as part of the proposed treatments. The direct employment and labor income benefits employees and their families and, therefore, directly affects the local economy. Additional indirect and induced multiplier effects (ripple effects) are generated by the direct activities. Indirect effects are felt by the producers of materials used by the directly affected industries. Induced effects occur when employees of the directly and indirectly affected industries spend the wages they receive. Together the direct and multiplier effects comprise the total economic impacts to the local economy. Data used to estimate the direct effects from the timber harvest and processing were provided by the University of Montana’s Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER) (Morgan et al. 2007). This national data is broken into multi-state regions and is considered more accurate than that which is available from IMPLAN. The Northern Rockies BBER Region (Montana and Idaho) is used for this analysis. The BBER data represents the results of mill censuses that correlate production, employment, and labor income. The economic impact area for this analysis consists of Lewis & Clark, Broadwater and Powell Counties, Montana. Potential limitations of these estimates are the time-lag in IMPLAN data and the data intensive nature of the input-output model. Significant changes in economic sectors since the latest data for IMPLAN have been adjusted using information from the University of Montana’s BBER. Environmental Justice As stated in Executive Order 12898, it is required that all federal actions consider the potential of disproportionate effects on minority and low-income populations in the local region. The principals of environmental justice require agencies to address the equity and fairness implications associated with federal land management actions. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) (1997) provides the following definitions in order to provide guidance with the compliance of environmental justice requirements: “Minority population: Minority populations should be identified where either: (a) the minority population of the affected area exceeds 50 percent or (b) the minority population percentage of the affected area is meaningfully greater than the minority population percentage in the general population or other appropriate unit of geographic analysis...” “Low-income population: Low-income populations in an affected area should be identified with the annual statistical poverty thresholds from the Bureau of the Census' Current Population Reports, Series P-60 on Income and Poverty. In identifying low-income populations, agencies may consider as a community either a group of individuals living in geographic proximity to one another, or a set of individuals (such as migrant workers or Native Americans), where either type of group experiences common conditions of environmental exposure or effect.” Spatial and Temporal Context for Effects Analysis The analysis area for the efficiency analysis is the project area (figure 102). The temporal scope of the analysis is the duration of the proposed activities. The project is expected to be accomplished over a 10-year period with the harvest activity occurring primarily in the first 4 years. Timber management activities within the project area have the potential to impact the economic conditions of local communities and counties. To estimate the potential effect on jobs and income, a zone of influence (or economic impact area) was delineated. The impact area was chosen based on commuting data suggesting a functioning economy and where the timber is likely to be processed (log flows) (Meti Corp 2010). This analysis suggested that Lewis & Clark, Powell and Broadwater Counties were the appropriate counties to include in the economic impact analysis area (figure 102).  Title: Economic impact areaFigure 102. Economic impact area Affected Environment The Stonewall Vegetation Project is located on the Lincoln Ranger District of the Helena National Forest and includes portions of both Lewis & Clark and Powell Counties, Montana. Broadwater County and Powell County are likely destinations for the majority of the sawlog material as a result of the project. Since these are the three counties that would be most affected by the project in terms of social and economic effects, the Affected Environment section focuses on these three counties. Population and Demographic Change According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the population of Lewis & Clark County grew by 30.2 percent between 1990 and 2009. Powell County grew 6.8 percent while the population of Broadwater County grew by 44.0 percent over the same period (table 161). Population growth in both Lewis & Clark and Broadwater County outpaced the growth observed in the State and Nation. The average state density is 6.8 persons per square mile (US Census Bureau 2010). The analysis area contains one of Western Montana’s least densely populated counties, Powell County, with 3.0 persons per square mile. Lewis and Clark County has a density of 18.3 persons per square mile, while Broadwater County has a density of 4.7 persons per square mile. Table 161. Estimated Population Change 1990 to 2009 COMMUNITY 1990 2000 2009 PERCENT CHANGE Lewis & Clark County Population 47,586 55,878 61,942 30.2 Increase Powell County Population 6,640 7,7178 7,089 6.8 Increase Broadwater County Population 3,328 4,366 4,793 44.0 Increase State of Montana Population 800,204 903,293 974,989 21.8 Increase Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2009 Population Estimates, 2000 Census, 1990 Census The racial composition of the population in the State of Montana and the analysis area in 2000 is shown in table 162. The overwhelming majority of the population across the state and within Lewis & Clark, Powell and Broadwater Counties is white. The total population of all races other than white was less than 10 percent at both the county and state level. Table 162. Racial Composition of 2000 Population  MONTANA BROADWATER COUNTY, MT LEWIS AND CLARK COUNTY, MT POWELL COUNTY, MT U.S. Total Population 902,195 4,385 55,716 7,180 281,421,906 Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 18,081 58 843 140 35,305,818 Not Hispanic or Latino 884,114 4,327 54,873 7,040 246,116,088 White alone 807,823 4,214 52,571 6,568 194,552,774 Black or African American alone 2,534 12 104 35 33,947,837 American Indian alone 54,426 50 1,078 244 2,068,883 Asian alone 4,569 5 282 31 10,123,169 Native Hawaiian & Oth.Pacific Is. 425 3 26 0 353,509 Some other race 569 1 16 10 467,770  MONTANA BROADWATER COUNTY, MT LEWIS AND CLARK COUNTY, MT POWELL COUNTY, MT U.S. Two or more races 13,768 42 796 152 4,602,146 Percent of Total      Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 2.0% 1.3% 1.5% 1.9% 12.5% Not Hispanic or Latino 98.0% 98.7% 98.5% 98.1% 87.5% White alone 89.5% 96.1% 94.4% 91.5% 69.1% Black or African American alone 0.3% 0.3% 0.2% 0.5% 12.1% American Indian alone 6.0% 1.1% 1.9% 3.4% 0.7% Asian alone 0.5% 0.1% 0.5% 0.4% 3.6% Native Hawaiian & Oth.Pacific Is. 0.0% 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.1% Some other race 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.1% 0.2% Two or more races 1.5% 1.0% 1.4% 2.1% 1.6% Employment and Economic Well-Being From 1970 to 2009, total employment for full- and part-time jobs increased by 121 percent in Broadwater County (from 1,067 to 2,354), Lewis & Clark County employment grew by 162 percent (from 17,317 to 45,758) and Powell County grew by 42 percent (from 2,576 to 3,666)(USDC 2011). The State of Montana saw an increase in total employment of 108 percent, over this same period. State employment growth was largely due to increases in service and professional sector employment (including retail trade, health and social services, transportation, utilities, finance, education, etc.). These sectors represent approximately 61 percent of employment in both counties. By contrast in the three-county impact area, the mining and fossil fuels sector decreased by 17.1 percent between 1990 and 2000. From 1990 to 2009, average annual unemployment rates in the three counties followed similar patterns as the state and national level, falling to a low of 2.4 percent in September 2007 and rising in response to the economic downturn to a high of 6.7 percent in January 2010. The highest unemployment observed in the three counties was in Powell County, with a rate of 11.0 percent in January 2011(US Department of Labor 2011). Lewis and Clark County also peaked in January 2011 with an unemployment rate of 6.2 percent while at the same time Broadwater County checked in at 9.6 percent Lewis & Clark County has the highest rate of government labor force of the three-county region, which explains the lower unemployment rate during this period, since government employment tends to be more secure. Per capita income is considered one of the most important measures of economic well-being. However, this measure can be misleading. Per capita income is total personal income divided by population. Because total personal income includes non-labor income sources (dividends, interest, rent and transfer payments), it is possible for per capita income to be relatively high due to the presence of retirees and people with investment income. And because per capita income is calculated using total population and not the labor force as in average earnings per job, it is possible for per capita income to be relatively low when there are a disproportionate number of children and/or elderly people in the population. From 1970 to 2009 all three counties saw increases in per capita income. Broadwater County saw the greatest increase in per capita income of the three county region with a 70 percent increase (adjusted for inflation to 2010$) from $17,752 to $30,203. Lewis & Clark County saw a 65 percent increase (adjusted for inflation to 2010$) from $23,939 to $39,407 while Powell County saw a 49 percent increase from $16,748 to $25,033. Unlike per capita income, which is affected by nonlabor income, average earnings per job are indicators of the quality of local employment. Higher average earnings per job indicate that there are relatively more high-wage occupations. From 1970 to 2009, Lewis & Clark County saw an 11 percent increase in average earnings (adjusted for inflation to 2010$) from $38,824 to $43,140. Powell County saw a 1 percent decrease (adjusted for inflation to 2010$) from $31,501 to $31,277 while Broadwater County also experienced a 1 percent decrease (adjusted for inflation to 2010$) from $29,243 to $28,854. There are a number of reasons why average earnings per job may decline. These include: (1) more part-time or seasonal workers entering the workforce; (2) a rise in low-wage industries, such as tourism-related sectors; (3) a decline of high-wage industries, such as manufacturing; (4) more lower-paid workers entering the workforce; (5) the presence of a university with increasing enrollment of relatively low-wage students; (6) an influx of workers with low education levels that are paid less; (7) the in-migration of semi-retired workers who work part-time or seasonally; and (8) an influx of people who move to an area for quality of life rather than profit-maximizing reasons. National and regional trends in industry sectors influence the ability of communities to adapt to changing circumstances. Employment in extractive industries such as timber and mining, as well as in ranching and agriculture, are declining in western Montana. Projections indicate continued declines in employment in these areas. The differences between today’s national forest timber sale program and the program that was in place a decade or so ago has changed. However, the role that timber production from NFS lands plays in national and regional economies through logging and related activities has existed for a considerable time, and is integral to local communities and individuals directly employed by them. In Montana the sale of timber from National Forest lands has declined substantially in the last 30 years from a high of 481 million board feet in 1983 to a low of 66 million board feet in 2003, mainly due to increased litigation and changing market structures. Since the low in 2003, trends have been positive. In 2010, 185 million board feet of timber was sold from National Forest lands in Montana. On the HNF during the same period, the sale of timber has been more erratic with a high of 23 million board feet of timber sold (due to a Mountain Pine Beetle outbreak) in 2010 and a low of 1 million board feet in 1999. The most consistent period was during the 1980s decade when all years saw between 10 and 17 million board feet sold annually. See the Vegetation section for a detail of volume sold in Region One, Montana, Idaho, and the Helena National Forest for the last 30 years. Figure 103 that follows shows a chart graph displaying the same information.  Title: Volume display for R1, Montana, Idaho and HNF from 1980-2010Figure 103. Volume display for R1, Montana, Idaho and HNF from 1980-2010 The Helena National Forest is a major employer and landholder in Montana’s capital city and the surrounding communities. Consequently, Forest Service budget reductions and policies impact employment opportunities throughout the region. There have been changes in the forest timber sale program over the past 30 years as objectives have changed and timber harvest levels have declined. The most likely destination of timber from the Stonewall Vegetation Project is Sun Mountain Lumber in Powell County or RY Timber in Broadwater County. The percentage of manufacturing jobs (including forest products) in Powell County in 2000 was 10.7 percent and 17.3 percent in Broadwater County compared with only 3.2 percent in Lewis & Clark County, which does not have a major timber processing facility. There are several small wood processing facilities in the Lincoln Valley that may be a destination for some of the timber products associated with this project. Alternative 1 – No Action The no-action alternative would not harvest timber, implement BMPs on haul routes, return fire to the landscape or implement any of the proposed activities, and therefore, incurs no financial costs. Alternative 1 would produce no revenue and have no effects on jobs or income. It would also fail to meet the Helena National Forest Plan for management area T, which emphasizes timber production while protecting other resources. Alternatives 2 and 3 Project Feasibility The estimation of project feasibility was based on the Region 1 Sale Feasibility Model, which is a residual value timber appraisal approach. This method takes into account logging system, timber species and quality, volume removed per acre, lumber market trends, costs for slash treatment, and the cost of specified roads, temporary roads and road maintenance and results in an accurate timber appraisal and is referred to as stumpage. The appraised stumpage rate from the feasibility analysis is compared to base rates (revenues considered essential to cover regeneration plus minimum return to the federal treasury), which in this case is the minimum rate of $3.00/CCF (hundreds of cubic feet). The appraised stumpage rate and base rates for each alternative are displayed in table 163. For each of the action alternatives, the appraised stumpage rate is greater than the base rate, indicating that each of the alternatives is feasible (highly likely to sell). Conclusions Alternative 2 has the highest appraised stumpage rate ($6.31/CCF) and, therefore, would likely generate the most revenue. Alternative 3 has a lower appraised stumpage rate ($3.36/CCF), which is nearing the base rate ($3.00/CCF), however it is still likely to sell given current market conditions. Estimates of timber value are based on current fair market values of timber. Timber markets have fluctuated in the past 5 years, dropping significantly during the 2008 recession, and then rebounding slightly in subsequent years. Current markets have not returned to their pre-2008 levels; however Forest Service timber sales have continued to sell during these challenging markets. A major factor that influences the value of the timber particularly in the Stonewall Project area is the quality of the dead and dying lodgepole pine (LP). A significant percentage of the volume in this project comes from dead and dying LP, the mortality a result of the mountain pine beetle outbreak that began in 2008 and continues today. Following mortality LP retains its value as a sawlog product for a time. As the tree begins to deteriorate that value as a sawlog diminishes, however the tree may still be viable for other less valuable products. Any delay in implementation could negatively affect the feasibility of this timber and jeopardize the purpose and need of this Decision by rendering the project economically infeasible. Table 163. Project Feasibility and Financial Efficiency Summary (2011 dollars) CATEGORY MEASURE ALTERNATIVE 1 (NO ACTION) ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Timber Harvest Information Acres Harvested 0 1,969 1,074  Volume Harvested (CCF) 0 22,022 14,299  Base Rates ($/CCF) $0 $3.00 $3.00  Appraised Stumpage Rate ($/CCF) $0 $6.31 $3.36  Predicted High Bid ($/CCF) $0 $11.96 $9.01  Total Revenue (Thousands of $) $0 $241 $119 Timber Harvest & Required Design Criteria PNV (Thousands of $) $0 $178 $68 Timber Harvest & All Other Planned Non-timber Activities PNV (Thousands of $) $0 -$1,231 -$1,096 Financial Efficiency The financial efficiency analysis is specific to the timber harvest and restoration activities associated with the alternatives (as directed in Forest Service Manual 2400-Timber Management and guidance found in the Forest Service Handbook 2409.18). Costs for sale preparation, sale administration, regeneration, and restoration activities are included. All costs, timing, and amounts were developed by the specialists on the project’s interdisciplinary team. If exact costs were not known, the maximum of the cost range was used to produce the most conservative PNV result. The expected revenue for each alternative is the corresponding predicted high bid from the sale feasibility analysis. The predicted high bid is used for the expected revenue (rather than the appraised stumpage rate) since the predicted high bid is the best estimate of the high bid resulting from the timber sale auction. The PNV was calculated using a 4 percent real discount rate over the 10-year project lifespan (2013-2022). For more information on the values or costs, see the project file. This analysis is not intended to be a comprehensive benefit-cost or PNV analysis that incorporates a monetary expression of all known market and nonmarket benefits and costs that are generally used when economic efficiency is the sole or primary criterion upon which a decision is made. Many of the values associated with natural resource management are best handled apart from, but in conjunction with, a more limited benefit-cost framework. An example of this is the difficulty in capturing the benefits in monetary terms of prescribed fire on wildlife habitat. These benefits are discussed qualitatively throughout the EIS document, within each resource section. Table 163 summarizes the project feasibility and financial efficiency, including the base rates, appraised stumpage rate, predicted high bid, total revenue, and PNV for each alternative. Because all costs of the project are not related to the timber sale, two PNVs were calculated. One PNV indicates the financial efficiency of the timber sale, including all costs and revenues associated with the timber harvest and required design criteria. The required design criteria, as used here, include cost allowances for purchaser required work such as road maintenance and purchaser deposits to fund Forest Service work such as brush disposal. For a more detailed view of timber sale related costs, see the Economics project file. The second PNV includes all costs for each action alternative, including activities that could be funded by the Forest Service, KV or potential Stewardship revenues. The costs used in the PNV calculations can be found in table 164 which displays those activity expenditures associated with each alternative, but not included in the appraisal. Sale preparation costs of $13.50/CCF, sale administration costs of $4.50 per CCF, and regeneration exam costs of $15.00 per acre are excluded from table 6. The cost of sale preparation, sale administration and regeneration exams for alternative 2 is $439,956. The cost of sale preparation, sale administration and regeneration exams for alternative 3 is $298,692. Stewardship Opportunities An integrated resource timber contract (IRTC) or stewardship contract as it is more commonly referred to enables the Forest Service to trade goods for services. The Forest Service exchanges timber for an equal value of environmentally beneficial work. Common types of projects included in Stewardship Contracts include weed spraying, road decommissioning, culvert replacement, precommercial thinning, slashing, etc. The starting point for the available revenue is the estimated stumpage value from the sale feasibility analysis minus an allowance for essential regeneration costs. This value is then adjusted downward by 25 percent to account for potential underrun. This stumpage value estimate is applied since it is a conservative value of the timber sale. The 25 percent adjustment provides a cushion to the available revenue estimate to account for potential factors such as the cruise volume being overestimated or degradation of dead material. No determination has been made as to whether to use a stewardship contract to implement the Stonewall Vegetation Project. Some factors that would determine the use of a stewardship contract include the value of the timber at the time of contract, the availability of needed projects in the area and the level of degradation of the dead lodgepole pine that makes up a large percentage of the sawlog volume in the project. The estimated available revenue after the aforementioned adjustment ranges from approximately $104,069 in alternative 2 to $36,011 in alternative 3. Both alternatives have a high likelihood of selling and producing positive revenue available for stewardship activities. Alternative 2 proposes more acres of harvest, more volume harvested, has higher potential revenue and therefore would generate greater available revenue for stewardship activities. Conclusions Table 163 that displays project feasibility and financial efficiency indicates that both action alternatives are financially inefficient (negative PNV) when including all activities associated with the analysis. Table 163 also indicates that both action alternatives are feasible when considering only timber harvest and the required design criteria. Alternative 2 has the highest PNV for the timber harvest and required design criteria at positive $178 thousand, and negative $1.2 million when considering all analysis activities. For alternative 3, the PNV for the timber harvest and required design criteria is positive $68 thousand, and negative $1.1 million for all decision activities. The no-action alternative has no costs or revenues associated with it. A reduction of financial PNV in any alternative as compared to the most efficient solution is a component of the economic trade-off, or opportunity cost, of achieving that alternative. The no-action alternative would not harvest timber or take other restorative actions and, therefore, incur no costs. As indicated earlier, many of the values associated with natural resource management are nonmarket benefits. These benefits should be considered in conjunction with the financial efficiency information presented here. These nonmarket values are discussed in the various resource sections found in this document. When evaluating trade-offs, the use of efficiency measures is one tool used by the decision maker in making the decision. Many things cannot be quantified, such as effects on wildlife and the restoration of watersheds and vegetation. The decision maker takes many factors into account in making the decision. Table 164. Activity Expenditures by Alternative (not included in appraisal) ACTIVITY ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Sale preparation $0 $297,297 $193,036 Sale administration $0 $99,099 $64,345 Weed Spraying- connected to harvest $0 $18,000 $18,000 Weed Spraying- not connected to harvest $0 $31,600 $31,600 Weed Monitoring $0 $3,333 $3,333 Planting $0 $493,884 $473,688 Silvicultural exams $0 $58,575 $43,650 Precommercial Thinning $0 $405,256 $294,276 Noncommercial thinning/slashing $0 $5,750 $5,750 Hand piling and burning of nonactivity fuels- Jackpot $0 $14,600 $11,900 Post-Harvest Burn $0 $303,875 $259,000 Prescribed burning $0 $409,725 $296,550 Economic Impact Effects The analysis calculated the jobs and labor income associated with the processing of the timber products harvested, and all other activities in the Decision, such as prescribed fire, noncommercial fuel reduction, post-harvest diversity planting, and precommercial thinning. Timber products harvested and the nontimber activities would have direct, indirect, and induced effects on local jobs and labor income. In order to estimate jobs and labor income associated with timber harvest, levels were proportionately broken out by product type ( table 165). In order to estimate jobs and labor income associated with reforestation and restoration activities, expenditures for these activities were developed by the resource specialists. Only the expenditures associated with the contracted activities are included in the impact analysis. Table 165. Proportion of Timber Harvest by Product Type PRODUCT TYPE ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 Sawmills 70 70 Log Homes 5 5 Post & Poles 5 5 Pulp 20 20 Table 166 displays the direct, indirect and induced, and total estimates for employment (part and full-time) and labor income that may be attributed to each alternative. Since the expenditures occur over time, the estimated impacts of jobs and labor income would be spread out over the life of the project. It is important to note that these may not be new jobs or income, but rather jobs and income that are supported by this project. These impacts are shown both in total (over the life of the project) and on an annual basis. It is anticipated that the timber harvest would occur over a 4-year period. Table 166. Economic Impacts (Employment and Labor Income), Total and Annual ($2011) PROPOSED ACTIVITIES ALTERNATIVES ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 NO ACTION TOTAL ANNUAL TOTAL ANNUAL  Non-timber Activities      Part and Full Time Jobs Contributed*      Direct 29 3 25 3 0 Indirect and Induced 8 1 7 1 0 Total 36 4 31 3 0 Labor Income Contributed** ($M2011)      Direct $855 $95 $737 $82 $0 Indirect and Induced $236 $26 $204 $23 $0 Total $1,091 $121 $941 $105 $0 Timber Harvest Activities    Part and Full Time Jobs Contributed      Direct 71 18 46 11 0 Indirect and Induced 63 16 41 10 0 Total 134 34 87 22 0 Labor Income Contributed ($M2011)      Direct $3,445 $861 $2,237 $559 $0 Indirect and Induced $3,190 $797 $2,071 $518 $0 Total $6,635 $1,659 $4,308 $1,077 $0 PROPOSED ACTIVITIES ALTERNATIVES ALTERNATIVE 2 ALTERNATIVE 3 NO ACTION TOTAL ANNUAL TOTAL ANNUAL  All Activities    Part and Full Time Jobs Contributed      Direct 100 21 71 14 0 Indirect and Induced 71 17 48 11 0 Total 171 38 118 25 0 Labor Income Contributed ($M2011)      Direct $4,301 $956 $2,974 $641 $0 Indirect and Induced $3,425 $824 $2,275 $540 $0 Total $7,726 $1,780 $5,249 $1,182 $0 * Employment is the total full and part-time wage, salaried, and self-employed jobs in the region. **Labor income includes the wages, salaries and benefits of workers who are paid by employers and income paid to proprietors. Conclusions The no-action alternative would not change jobs or income because there are no proposed project activities associated with this alternative. Alternative 2 proposes harvest of 22,022 hundred cubic feet (Ccf) of timber products and could result in a total of 171 jobs and labor income at $7.7 million over the life of the project. On an annual basis, this would amount to approximately 38 jobs per year over a period of 10 years. Annual effects are greatest with this alternative since it has the most timber harvest. If the harvest takes longer than anticipated, the total impacts would remain the same, but the annual contributions would be reduced. Approximately 134 direct, indirect and induced jobs and $6.6 million of labor income are associated with the proposed timber harvest activities, with the rest associated with restoration activities. Alternative 3 proposes harvest of 14,299 Ccf of timber products could result in a total of 118 jobs and $5.2 million in total labor income over the life of the project. On an annual basis, this would amount to approximately 25 jobs per year over a period of 10 years, and $1.2 million annually in total labor income. Approximately 87 direct, indirect and induced jobs and $4.3 million of labor income would be associated with the timber harvest activities, with the rest associated with restoration activities. Environmental Justice According to the CEQ’s Environmental Justice Guidelines for NEPA (1997), “minority populations should be identified where either: (a) the minority population of the affected area exceeds 50 percent or (b) the minority population percentage of the affected area is meaningfully greater than the minority population percentage in the general population or other appropriate unit of geographic analysis.” Table 162 shows that the total share of all minority populations represented less than 10 percent of the population in the state and the analysis area in 2000. Thus, the U.S. Census data suggest minority populations within the analysis area do not meet the CEQ’s Environmental Justice criterion. Guidance from CEQ on identifying low-income populations states that “…agencies may consider as a community either a group of individuals living in geographic proximity to one another, or a set of individuals (e.g., migrant workers or Native Americans), where either type of group experiences common conditions of environmental exposure or effect.” Low-income populations are defined, based on the 2000 Census standard, as persons living below the poverty level (based on total income of $17,604 for a family household of four). Persistent poverty status requires a county to have experienced an individual poverty rate in excess of 20 percent for several Census years. In 2000, 10.8 percent of the population in Broadwater County, 12.6 percent of the population in Powell County and 10.9 percent of the population in Lewis & Clark County were living below the poverty level. Based on these data, the characteristic of persistent poverty is not present in the analysis area. Conclusions Table 165 predicts more employment and labor income opportunities would be created by alternatives 2 and 3. Implementation of any of the action alternatives would not likely adversely affect minority or low-income populations. Implementation of the no-action alternative maintains the status quo and provides no additional employment or income in the economic impact area. The Executive Order also directs agencies to consider patterns of subsistence hunting and fishing when an action proposed by an agency has the potential to affect fish or wildlife. There are no Native American Reservations or designated Native American hunting grounds located in or near the analysis area. None of the alternatives restrict or alter opportunities for subsistence hunting and fishing by Native American tribes. Tribes holding treaty rights for hunting and fishing on the Helena National Forest are included on the project mailing list and have the opportunity to provide comments on this project. Other Disclosures This DEIS fulfills the requirements for environmental analysis found in NEPA and in the Council on Environmental Quality implementing regulations at 40 CFR, Parts 1500-1508. NEPA at 40 CFR 1502.25(a) directs, “to the fullest extent possible, agencies shall prepare draft environmental impacts statement concurrently with and integrated with... other environmental review laws and executive orders.” The action alternatives would be located entirely on national forest system lands. The action alternatives are not in conflict with planning objectives for County or local tribes. Short-term Uses and Long-term Productivity NEPA requires consideration of “the relationship between short-term uses of man’s environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity” (40 CFR 1502.16). As declared by the Congress, this includes using all practicable means and measures, including financial and technical assistance, in a manner calculated to foster and promote the general welfare, to create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can exist in productive harmony, and fulfill the social, economic, and other requirements of present and future generations of Americans (NEPA Section 101). Short-term uses, and their effects, are those that occur within the first few years of project implementation. Long-term productivity refers to the capability of the land and resources to continue producing goods and services long after the project has been implemented. Under the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act and the National Forest Management Act, all renewable resources are to be managed in such a way that they are available for future generations. The harvesting and use of standing timber can be considered a short-term use of a renewable resource. As a renewable resource, trees can be reestablished and grown again if the long-term productivity of the land is maintained. This long-term productivity is maintained through the application of the project design features described in chapter 2, in particular those applying to the soil and water resources. Under alternatives 2 and 3, openings would be created in regeneration cutting units in the short term, but well-stocked vigorous stands would be established for the long term as a result of post-harvest reforestation and stand tending. Alternatives 2 and 3 would provide timber products, in decreasing yields, to benefit consumers in the short term. With alternatives 2 and 3 harvest units there would be a short-term increase in fuel hazard in the period between harvesting and activity fuel treatment. This would be accompanied by a long-term increase in stand vigor, a reduction in fuel hazard, and a corresponding decrease in the risk of stand-replacing fire occurring within the harvest units. There would also be a 3- to 5-year increase in fuel hazard from post-harvest treatments and a corresponding increase in stand vigor as discussed in the Fire and Fuels section of this chapter. Big game security habitat under the action alternatives would be reduced, causing short-term habitat degradation. If an action alternative is selected, a site-specific forest plan amendment would be required for Forest Plan standards 3 and 4a (FP pgs. II/17-18). The treatments would allow the development of healthy, more vigorous stands that are more sustainable for those habitat values in the long term. These effects are discussed in the Commonly Hunted Species section of this chapter. Unavoidable Adverse Effects Implementation of any action alternative could cause some adverse environmental effects that cannot be effectively mitigated or avoided. Unavoidable adverse effects often result from managing the land for one resource at the expense of the use or condition of other resources. Some adverse effects are short term and necessary to achieve long-term beneficial effects. Many adverse effects can be reduced, mitigated, or avoided by limiting the extent or duration of effects. The interdisciplinary procedure used to identify specific harvest units and roads was designed to eliminate or lessen the significant adverse consequences to resource protection standards of the Helena National Forest Plan. The application of project design features was intended to further limit the extent, severity, and duration of potential effects. Such measures are discussed throughout this chapter. Regardless of the use of these measures, some adverse effects would occur. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Irreversible commitments are decisions affecting non-renewable resources such as soils, wetlands, cultural resources, or the extinction of a species. Such commitments are considered irreversible because the resource has deteriorated to the point that renewal can occur only over a long period of time or at a great expense, or because the resource has been destroyed or removed. No irreversible commitments of resources were identified. Irretrievable commitments are those that are lost for a period of time such as the temporary loss of timber productivity in forested areas that are kept clear for use as a power line right-of-way of road. These are opportunities that are forgone for the period of time that the resource can’t be used. For the action alternatives, there are irretrievable commitments of the growth of forest vegetation from the creation of new landings and new skid trails. This loss is not irreversible. Upon project completion landings, necessary for logging operations, have a low probability of maintaining long-term soil productivity. The type of vegetation growing on these sites will likely be grass and brush. The amount of landings is small and skid trails are expected to recover and are expected to show little to no adverse effects. Required Permits At this time it is uncertain whether this project would require a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, due to several factors. In Northwest Environmental Defense Center v. Brown, 640 F.3d 1063 (9th Cir. 2011) (“NEDC”), the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held that stormwater runoff associated with two logging roads that flows into systems of ditches, culverts, and channels before being discharged into forest streams and rivers is a point source discharge for which a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit is required. The Court of Appeals then remanded to the district court for further proceedings consistent with its opinion. The State of Oregon and other parties filed petitions for certiorari with the U.S. Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit’s decision. The United States was not a party to litigation. NEDC v. Brown involved a citizen suit; thus any available relief on remand would be limited to addressing the violation in question and is only binding on the involved parties. Because the USDA Forest Service was not a party, the Ninth Circuit's decision did not impose any affirmative duties on it. However the case has implications for federal land management agencies. In response to NEDC v. Brown, EPA issued a formal notice on March 23, 2012 in the Federal Register (77 FR 30473) indicating its intent to expeditiously propose revisions to its Phase I stormwater regulations (40 C.F.R. §122.26) to specify that stormwater discharges from logging roads are not stormwater discharges “associated with industrial activity.” The notice also states that EPA intends to further study and seek public comment on alternative approaches for addressing stormwater discharges from forest roads. Additionally, following the Ninth Circuit's decision, Congress took legislative action suspending any potential permitting requirement imposed by the decision: From the date of enactment of this Act until September 30, 2012, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall not require a permit under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342), nor shall the Administrator directly or indirectly require any State to require a permit, for discharges of stormwater runoff from roads, the construction, use, or maintenance of which are associated with silvicultural activities. Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012, § 429, Pub. L. No. 112-74, 125 Stat. 786, 1046-1047 (Dec. 23, 2011). Thus, until September 30, 2012, no NPDES permits are required for stormwater discharges from roads associated with silvicultural activities. Permanent legislation is also pending in both the U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives that would amend Section 402 of Clean Water Act to exempt stormwater discharges resulting from silvicultural activities from NPDES permit requirements. Due to these factors, it is uncertain at this time whether any NPDES permitting requirements apply, or would apply in the future to stormwater discharges from logging roads. Should it be determined that an NPDES permit is required for this project, the Forest Service will comply with any applicable NPDES permitting requirements. On March 20, 2013, the United States Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit and held runoff from most logging roads is not storm water runoff related to industrial facilities and so not subject to the Clean Water Act’s requirement for a NPDES permit (Decker v. NEDC). The Supreme Court gave deference to the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) interpretation of its own regulation, the Industrial Stormwater rule, of the Clean Water Act. In a regulation promulgated just prior to the ruling in this case, the EPA found its regulation’s references to facilities, establishments, manufacturing, processing and an industrial plant mean the regulation extends only to traditional industrial buildings, such as factories and associated sites. Most logging roads are not associated with such sites unless they are directly related to raw materials storage areas and sites for the processing of raw materials, such as sawmills. The Court found deference warranted here because the EPA’s interpretation of its regulation was consistent with its earlier regulations. (U.S. S. Ct.). Roads associated with timber harvest are not considered by the EPA to produce pollutant discharges that require point-source discharge permits because they do not come from industrial sources nor do they result from manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant. 40 CFR §122.26(b)(14).   This page left blank intentionally Chapter 4. Consultation and Coordination Preparers and Contributors The Forest Service consulted the following individuals, Federal, State, and local agencies, tribes and other organization and individuals during the development of this environmental impact statement: Interdisciplinary Team Members Responsible line officer: Amber Kamps, Lincoln Ranger District, District Ranger Name Responsibility Experience Larry Amell Silviculturist Bachelor of Science in Forest Resource Management, Master of Science in Forest Resource Management, University of Idaho. 29 years of experience in fire control/management and silviculture Katherine Carsey Botanist Master of Science in Biology, 21 years of experience Chris Bielecki Logging Engineer Bachelor of Science, Forestry; Master of Forestry, Forest Engineering; 14 years of experience Cameron Bonnett Landscape Architect B.L.A Degree in Landscape Architecture; Master of Science, 20 years of experience T. Buhl Fire Management Specialist Undergraduate education in Range Science and Fire Technology; 15 years of experience in fire and fuels management Laura Burns GIS Specialist Bachelor of Science in Forest Resource Management, fisheries biologist for 17 years and a GIS specialist for 6 years Cynthia Englebert Botanist Bachelor of Science, Range Science; Additional undergraduate work in botany; 16 years of experience Perry Nolan Archaeologist Bachelor of Arts, Anthropology; Master of Science, Forest Science; Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems (GIS); 14 years of experience Michael McNamara Hydrologist Bachelor of Science in Geology and Master of Science in Forest Hydrology; 25 years of experience Lois Pfeffer Environmental Coordinator, Interdisciplinary Team Leader Bachelor of Science in Forest Resources, Minor in Soil Science, 23 years of experience Amee Rief Fisheries Biologist Bachelor of Science in Biology and Master of Science in Fisheries and Wildlife Science, 18 years of experience Scott Reitz Wildlife Biologist Bachelor of Science in Wildlife Science, 35 years of experience. Janice Schultz Writer-Editor 20 years of experience with the Forest Service in silviculture, recreation and public affairs, 12 years in NEPA documentation Stephanie Valentine Recreation Bachelor of Science, Outdoor Recreation Management; 15 years of experience Dustin Walters Soil Scientist Master of Science, Natural Resource Conservation; 13 years of experience   Reviewers and Specialists Consulted · Amanda Milburn Silviculture · Byron Stringham Landscape Architect · David Callery Hydrologist · David Marr Soil Scientist · Eric Barclay Engineer · Ernie Lundburg Recreation · Jan Fauntleroy Project Liaison/NEPA Coordinator · Jarel Kurtz Fuels Planner/Air Quality · Kathy Bushnell Public Affairs · Kyle McGuire Archeologist · Len Walch Fish Biologist · Lois Olsen Botanist/Noxious weeds · Pat Shanley Project Liaison/Wildlife Biologist · Scott Johnson Planning Forester/Logging Specialist · Shawn Heinert Range  Federal, State, and Local Agencies The Forest Service consulted the following Federal, State, and local agencies and tribes during the development of this environmental impact statement: Anne VanDehey, US Fish & Wildlife Service Bill Kuney, Montana Film Office Boulder Community Library Brad Rixford & Mike Wyatt, BLM (BLM) Broadwater Community Library Broadwater County Commissioners Bureau of Reclamation Carole Mackin, Montana DEQ Christian Levine, DEQ Cory Loecker, Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks (MTFWP) Craig Osterman, Treasure State Alliance Dan Bushnell, Department of Natural Resources Dave Burch, Jefferson County Weed District Dave White, Natural Resource Conservation Service David Bowers, DEQ Remediation Division Deb Dils, MTFWP Dept. of Natural Resources and Conservation Deputy Director, USDA Aphis PPD/EAD Director of Planning and Review, Ad Council on Historic Preservation Division Administrator, Federal Highway Administration Don Allen, Western Environmental Trade Assoc. Dr. Mark Baumler, Montana State Historic Preservation Ed Shindoll, Broadwater Co. Rural Fire Dist. EIS Review Coordinator, Reg. 8 US EPA Environmental Protection Agency, Attn: John F. Wardell Eric Griffin, Lewis and Clark County Everett M. "Sonny" Stiger, Wolf Creek Volunteer Fire Co. Fran Viereck, Montana Department of Commerce Gail Keith, Montana Board of Outfitters Gallatin County Commissioners Gary Olson, MTFWP Gary Steinberg, Sheridan County Weed District Governor State of Montana Helena Regulatory Office, US Army Corps of Engineers Honorable Dennis Rehberg, US House of Representatives Honorable Jon Tester, US Senate Honorable Max Baucus, US Senate James Wilbur, Lewis & Clark Co. Water Quality Protection District Jefferson County Commissioners Jenny Sika, MT FWP Jerry Meyer,Capital City Coordinator, USDA Forest Service, Northern Region Jim Freeman, Cascade County Jim Ghekiere, Liberty County Weed District Jim Sottrafield, MTFWP Jim Wedeward, Bureau of Reclamation Joe Hudson District Ranger, USDA FS Moose Creek Ranger District Joe Maurier,MTFWP John Fraley,MTFWP Kathy Lloyd, C-U Task Force Kelly Ingalls, Broadwater County Weed Board Kevin T. Brewer. Montana Dept. of Transportation Larry Anderson, U.S. Senator Conrad Burns Larry Hoffman, Lewis & Clark County Weed Coordinator Larry Peterman, MTFWP Laurence Hoffman, Lewis and Clark County Extension Service Lewis and Clark County Library Lillian Hegstad, Helena Chamber of Commerce Lincoln Community Library Lincoln Office, Montana DNRC Linda Cardenas Mack Long, MTFWP Marc Wilson, US Fish & Wildlife Service Mark Snoozye Bureau of Reclamation Mary Upton, Townsend Area Chamber of Commerce Meagher County Commissioners Mgr., Intergovernmental Review, State Clearinghouse, Lt. Governor’s Office Michael Downey, MTFWP Michael Korn, MTFWP Michael Murray, Lewis and Clark County Commissioners Mine Waste Cleanup Bureau, Montana Dept. of Environmental Quality Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife & Parks Region 3 Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife & Parks, Region 4 Northwest Mountain Region Regional Administrator Federal Aviation Administration Northwest Power Planning Council NRCS, National Environmental Coordinator Office of Environmental Affairs, Department of the Interior Pat Saffel, MTFWP Paul Spengler, Tri County Fire Working Group Perry Brown, MTFWP Pete Strazdas, Montana DEQ Policy and Planning Division, Office of Civil Rights Powell County Commissioners Randall and Sherry Reynolds, FAA Ray Vinkey, MTFWP Regional Forester, USDA FS NR Regional Office Richard Fairweather, Meagher County Weed District Rick Hotaling, BLM Rod Duty, MTFWP Roger Knapp, Treasure County Weed District Ron Pierce, MTFWP Ron Spoon, MTFWP Rus Von Koch, BLM Ruth Miller, BLM Sam Little, Jefferson County Weed District Scott Oviatt, NRCS Snow Survey Sharon Rose, MTFWP State Publications Center, Montana State Library Stephen Potts, Helena Office EPA - Region 8 Tammy DeCock, NRCS Ted Lawrence, Townsend Volunteer Fire Department Tom Carlsen, MTFWP Tom Sawatzke Bureau of Reclamation US Army Engr. NW Division US Coast Guard US Department of Energy, Director, NEPA Policy US DOI, Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance US EPA EIS Filing Section US EPA Office of Federal Activities US EPA Region VIII, Montana Office US Fish & Wildlife Service USDA National Ag Library. USDA Forest Service, Ecosystem Mgmt Coordination Staff USDA Forest Service, NEPA Program Leader USDA FS White Sulphur Springs Ranger Distgrict USDA NAL, ACQ & Serials Branch USDA Policy & Planning Division Virginia Knerr, Broadwater Co. Extension Service Tribes Marlene Bear Walter, Blackfoot Tribal Council Agency Director Schmitz, Shoshone-Bannock Tribes Vera Sonneck, Nez Perce Tribe James H. Steele, Tribal Chairman, Confederated Salish & Kootenai Tribes Executive Director, Blackfoot Challenge Tina Bernd Cohen, Blackfoot Challenge Jon Krutar, Blackfoot Legacy Brian McDonald, Blackfoot Challenge Marcia Pablo, Confederated Salish & Kootenai Tribes,Preservation Department  Others: A.W. Madison Agency Director, Smurfit-Stone Container Corp. Al and Susan Weinert Al Christofferson Al Martini Alan Gilda Alan Heimbach Alan J. Smith, Helena Snowdrifters Alan Wright Alane Fitzpatrick Alvin L. Breneman Ann Pierce April E. Johnston, American Wildlands Arny Brown Arthur Bowron Audie Anderson, Ramshorn Outfitters B & W Ranch LP Barney and Claudette Vandenbos Barry Dexter Becky Garland Becky Thurman Ben Thompson Ben Thompson Benjamin Pignatelli Bill and Brenda Quay, Sunny Slope Bill Brewster Bill Bucher Bill Crenshaw, Elkhorn Land Owners Protective Association Bill Cutsforth Bill Cyr Bill Dart, Public Lands Director, Blue Ribbon Coalition Bill Hammer Bill Hertz Bill Hubber, Bill Koehnke Bill L. Davis, Davis Bar Triangle "T" Ranch Bill Myers Bill Orsello, Montana Wildlife Federation Bill Otten Bill Tiddy Billie Ranard Bob and Jan Braico Bob Bugni Bob Bukantis Bob Bushnell, Montana Snowmobile Assoc. Bob E. O'Connell Bob Erickson Bob Marks Bob Wing, Native Montanan Bonnie Miller Boyd Bomar Brad and Alice Cooper, Tri River Lumber Brent Anderson Brent Bushnell, Qwest Brian and Betty Eisenzimer Brian Kimpton, Kimpton Ranch Company Broadwater Rod & Gun Club Brooke and Maria Hunter Bruce Farling Trout Unlimited Bruce Rehwinkel Bruce Timpano, Pyramid Mountain Lumber, Inc Bryan Lewis Bud Smith Budd Williams Carl Lindstrom Carl Maehl Carol D. Wells Carolan Bunegar Cathy Champion-Predmore & Dan Predmore Cedron Jones, Western Montana RAC Member Charlene Locke Charles and Georgia Ferrel Charles and Maureen Redfield Charles and Ethel Sutej Charles D. Muir Charles D. Trinwith Charles E. McLane Charles Hedrick Charles Plymale Charles R. Udell Charles Sherman Living Trust Charlie Hail Charlotte A. & Melvin Hagen, Ponderosa Snow Warriors Charly and Shirley Tiernan Chris Castagne Chris Deveny & Ken Knudson Chris Pfahl, ASARCO Incorporated Chuck Dietz Chuck Hahn, Hahn Ranch Company Chuck or Louise Fischer Chuck Seeley Smurfit-Stone Container Corp. Cindy and Harry Poett Cleve Johnson Cliff Cox, Creek Ranch Cory Miedema Craig Brayko Craig Cazier, Broadwater County Snowmobilers Club Craig Knowles Craig Winterburn, Running W Cattle Company Curt Diehl D. Smith, J. Johnson & M. McCracken, Bonneville Power Administration Dal Smilie, American Motorcyclist Association Dale and Maryanne Bishop Dale Bouma Dale Cote Dale Gardner, Helena Trail Riders Dan and Susan Wallace Dan Oliver Dan Pittman, Forest Resources of MT & Assoc. LLC Dan Rundell Daniel Comer Darrell Miller, Marks-Miller Post & Pole Dave Austin Dave Greytak, G and O Partnership Dave Jackson Dave Lewis David & Connie Cole David & Nancy Duel David Brown David Comer David P. Clark David Scrimm, Program Director, Montana Wilderness Association David Stahly David Walker Dean Halverson Del Sharbono, MTVRA Deloris White Dennis Hengel DeWayne Williams Diana Colby Diana Reichenberg Dick Artley Dick Bruins Dick Clearman Dick Noel Dick Sloan Diehl Curt Dinene Schmitz, Land, Resources, Environ Sciences Don & Suzanne Peavey Don Burnham, Prickly Pear Simmental Ranch Don Doyle Don Gordon Don Hulett Don Smith Donald and Nadeane Jensen Donald and Peter Plaza Donald and Judith Templeton Donald Hinman Donald Shearer Donna Roy Dorothy Lake Doug Abelin, CTVA/MTVRA/NOHVCC Doug and Cindy Brady Doug Breker Doug Finstad Doug Powell, Powell Contractors Doug Salsbury, Tomahawk Ranch Douglas Swingley Douglas Vulcan Dr. David Baker Duane and Elaine Mann Duane Bakken Duane Halverson Dustin Ecker Dwight Crawford Ecosystem Defense/Alliance for the Wild Rockies Ed Dawes Ed McCauley Ed Regan, RY Timber, Inc Ed Tyanich Edward L. Austin Edward L. Finstad Edward nd Susan Standley Elaine Snyder Elkhorn Mountain Ranch Ellen Brown Ellen Engstedt, Montana Wood Products Assoc. Ellen Feaver Emma Suarez, Pacific Legal Foundation ERG Ernest R. Pearce Ernie Nunn Estiban and Gayle Serquina Eve Byron Farrel Rose, Rose Appraisal/Realty Frank & Billie Houle, Montana Wilderness Association Franklin Slifka Fred Bailey, Helena Snowdrifters Fred Dalbec Fred Lurie, BBCTU Fred Robinson Fred Rousseau Fritz Snideman Gabe Furshong Gary and Joyce Thompson Gary Axtman, Kim's Marina Gary Burnett Gary E. Sutton Sr. Gary Marks, Marks-Miller Post and Pole, Inc. Gayle Joslin Gene and Lonnie Grandy Gene Cook George and Barbara O'Dore, Mildred Neild Trust George Bettas, Boone and Crockett Club George Demers George Gray George Oberst George Ochenski Ginger Gillin, GEI Consultants Glen and Marge Kolve Glenn Hockett, Gallatin Wildlife Association Glenn Middlestead, Helena Cycle Center Gloria B. Stiner Gloria Cartan Gordon Thompson Gordy Sanders, Pyramid Mountain Lumber, Inc Gregory Field, Tri Mountain Angus Grosfield Ranch LLC Hallie Rugheimer Hank Goetz Hank Mathiason Harley and Patricia Ziesman Heidi Bray Helena Hunters and Anglers Assoc. Holly Horton Homer J. Phillips Iwy Obrigewitch Jack Eddie Jack Mahon Jack McDonnell Jack McLeod Jack Rich Jack Smith Jack Thomas Jack Vanliere James and Karen Langsather James and Virginia Reynolds James and Laura Palagi James Baker James E. Roberts Jr. James F. Davis James F. O'Connor James Greenwood James H. & Donna Aline James L. Paris, Montana Snowmobile Assoc. James Maher James McMaster James Nettleton James R. Wolf, Continental Divide Trail Society James T. Wethevelt James Thomason James W. Duffy, Duffy Ranch Janey and Tilton Holm Jay and Lisa Roberson Jay Krieg, Eagle Stud Mill, Inc. Jay Reardon Jeff & Marie Hoeffner, Staubach Jeff Juel, Wild West Institute Jeffery and Ivan Clark Jeffrey Carlile Jerome Cain Jerry and Ruth Massee Jerry and Mary Lehman Jerry Burns Jerry Grebenc, Helena Hunters & Anglers Association Jim and Peggy Thompson, Thompson Ranch and Livestock Jim Barnes, Big Sky Cyclery - Helena, Inc. Jim Harris Jim Haslip Jim Jenson, Montana Environmental Info Center Jim Lewis, Helena Outdoor Club Jim Posewitz, Helena Hunters and Anglers Assoc. Jim Rathburn Jim Robbison and Chere Jiusto Jim Stipich Jim Stone Jim Suek Joe and Carlene Armstrong Joe and Helen Beausoleil Joe Baze Joe Cote Joe Jepson Joe Marino Joel Davis John and Jocelyn Bowne John and Lynn Cromrich John and Kay Robertson John Day, Ravalli County Weed District John Gatchell, Montana Wilderness Association John Heide John Hodnik John Johnson, Cost Cutters Landscape John L. Stoner John Moodry John Northey John S. Fleming John Sam Bakke John Wilson, Trout Unlimited Jon Clarenbach Jon Moore Jonathan Haywood Jonathan Roe Joseph and Wendy Schultz Josephine Cope Juanita J. Wilson Judith L. Landecker Juris Ore, Prickly Pear Sportsman's Association Karalee Bancroft, Caroline Ranch Karen Davidson Karen Kueffler Karen Stone Karole Lee Karole Lee, Montana Wilderness Association Katharine Donnelley Katherine Mieyr Kathy Cockerham Kathy Kimpton, Kimpton and Sons, Inc. Kathy Lloyd & Drake Barton Kathy O'Reilly, Henry O’Reilly Trust KD Feeback Keith Lenard, Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation Kelly Flynn, Goldwest Kelly Flynn, Hidden Hollow Hideaway Ranch Kelly Ingalls, Round Grove Ranch Kelly Leo Ken & Pat Peterson Ken Gardner Ken Krause Ken Quimby Ken Wallace, Wild Divide Chapter of MWA Kim Davitt American Wildlands Kim Gray Kim Wilson Kipp and Betty Kazda Kurt Vandervalk L& Commissioners, Cascade County L. F. Schombel Larry Copenhaver, Montana Wildlife Federation Larry Phillips Larry Wismer, Last Chance Back Country Horseman Laurel Schubert Lauren Buckley, Wild West Institute Laurie Erban, North Ranch Laurie Maughan Laurie, Walter and Alice Bennett Lawrence and Carol McEvoy Leo Sera Leonard Eckel Leslie and Eldon O'Neil Leslie Heisey Lewis Zundel Lincoln Springs Homeowners Association Lloyd Riggins Lois Delger-DeMars, Montana Land Reliance Lonnie and Elizabeth Cook Loren Davis Loretta Kelly Louie Bouma Louisa Rothfus Lowell C. Anderson Lucille Gardella Lyle and Pat Myers Lynn and Jeannee Dickey Lynne Lansdon Marc and Rose Kneedler Marilyn C. Webber Mark and Joy Aquino Mark Krpan, Krpan Logging Mark S. Ryckman Marshall & Carol Sewell Martin Clark Marvin & Kathy Reeve, Ponderosa Snow Warriors Marvin P. Love Mary Anne Guggenheim & Jan Donaldson Mathew Kmon Matt Clifford, Trout Unlimited Melanie Delorenzo Merry J. Johnson Michael and Joyce Ferguson Michael and Nancy Schmauch Michael Brown, Graymont Western US, Inc. Michael Garrity, Executive Director, Alliance for the Wild Rockies Michael Hall Michael Hayes Michael Oke Mike and Brenda Sperry Mike Bertram Mike Clark, Helena Snowdrifters Mike Day Mike Grimes Mike Henry Mike R. Benson Milton Coty Miner Lea Mitchell Hegman Monte and Mary Ellen Schnur Mr. and Mrs. Merten Freyholtz, Sweetgrass Hills Protective Assoc. Mr. W. Greiner Nancy Larson Nancy Pitblado Nellie and James Harris Nelson and Suzy Wert Newton L. Sloan Norm Peters Orrin Johnson Pam and Ron Boggs Pat Helvey Patrick Miller, PFM Manufacturing, Inc. Patrick Shiels Paul and Becky Donaldson Paul and Vicki Kent Paul Antonioli Paul Edwards Paul Leite Paul Richards, Southwest Montana Wildlands Alliance Paul Roos Paul Sharon Paul Updike Paula Ward and Bruce Ward, Continental Divide Trail Alliance Pauline Webb, Ag In The Classroom Pete and Maureen Strazdas Pete Feigley Peter J. Sulluran Phil Henault Philip and Terry Rose Philip D. Pallister, Jaybird Ranch Phyl Miller Public Lands Access Association R. J. Berger Ralph A. Jackson Ralph Boland Ralph Strom Ralph Visconti Randy and Carrie Chambers Randy Moorman, Earth Justice Ray Smith Raymond G. Bayles Raymond Geist Raymond Heinrich Richard and Barbara Debick Richard and Mathew Diehl, Winston Livestock Co. Richard and Barbara Debick Richard Byron Richard Juntunen, Resource Management Associates Richard Michalski Richard Stoltz Richard Thieltges Rick Walsh, Northwestern Energy Rita and Bob Cartright Rob Roberts, Trout Unlimited Robert and Ruth Champion Robert and Sylvia Love Robert and Vicki Cleereman Robert Berry Robert Cobban, Cobban Ranch Robert D. Nelson Robert E. Zucconi Robert Mares Robert Mullenix Robert P. Kunz Robert Ray, Robert Ruthmeyer Robert Tomich Robert W. Ringler Robert Zadick Rock Ringling, Montana Land Reliance Rocky Yuricic Roger and Cindy Sanderson Ron Cheever Ron Malecki Ron Peaslee Ron Stipcich Ronald and Darlene Bey Ronald Willden Rose Baum, Baum Ranch LLC Roy Rasmussen Russ Alm Russ Sisk Russell Gowen, Lisara Corporation Ryen Aasheim S.J. Maras Sara Jane Johnson, Native Ecosystems Council Scott and Joan Tabbert Scott Black Scott Brennan Scott Stoner Sharon Harvey, Allied Mfg. Sharon Paul Shawn Eva Stan Frasier, Helena Hunters and Anglers Assoc. Stanley and Nikki Williams Stephan Dicomitis Stephen and Nancy Copenhaver Stephen Nowak Stephen R. Granzow Stephen Wallace Steve Dempsey Steve Grotbo Steve Joy Steve Kologi Steve Marks, Marks Lumber Steve Platt Steve Tokarski Steven and Mary Stocks Steven Kloetzel Stuart Klein Susan and Nule Howsmon, BVD Susan Bjerke Susan Gepstein and Spencer Shrophire Susan Hall Susan Murphy Susanne and Kurt Jones Ted and Deb Flynn Ted Schuele Teresa Hastings Terry Copenhaver Terry Lindsay, Lindsay Drilling Company The Nature Conservancy Thomas Benson Thomas E. Hattersley Sr., Sky Top Ranch Thomas J. Williams Thomas R. Kindrick Thorne and Linda Silverberg Tim and Karen Anderson Tim M. Reilly Tim Oke Tim Ravndal, Montana Multiple Use Assoc. Timothy J. Meloy, Elk Horn Citizens Organization Timothy L. Hartwell Tom and Caroline Hattersley Tom Cotter Tom Dawson Tom England Tom Futral, Wildfire Solutions Tom Kilmer Tom Lanning RPG Properties LLC Tom O'Donnell, G and O Partnership Tom Osborne Tom Russ, 4R Ranch Tracey Fortner Tracy Stone-Manning, Clark Fork Coalition Tyler Myrstol, Myrstol Logging Vince Thompson, Thompson & Thompson Ranch Virgil Binkley W. H. Warren W. L. Olsen, Broadwater Rod & Gun Club Walt Scott Ward Kemmer William Allen William and Charron Mee William and Michelle Devine William J. & Shirley A. Lambeth William P. Cooper, Free Enterprize William P. Gruber, Gruber Excavating, Inc. William R. Lane William Rockwell, Broadwater Rod & Gun Club Willis Hossfeld Jr. Youderian Family LLC   Distribution of the Environmental Impact Statement This environmental impact statement has been distributed to individuals who specifically requested a copy of the document. In addition, copies have been sent to Federal agencies, federally recognized tribes, State and local governments, and organizations representing a wide range of views. References Acheson, Ann et al. 2005. Smoke NEPA Guidance Air Resource Impacts from Prescribed Fire on National Forests and Grasslands of Montana, Idaho, North Dakota and South Dakota in Regions 1 & 4. March Acheson, Ann; Stanich, Charles; Story, Mark. 2000. Describing Air Resource Impacts from Prescribed Fire Projects in NEPA Documents for Montana and Idaho in Region 1 and Region 4. http://www.fs.fed.us/emc/nepa/nepa_templates/examples/samplefire.pdf Agee, J. K. 1998. The landscape ecology of western forest fire regimes. Northwest Science 72(Special Issue):24–34. In Lehmkuhl, J.F., K.D. Kistler, J.S. Begley and J. Boulanger. 2006. Demography of northern flying squirrels informs ecosystem management of western interior forests. Ecological Applications, 16(2), pp. 584-600. Agee, J. K. 2002. Fire as course filter for snags and logs. pp. 359-368. USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-181. Agee, J. K. and C.N. Skinner 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel reduction treatments, Forest Ecology and Management. 211 (2005): 83-96. Agee, J.K. 2000. Disturbance ecology of North American boreal forests and associated northern mixed/subalpine forests. Pages 39-82 in Ruggiero, L.F., K.B Aubry, S.W. Buskirk, et al. 1999. Ecology and conservation of lynx in the contiguous United States. University Press of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado. Agee, James K. 1993. Fire ecology of Pacific Northwest forests. Washington, DC: Island Press.493 p. Agee, James K. and C.N. Skinner 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel reduction treatments. Forest Ecology and Management. 211: 83–96. Albini, F.A. 1976. Estimating wildfire behavior and effects. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-30. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 92 p. Allen, C.D.; Savage, M.; Falk, D.A.; Suchling, K.F.; Swetnam, T.W.; Schulke, T.; Stacey, P.B.; Morgan, P.; Hoffman, M.; Klingel, J.T. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological Applications. 12: 1418-1433. In USDA Forest Service. 2006b. Fuel reduction effects on wildlife habitat. RMRS GTR 173. 41 pp. Allison, Stuart K. 2004. What do we mean when we talk about ecological restoration? Ecological Restoration, 22 (4): 281-286. Amacher, A.J., R.H. Barrett, J.J. Moghaddas and S.L. Stephens. 2008. Preliminary effects of fire and mechanical fuel treatments on the abundance of small mammals in the mixed-conifer forest of the Sierra Nevada. Forest Ecology and Management 255 pp. 3193-3202. Amell, L. and Klug, P. 2013. Stonewall Vegetation Project Atmospheric Carbon Report. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. Amell, Larry. 2012c. Stonewall Vegetation Project Restoration Comments. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. Amell, Larry. 2012a. Stonewall Vegetation Project Silviculture Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Project file. Amell, Larry. 2012b. Stonewall Vegetation Project Old Growth and Snag Analysis. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978. Public Law 95-341, 42 U.S.C. 1996 and 1996a. Amman, G. D. 1988a. Why partial cutting in lodgepole pine stands reduces losses to mountain pine beetle. Paper presented at the Symposium on the Management of Lodgepole Pine to Minimize Losses to Mountain Pine Beetle. Kalispell, MT. July 12-14, 1988. Amman, G. D. 1988b. Lodgepole pine selection by mountain pine beetle in relation to growth and vigor following thinning. In: Proceedings of the IUFRO Working Party and XVII International Congress of Entomology Symposium, “Integrated Control of Scolytid Bark Beetles” T; L. Payne and H. Saarenmaa Editors. Vancouver, B.C., Canada. Amman, G. D. 1977. The role of mountain pine beetle in lodgepole pine ecosystems: impact on succession. In: Mattson, W.J. ed. The Role of Arthropods in Forest Ecosystems. Springer-Verlag. Pages 3-18. Amman, G. D.; Logan, J. A. 1998. Silvicultural control of the mountain pine beetle: prescriptions and the influence of microclimate. Am. Entomol. 44: 166-177. Amman, G.D., Gene D. Lessard, Lynn A. Rasmussen, Curtis G. O’Neil. 1988a. Lodgepole pine vigor, regeneration, and infestation by mountain pine beetle following partial cutting on the Shoshone National Forest, Wyoming. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Research Paper INT-396. Amman, G.D.; M. D. McGregor; R. F. Schmitz; R. D. Oakes. 1988b. Susceptibility of lodgepole pine to infestation by mountain pine beetles following partial cutting of stands. Can. J. For. Res. 18: 688-695. Amman, Gene D.; Mark D. McGregor; Bonn B. Cahill; William H. Klein. 1977. Guidelines for reducing losses of lodgepole pine to the mountain pine beetle in unmanaged stands in the Rocky Mountains. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-36. 28 p. Amman, Gene D.; Mark D. McGregor; Robert E. Dolph, Jr. 1990. Mountain pine beetle. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Insect and Disease Leaflet 2. Andersen, D.E., S. DeStefano, M.I. Goldstein, K. Titus, C. Crocker-Bedford, J.J. Keane, R.G. Anthony, and R.N. Rosenfield. 2005. Technical review of the status of northern goshawks in the western United States. Final Report presented to The Joint Raptor Research Foundation, Inc., and The Wildlife Society, Technical Committee on the Status of Northern Goshawks in the Western United States. 44 p Andrews, P.L. 1986. BEHAVE: Fire behavior prediction and fuel modeling system - BURN subsystem, Part 1. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-194. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 130 p. Anhold, John A. and Michael J. Jenkins. 1987. Potential mountain pine beetle (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) attack of lodgepole pine as described by stand density index. Environ. Entomol. 16: 738-742. Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979. Public Law 95-96; 16 U.S.C. 470aa-mm. Archer, V. 2008. Preliminary results for winter harvest monitoring. Draft Inservice Report prepared for Lolo National Forest. March 2008 Version. USDA Forest Service, Region 1, Lolo National Forest. Missoula, MT. 10p. Archer, V. 2009. Auggie Restoration and Fuels Project, Soil Specialist Report. USDA Forest Service, Lolo National Forest, Missoula, MT. Archer, Vince. (TEAMS Soil Scientist) 2011. Personal communication with Dustin Walters, (TEAMS Soil Scientist). Missoula, MT. Ares, A., T.A. Terry, R.E. Miller, H.W. Anderson, and B.L. Flaming. Ground-Based Forest Harvesting Effects of Soil Physical Properties and Douglas-Fir Growth. 2005. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 69: 1822-1832. Arikian, Melissa J.; Klaus J. Puettmann; Alaina L. Davis; George I. Host; John C. Zasada. 1999. Harvesting impacts on soil properties and tree regeneration in pure and mixed aspen stands. In: Ek, Alan and Bruce ZumBahlen, comps., eds. Proceedings-Improving Forest Productivity for Timber…A key to Sustainability. University of Minnesota. 329-331. ARM: Administrative Rules of the State of Montana, Chapter 17:30, Water Quality. http://www.mtrules.org/gateway/chapterhome.asp?chapter=17%2E30 Armour, Charles D., S.C. Bunting, L.F. Neuenschwander 1984. Fire Intensity Effects on the Understory in Ponderosa Pine Forests. Journal of Range Management. 37(1): 44–9. Arno, S. F. 1991. Ecological relationships of interior Douglas-fir. p. 47-52 in D. M. Baumgartner and J. E. Lotan, eds. Interior Douglas-fir: the species and its management: symposium proceedings. Pullman, Washington State University. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Arno, S. F. 2000. Fire in western forest ecosystems. In Brown, J. K., and J. Kapler-Smith Eds. Wildland fire in ecosystems, effects of fire on flora. USFS Gen. Tech. Report RMRS-GTR-42 Vol. 2. Ogden, Utah. Arno, S. F., and T. Weaver. 1990. Whitebark pine community types and their patterns on the landscape. General Technical Report INT-270, USDA Forest Service, Bozeman, MT., USA. In Keane, R.E. and R.A. Parsons, 2007. Restoring whitebark pine forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains, USA. 22 pp. Arno, S. F., and W. C. Fischer.1995. Larix occidentalis—fire ecology and fire management. P. 130-135 in Ecology and management of larix forests: a look ahead. USDA For. Serv. General Technical Report INT-GTR-319. Intermountain Research Station. Ogden, UT. Arno, S. F.; Smith, H. Y.; Krebs, M. A. 1997. Old growth ponderosa pine and western larch stand structures: Influences of pre-1900 fires and fire exclusion. USDA Forest Service, Research Paper INT-495. 20 p. Arno, Stephen F. 1976. The historical role of fire on the Bitterroot National Forest. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Research paper INT-187. 35 pages. Arno, Stephen F. 1980. Forest Fire History in the Northern Rockies. Journal of Forestry. 78: 460-465. Arno, Stephen F. 1986. Whitebark pine cone crops-a diminishing source of wildlife food? Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 1(3)-92-94. Arno, Stephen F. 2000. Fire in western forest ecosystems. Chapter 5 in: Effects of Fire on Flora. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 2. Arno, Stephen F. 2000. Fire in Western Forest Ecosystems. In: Brown, James K.; Smith, Jane Kapler, eds. Wildland fire in ecosystems: Effects of fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep.RMRS-GTR-42-Volume 2. Fort Collins, Colorado: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Chap. 5: 97–120. Arno, Stephen F. 2001. Community types and natural disturbance processes. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 74-88. Arno, Stephen F. and George E. Gruell. 1983. Fire history at the forest-grassland ecotone in southwestern Montana. Journal of Range Management 36, no. 3 (May): 332–36. Arno, Stephen F. and Raymond J. Hoff. 1990. Whitebark Pine. In: Burns, Russell M., and Barbara H. Honkala, tech. coords. 1990. Silvics of North America: 1. Conifers; 2. Hardwoods. Agriculture Handbook 654. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Vol.2, 877 p. Arno, Stephen F., Helen Y. Smith, and Michael A. Krebs. 1997. Old growth ponderosa pine and western larch stand structures: Influences of pre-1900 fires and fire exclusion. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Research Paper-INT-RP-495. Ogden, Utah. Arno, Stephen F., Joe. H Scott, and Michael G Hartwell. 1995. Age class structure of old growth ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands and its relationship to fire history. U.S Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Research Paper INT-RP-481. Ogden, Utah. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Arno, Stephen F.; Joe H. Scott; Michael G. Hartwell. 1995. Age class structure of old growth ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir stands and its relationship with fire history. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Research Paper INT-RP-481. 28 pp. Arno, Stephen F.; Parsons, David J.; Keane, Robert E. 2000. Mixed-severity fire regimes in the northern Rocky Mountains: consequences of fire exclusion and options for the future. In: Cole, David N.; McCool, Stephen F.; Borrie, William T.; O’Loughlin, Jennifer, comps. 2000. Wilderness science in a time of change conference-Volume 5: Wilderness ecosystems, threats, and management; 1999 May 23–27; Missoula, MT. Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. p. 225-232. Arno, Stephen F; Brown, James K. 1991. Overcoming the paradox in managing wildland fire. Western Wildlands 40-46/ Asher, Jerry and Carol Spurrier 1998. The Spread of Invasive Weeds in Western Wildlands: A State of Biological Emergency. Report to the Governors Idaho Weed Summit: Boise, ID; 1998 May 19. 14 p. Aubry, K.B., G.M. Koehler, J.R. Squires. 2000. Ecology of Canada lynx in southern boreal forests. Pages 373-369. In Ruggiero, Leonard F.; Aubry, Keith B.; Buskirk, Steven W.; Koehler, Gary M.; Krebs, Charles J.; McKelvey, Kevin S.; Squires, John R. 1999. Ecology and conservation of lynx in the United States. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-30WWW. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr030.html Aune, K., T. Silvers and M. Madel. 1984 Rocky Mountain Front grizzly bear monitoring and investigation. Montana Dept. Fish, Wildl. and Parks, Helena, 239 pp. In USDA Forest Service 1986 Helena National Forest. Forest Plan. Avian Science Center. 2006a. Northern Region Landbird Monitoring Program Field Methods 2006. Avian Science Center. 2006b. Northern Region Landbird Monitoring Program, 2006 Final Report, Black-backed Woodpecker and the Bird Community in Beetle Outbreak Areas. Avian Science Center. 2006c. Northern Region Landbird Monitoring Program, 2005 Flammulated Owl Surveys Final Report. Bagne, K.E. and K. L. Purcell. 2008. Lessons learned from prescribed fire in ponderosa pine forests of the southern Sierra Nevada. Proceeding of the Fourth International Partners in Flight Conference: Tundra to Tropics pp. 679-390. Baker, W. L. 2009. Fire ecology in rocky mountain landscapes. Island Press, Washington D.C. 605 p. Ball, P.N., M.D. Mackenzie, T.H. DeLuca, and W.E. Holben. 2010. Wildfire and Charcoal Enhance Nitrification and Ammonium-Oxidizing Bacterial Abundance in Dry Montane Forest Soils. Journal of Environmental Quality, 39:1243-1253. Banci, V.A. 1989. A fisher management strategy for British Columbia. BC Ministry of Environment. Wildlife Bulletin No. B-63. 127 pp. Banci, V.A. 1994. Fisher (Pages 44 and 47) and Wolverine (Pages 99-127). In L.F. Ruggiero, K.B. Aubry, S.W. Buskirk, L.J. Lyon, and W.J. Zielinski, eds. 1994. The scientific basis for conserving forest carnivores, American marten, fisher, lynx and wolverine in the western United States. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mt. For. and Range Exp. Stn., Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-254, Fort Collins, CO. Barrett, S. W., S. F. Arno, and C. H. Key. 1991. Fire regimes of western larch - lodgepole pine forests in Glacier National Park, Montana. Can. J. For. Res. 21: 1711-1720. Barrett 1994 – whitebark. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Barrett, Stephen W. 1994. Fire regimes on andesitic mountain terrain in northeastern Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Int. J. Wildland Fire. 4(2): 65-76. Barrett, Stephen W. and Stephen F. Arno. 1982. Indian fires as an ecological influence in the Northern Rockies. Journal of Forestry. October 1982, p. 647-651. Barrett, Stephen; Arno, Stephen and Menakis, Jim. 1997. Fire Episodes in the inland Northwest (1950-1940) Based on Fire History Data. Intermountain Research Station. INT-GTR-370. Barrett, Stephen; Arno, Stephen. 1982. Indian Fires as an Ecological Influence in the Northern Rockies.October Journal of Forestry. http://docserver.ingentaconnect.com/deliver/connect/saf/00221201/v80n10/s11.pdf?expires=1321654857&id=65744879&titleid=3830&accname=National+Forest+Service+Library&checksum=B30D1D594D0A3BB11F5DF730B134A9FB Barton, Drake and Susan Crispin 2002. Sensitive Plant Species in Weed Management Areas on the Helena National Forest: Final Report. Helena, MT: Montana Natural Heritage Program. 17 p. plus appendices. Bartos, Dale L. and Gordon D. Booth. 1994. Effects of thinning on thinning on temperature dynamics and mountain pine beetle activity in a lodgepole pine stand. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Res. Pap. INT-RP-479. 9 p. Bartos, Dale L.; Walter F. Mueggler; Robert B. Campbell, Jr. 1991. Regeneration of aspen by suckering on burned sites in western Wyoming. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range experiment Station. Research Paper INT-448. 10 p. Basko, W. 2002. Guidelines for analyzing environmental effects on soil. Unpublished Inservice Report. USDA Forest Service, Region 1, Flathead NF. Kalispell, MT. 6p. Bate, Lisa J. 2003. Annual Progress Report: Birds and Burns Network. Helena National Forest. December 2003. Bate, Lisa J. 2004. Annual Progress Report: Birds and Burns Network. Helena National Forest. August 2004. Bate, Lisa J. 2005a. Investigating the use of prescribed fire to restore wildlife habitat in the Elkhorn Mountains, Helena National Forest. Helena National Forest. November 2005. Bate, Lisa J. 2005b. Progress Report: Birds and Burns Network. Helena National Forest. Helena National Forest. June 2005. Bate, Lisa J. 2007. 2006 Annual Progress Report: Birds and Burns Network. Helena National Forest. February 2007. Beaty, Matthew R. and Alan H. Taylor. 2007 Fire disturbance and forest structure in old-growth mixed conifer forests in the northern Sierra Nevada, California. Journal of Vegetation Science. 18: 879-890. Beaty, R. Matthew and Alan H. Taylor. 2001. Spatial and temporal variation of fire regimes in a mixed conifer landscape, southern Cascades, California USA. Journal of Biogeography. 28: 955-966. Beck, B.S. 1989. Historical Overview of the Helena and Deerlodge National Forests. USDA Forest Service, Helena and Deerlodge National Forests, MT. Beck, K.G. 2001. How do weeds affect us all? [Online]. Proceedings: Grazing Land Forum VIII, "An Explosion in Slow Motion: Noxious Weeds and Invasive Alien Plants on Grazing Lands", Bozeman, MT. 2001. Available: http://library.ndsu.edu/repository/bitstream/handle/10365/4099/11BECK94.PDF?sequence=1 [2010, February 3]. Berglund, Doug; Renate Bush; Jim Barber; Mary Manning. 2009. R1 multi-level vegetation classification, mapping, inventory, and analysis system. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 1, Forest and Range Management & Engineering. Missoula, MT. 14 p. Beschta, R.L., C.A. Frissell, R. Gresswell, R. Hauer, J.R. Karr, G.W. Minshall, D.A. Perry, and J.J. Rhodes. 1995. Recommendations for ecologically sound post-fire logging and other post-fire treatments on Federal lands in the west. Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR. 14 p. Beschta, R.L., J.J. Rhodes, J.B. Kauffman, R.E. Gresswell, G.W. Minshall, J.R. Karr, D.A. Perry, F.R. Hauer, and C.A. Frissell. 2004. Post-fire Management on Forested Public Lands of the Western United States. Conservation Biology 18(4): 957–96. Birds of North America. 2011. http://bna.birds.cornell.edu/bna.. (Accessed 9/15/11) Bessie, W.C; Johson, E.A. 1995 The relative importance of fuels and weather on fire behavior in subalpine forests. Ecology 747-762. Bisbing, S.M., P.B. Alaback, and T.H. DeLuca. 2010. Carbon storage in old-growth and second growth fire-dependent (Larix occidentalis Nutt.) forests of the inland northwest, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 259:1041-1049. Bloom, P.H., G.R. Stuart, and B.J. Walton. 1986. The status of the northern goshawk in California, 1981-1983. Wildlife Management Branch, Administrative Report, 85-1. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, California, USA. In Andersen, D.E., S. DeStefano, M.I. Goldstein, K. Titus, C. Crocker-Bedford, J.J. Keane, R.G. Anthony, and R.N. Rosenfield. 2005. Technical review of the status of northern goshawks in the western United States. Final Report presented to The Joint Raptor Research Foundation, Inc., and The Wildlife Society, Technical Committee on the Status of Northern Goshawks in the Western United States. 44 p Boal, C.W., D.E. Andersen and P.L. Kennedy. 2002. Home range and habitat use of northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis) in Minnesota. Forest systems of the upper Midwest: research review. Cloquet Forestry Center, University of Minnesota, U. S. Forest Service and Minnesota Forest Resources Council. Cloquet, MN. In Kennedy, Patricia L. 2003. Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis atricapillus): A technical conservation assessment . USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. Bois, G., L. Impeau and M.J. Mazerolle. 2012. Recovery time of snowshoe hare habitat after commercial thinning in boreal Quebec. Canadian Journal of Forest Resources. Vol. 42. pp. 123-133. Bollenbacher, Barry; Renate Bush; Beth Hahn; Renee Lundberg. 2008. Estimates of snag densities for eastside forests in the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Region. 56p. Bollenbacher, Barry; Renate Bush; Beth Hahn; Renee Lundberg. 2008. Estimates of snag densities for eastside forests in the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Region. 56p. Bonar, R. L. 2001. Pileated woodpecker habitat ecology in the Alberta foothills. Dissertation, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. In Samson, F. B. 2006a. A Conservation assessment of the northern goshawk, blacked-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl, and pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region, USDA Forest Service. Unpublished report on file, Northern Region, Missoula, Montana, USA. Bonnett, C. 2012. Stonewall Vegetation Project Visual Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. Bonnot, T.W. 2006. Nesting ecology of black-backed woodpeckers in mountain pine beetle infestations in the Black Hills, South Dakota. Columbia, Missouri. M.S. Thesis. University of Missouri. 77 pp. Bowles, M.L., K.A. Jacobs and J.L. Mengler. 2007. Long-term Changes in an Oak Forest’s Woody Understory and Herb Layer with Repeated Burning. Journal of the Torey Botanical Society. 134(2) pp. 223-227. Bowles, M.L., K.A. Jacobs and J.L. Mengler. 2007. Long-term Changes in an Oak Forest’s Woody Understory and Herb Layer with Repeated Burning. Journal of the Torey Botanical Society. 134(2) pp. 223-227. Bradley, Anne F.; William C. Fischer; Nonan V. Noste. 1992. Fire ecology of the forest habitat types of eastern Idaho and Western Wyoming. U.S.D.A. Forest Service. Intermountain Research Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-290. Bradley, Tim and Paul Tueller. 2001. Effects of fire on bark beetle presence on Jeffrey pine in the Lake Tahoe Basin. Forest Ecology and Management. 142: 205-214. Brawn, J. D., S. K. Robinson, and F. R. Thompson III. 2001. The role of disturbance in the ecology and conservation of birds. Annual Review of Ecological Systematics 32:251- 276. In Covert, K.A. 2003. Hairy woodpecker winter ecology following wildfire: Effects of burn severity and age. MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. 98 pp. Brewer, L.T., R. Bush, J.E. Canfield, A.R. Dohmen. 2007. Northern Goshawk Overview and Multi-level Analysis. Northern Region. Version 1.2. March 9, 2007. 57 pp. Brohman, Ronald J. and Larry D. Bryant. 2005. Existing vegetation classification and mapping technical guide, version 1.0. U.S.D.A. Forest Service, Ecosystem Management Coordination Staff. Gen. Tech. Report. WO-87. 305 p. Brooks JM, Field M, Kennicutt MC. 1991. Observations of gas hydrates in marine sediments, offshore northern California. Mar Geol 96:103–109 Brown James K. and Dennis G. Simmerman. 1986. Appraising fuels and flammability in western aspen: a prescribed fire guide. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. General Technical Report INT-205. 48 p. Brown, J. and J. Kapler Smith, eds. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of fire on flora. Gen. Tech Rep RMRS-GTR-42-vol.2. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Ogden, UT: 257 pp. Pages 97-120; 185-203. Brown, J. K, S.F. Arno, S.W. Barrett, and J.P. Menakis. 1994. Comparing the prescribed natural fire program with pre-settlement fires in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness. Intl. J. Wildland Fire 4: 157- 168. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Brown, J. K. 2000. Chapter 1: Introduction to fire regimes. In Brown, J. K., and J. Kapler-Smith Eds. Wildland fire in ecosystems, effects of fire on flora. USFS Gen. Tech. Report RMRS-GTR-42 Vol. 2. Ogden, Utah. Brown, J.K. 1974. Handbook for Inventorying Downed Woody Material. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report, INT-16. Brown, J.K. 1995. Fire regimes and their relevance to ecosystem management. P. 171-178 in: Proceedings of Society of American Foresters National Convention; 1994 Sept. 18-22; Anchorage, AK. SAF, Bethesda, MD. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Brown, J.K., E.D. Reinhardt and K.A. Kramer. 2003. Coarse Woody Debris: Managing Benefits and Fire Hazard in the Recovering Forest. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-105. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research, Missoula, MT. 16pp Brown, J.K., E.D. Reinhardt, and K.A. Kramer. 2003. Coarse Woody Debris: Managing Benefits and Fire Hazard in the Recovering Forest. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, General Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-105. Brown, James K. and Jane Kapler Smith. USDA Forest Service. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosystems: Effects of fire on flora. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42-volume 2. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. December 2000. Brown, James K. and Norbert V. DeByle. 1987. Fire damage, mortality, and suckering in aspen. Can. J. For. Res. 17: 1100-1109. Brown, James K.; Stephen F. Arno; Stephen W. Barrett; James P. Menakis. 1994. Comparing the prescribed natural fire program with presettlement fires in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness. Int. J. Wildland Fire. 4(3): 157-168. Brown, R. T. J. K. Agee, and J. F. Franklin. 2004. Forest Restoration and Fire: Principles in the context of place. Conservation Biology. Vol. 18 No. 4 pp 903-912. Brumley, J.H, Nemeth, A. Weiser, and S. Jung. 1998. Synopsos of Cultural Resource Studies Conducted to Date in Response to the proposed McDonald Gold Mine, Lewis and Clark CO., Mt. Report. submitted to Seven-Up Pete joint Venture. Ethnos Consultants, Harvey, MT. Buhl. 2012. Stonewall Vegetation Project Fuels Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. Bull, E. L. 1983. Longevity of snags and their use by woodpeckers. In: Davis, J. W.; Goodwin, G. A.; Ockenfels, R. A., eds. Snag habitat management symposium. 1980 June 7-9; Flagstaff, AZ. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-99. Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture; 64-67. Bull, E. L., and J. A. Jackson. 1995. Pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus pileatus). No. 146. A. Poole, and F. Gill, editors. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and The American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C, U.S.A. Bull, E. L., C. G. Parks, and T. R. Torgersen. 1997. USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station. 1997. Trees and logs important to wildlife in the interior Columbia River basin. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-391. Portland, OR: USFS.USDA Forest Service 2008. Bull, E., K.B. Aubrey, and B.C. Wales, 2001. Effects of Disturbance on Forest Carnivores of Conservation Concern in Eastern Oregon and Washington. Northwest Science. Vol 75, Special Issue, 2001. Bull, E.L. and R.S. Holthausen. 1993. Habitat use and management of pileated woodpeckers in northeastern Oregon. J. Wildl. Manage. 57(2):335-345. Bull, E.L.; Clark, A.A.; Shepherd, J.F. 2005. Short-term effects of fuel reduction on pileated woodpeckers in northeastern Oregon—a pilot study. Res. Pap. PNW-RP- 564. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 17 p. In USDA Forest Service. 2006. Fuel reduction effects on wildlife. RMRS GTR 173. 41 pp. Bull, Evelyn L. 1987. Ecology of the pileated woodpecker in northeastern Oregon. Journal of Wildlife Management 51, No. 2 472-81. Bull, Evelyn L., and Arlene K. Blumton. 1999. Effect of Fuels Reduction on American Martens and Their Prey. [Research Note PNW-PN-539]. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. (9 pp.). Bull, Evelyn L., Keith Aubry, and Barbara Wales. 2001. Effects of Disturbance on Forest Carnivores of Conservation Concern in Eastern Oregon and Washington. Northwest Science. Vol 75, Special Issue, 2001. Pages 180-184. Bulmer, C. 1997. An Overview of Forest Soil Rehabilitation in the BC Interior. Proceedings of the 21st Annual British Columbia Mine Reclamation Symposium in Cranbrook, BC, 1997. The Technical and Research Committee on Reclamation. Bunnell, F.L., M. Boyland, and E. Wind. 2002. How should we spatially distribute dying and dead wood? Pages 739-752 Burcham, Milo, W. Daniel Edge, and C. Les Marcum. 1999. Elk use of private land refuges. Wildlife Society Bulletin 27, no. 3 833–9. Burns L. 2007a. Stonewall Allotment (fish review). ). Helena National Forest Fishery Files. Helena, Mt. Burns L. 2007b. Keep Cool Allotment (fish review). ). Helena National Forest Fishery Files. Helena, Mt. Burns, L. 2006. Stone Dry Watershed Analysis (Fisheries Information). Helena National Forest Fishery Files. Helena, Mt. Bush, Renate; Doug Berglund; Andy leach; Renee Lundberg; Art Zack. 2006. Estimates for old growth for the Northern Region and national forests. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Region. 8 p. Buskirk, S. W., and L. F. Ruggiero. [Online] 1994. American Marten. In The Scientific Basis for Conserving Forest Carnivores: American Marten, Fisher, Lynx, and Wolverine in the Western United States. USDA Forest Service. [Gen. Tech. Report RM-254]. Fort Collins, CO. http://www.rsl.psw.fs.fed.us/projects/wild/gtr_rm254/index.html. Accessed 9/15/11. Byrne. G. 1999. Personal communication with Pat Shanley, Wildlife Biologist, Lincoln Ranger District, Helena National Forest. Canon, S. K.; Urness, P. J.; DeByle, N. V. 1987. Habitat selection, foraging behavior, and dietary nutrition of elk in burned aspen forest. Journal of Range Management. 40(5): 443-438. Canon et al. 1987 In USDA Forest Service 2006b. Wildlife and invertebrate response to fuel reduction treatments in dry coniferous forests of the western United States: A synthesis. RMRS-GTR-173. 41 pp. Carlson, Clinton E and N. William Wulf. 1989. Silvicultural strategies to reduce stand and forest susceptibility to the western spruce budworm. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Cooperative State Research Service. Agriculture Handbook No.676. 31 p. Cassirer, E. F., D. J. Freddy, and E. D. Ables. 1992. Elk response to disturbance by cross-country skiers in Yellowstone National Park. Wildlife Society Bulletin 20, 375–81. Caton, E. L. 1996. Effects of fire and salvage logging on the cavity nesting bird community in Northwest Montana, PhD Dissertation, University of Montana, Missoula. In USDA Forest Service 2007c. Black-backed Woodpecker. Northern Region Overview. Key Findings and Project Considerations. Prepared by the Black-backed Woodpecker Working Group. 41 pp. Chamberlain, T.W., R.D. Harr, and F.H. Everest. 1991. Timber harvesting, silviculture, and watershed processes. Chapter 6 in W.R. Meehan [ed.] Influences of forest and rangeland management on salmonid fishes and their habitats. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 19, Bethesda, Maryland. Chapin, T. G., D. J. Harrison, and D. M. Phillips. 1997. Seasonal habitat selection by marten in an un-trapped forest preserve. Journal of Wildlife Management 61, no. 3 (July 1997): 707-17. Choi, Young D. 2004. Theories for ecological restoration in changing environment: toward ‘futuristic’ restoration. Ecological Research. 19: 75-81. Christensen, Alan G., L. Jack Lyon, and James W. Unsworth. 1993. Elk management in the Northern Region: Considerations in forest plan updates or revisions. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. General Technical Report INT-303. Ogden, Utah. Cilimburg, Amy, Kristina Smucker, and Dick Hutto. 2006. Black-backed woodpeckers and the bird community in beetle outbreak areas. University of Montana, Division of Biological Sciences, Avian Science Center. Final Report. Missoula, MT. 2006. Clark, P.E., W.C. Krueger, L.D. Bryant and D.R. Thomas. 2000. Livestock grazing effects on forage quality of elk winter range. Journal of Range Management. 53:97-105. 9 pp. Clean Air Act 1970, as amended in 1977 and 1990 CAA, as amended 1977 and 1990: http://www.epa.gov/ Clough, L.T. 2000. Nesting habitat selection and productivity of northern goshawks in west-central Montana. Master’s thesis, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. 95 pp. Cochran P. H. and Walter G. Dahms. 2000. Growth of lodgepole pine thinned to various densities on two sites with differing productivities in central Oregon. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Research Paper PNW-RP-520. Cochran, P. H. and James W. Barrett. 1995. Growth and mortality of ponderosa pine poles thinned to various densities in the Blue Mountains of Oregon. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Research Paper PNW-RP-483. Cochran, P. H. and James W. Barrett. 1999a. Growth of ponderosa pine thinned to different stocking levels in central Oregon: 30-year results. U.S.D.A. Forest Service. Pacific Northwest Research Station. Research Paper PNW-RP-508. Cochran, P. H. and James W. Barrett. 1999b. Thirty-five-year growth of ponderosa pine saplings in response to thinning and understory removal. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Research Paper PNW-RP-512. Cohen, Jack D. 1999. Reducing the wildland fire threat to homes: Where and how much? In: Gonzales-Caban, Armando; Omi, Philip N., technical coordinators. Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire Economics, Planning, and Policy: Bottom Lines; 1999 April 5-9. San Diego, CA. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-173. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. p. 189-195. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_other/rmrs_1999_cohen_j001.pdf Cohen, Jack D. Ph.D. 2000. “What is the Wildland Fire Threat to Homes?” Presented as the Thompson Memorial Lecture, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ., April 10, 2000. http://www.nps.gov/fire/download/pub_pub_wildlandfirethreat.pdf Cohen, Jack D. Ph.D. 2003. “An Examination of the Summerhaven, Arizona Home Destruction Related to the Local Wildland Fire Behavior during the June 2003 Aspen Fire.” http://www.governor.state.az.us/fhc/documents/SummerhavenWUIDestruction.pdf Cole, W.E.; Donn B. Cahill.; and Gene D. Lessard. 1983. Harvesting strategies for management of mountain pine beetle infestations in lodgepole pine: preliminary evaluation, east Long Creek demonstration area, Shoshone National Forest, Wyoming. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Ogden, UT. Research Note INT-333. Cole, Walter E. and Gene D. Amman. 1969. Mountain pine beetle infestations in relation to lodgepole pine diameters. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Research Note INT-95. 8 p. Cole, Walter E. and Gene D. Amman. 1980. Mountain pine beetle dynamics in lodgepole pine forests Part 1: course of an infestation. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Gen. Tech. Note INT-89. 64 p. Cole, Walter E. and Mark D. McGregor. 1985. Reducing or preventing mountain pine beetle outbreaks in lodgepole pine stands by selective cutting. In: Proceedings of the IUFRO Conference on: the role of the host in the population dynamics of forest insects. L. Safranyik Editor. Published jointly by Canadian Forestry Service and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Forest Research Center, Victoria BC. Collins, Brandon; Stephens, Scott; Moghaddas, Jason; Battles, John. 2010. Challenges and Approaches in Planning Fuel Treatments across Fire-Excluded Forested Landscapes. Journal of Forestry January/February 2010. http://ddr.nal.usda.gov/bitstream/10113/40248/1/IND44331204.pdf Collins, W. B., and P. J. Urness. 1983. Feeding behavior and habitat selection of mule deer and elk on northern Utah summer range. Journal of Wildlife Management 47:646-663. In Hayden, J. G. Ardt, M. Fleming, T.W. Keegan, J. Peek, T.O. Smith, and A. Wood. 2008. Habitat guidelines for mule deer, Northern forest ecosystem. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 48 pp. Conklin, David A. 2000. Dwarf management and forest health in the southwest. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 30 p. Conklin, David A. and William A. Armstrong. 2002. Effects of three prescribed fires on dwarf mistletoe infection in southwestern ponderosa pine. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Forestry and Forest Health. R3-01-02. 19 p. Cook, J.G., L.L. Irwin, L.D. Bryant, R.A. Riggs, and J.W. Thomas. 1998. Relations of forest cover and condition of elk: a test of the thermal cover hypothesis in summer and winter. Wildlife Monographs 141: 1-61. Cooper, S.V., G.M. Kendray, P. Hendricks, B.A. Maxwell, W.M. Jones, C.L. Currier 2005. Inventory of Plants, Plant Communities, and Hereptofauna of Concern in the Vicinity of the Snow-Talon Burn, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT: Montana National Heritage Program. 15 p. plus appendices. Copeland, J. P. 1996. Biology of the wolverine in central Idaho. Thesis. University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, USA. In Carroll, R.N. 2001. Carnivores as Focal Species for Conservation Planning in the Rocky Mountain Region. Ecological Applications, Vol. 11, No. 4. pp. 961-980 Copeland, J.P. 1996. Biology of the wolverine in central Idaho. M.S. Thesis, University of Idaho, 138 pp. Copeland, J.P., J.M. Peek, C.R. Groves, W.E. Melquist, K.S. McKelvey, G.W. McDaniel, C.D. Long, C.E. Harris. 2010. Seasonal Habitat Associations of the Wolverine in Central Idaho. Journal of Wildlife Management Wildlife Monographs. 71(7). 2201-2212. Copenheaver, Carolyn A.; S. Andrew Predmore; Dawn N. Askamit. 2009. Conversion of rare grassy openings to forest: have these areas lost their conservation value? Natural Areas Journal. 29: 133-139. Cornell Lab of Ornithology. 2012. Birds of North America, [Online]. http://bna.birds.cornell.edu/bna/species. Accessed 06/11/2012. Countryman, C. M. 1972. The fire environment concept. USDA Forest Service Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. Berkeley, California Covert, K.A. 2003. Hairy woodpecker winter ecology following wildfire: Effects of burn severity and age. MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. 98 pp. Cunningham, Catherine A.; Michael J. Jenkins; David W. Roberts. 2005. Attack and brood production by the Douglas-fir beetle (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) in Douglas-fir, Pseudotsuga menziesii var. Glauca (Pineacae), following a wildfire. Western North American Naturalist 65(1): 70–79 Czaplewski, Raymond L. 2004. Application of Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) data to estimate the amount of old growth forest and snag density in the Northern Region of the National Forest System. Unpublished paper on file at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 13 p. D’Antonia, C.M. 2000. Invasive weeds in rangelands. Species, impacts and management. Weed Science, 48:255-265. D’Antonio, C. M. 2000. Fire, plant invasions and global changes. Pages 65–94 in H. Mooney, and R. Hobbs, editors. Invasive species in a changing world. Island Press, Washington, DC D’Antonio, C.M. 2000. Fire, plant invasions and global changes. In, H. Mooney and R. Hobbs (eds). Invasive species in a changing world, pp. 65-94. Island Press, Covela. Daly, C., G.H. Taylor, W. P. Gibson, T.W. Parzybok, G. L. Johnson, P. Pasteris. 2001. High-quality spatial climate data sets for the United States and beyond. Transactions of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, 43: 1957-1962. Davis, C. 2000. Helena National Forest Annual Heritage Resource Compliance Report. USDA Forest Service, Helena National Forests, Helena, MT. Davis, C. 2003. Heritage Resources. In : Snow Talon Fire Salvage Environmental Impact Statement. USDA Forest Service, Helena National Forests, Helena, MT. Davis, C. and T. Godin. 2004. Helena National Forest Annual Heritage Resource Compliance Report. USDA Forest Service, Helena National Forests, Helena, MT. DeByle, N.V. 1985. In: DeByle, N.V., Winokur, R.P., editors. Aspen: Ecology and Management in the Western United States. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-119. Rocky Mountain Research Station and Range Experiment Station, Forest Collins, CO. pp. 135-152. DeLuca, T.H., and G.H. Aplet. 2008. Charcoal and carbon storage in forest soils of the Rocky Mountain West. Front. Ecol. Environ. 6(1): 18-24. DeLuca, T.H., M.D. MacKenzie, M.J. Gundale, and W.E. Holben. 2006. Wildfire-Produced Charcoal Directly Influences Nitrogen Cycling in Ponderosa Pine Forests. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 70:448-453. Denevan, William M. 1992. The native population of the Americas in 1492. The University of Wisconsin Press. 353p. Department of Sustainability and Environment, 2010. Landscape Mosaic Burns Information Sheet. Victorian Government, Melbourne, AU DiTomaso, J. 2000. Invasive weeds in rangelands: Species, impacts and management. Weed Science, 48:255-265. DiTomaso, Joseph M. 2000. Invasive weeds in rangelands: Species, impacts, and management. Weed Science 48, 255–65. Dixon, Gary E. comp. 2010. Essential FVS: A user’s guide to the Forest Vegetation Simulator. Internal Rep. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Management Service Center. 242 p. Dixon, R. D. and V. A. Saab. 2000. Black-backed woodpeckers. In The birds of North America. ed. Poole, A. and F. Gill, Cornell, New York: Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology and the Academy of Natural Science. Dodson, Erich K., D.W. Peterson, and R.J. Harrod 2008. Understory vegetation response to thinning and burning restoration treatments in dry conifer forests of the eastern Cascades, USA. Forest Ecology and Management. 255: 3130-3140. Dudley, J.G. and V. A Saab. 2007. Home range size of black-backed woodpeckers in burned forests of Southwestern Idaho. Western North American naturalist 67(4), pp. 593-600. Durham, Daniel Avery. 2008. Aspen response to prescribed fire in southwest Montana. Montana State University. Bozeman, Montana. 62 p. Eaton C. B. 1941. Influence of the mountain pine beetle on the composition of mixed pole stands of ponderosa pine and white fir. J. For. 39(8): 710-713. Economic Profile System – Human Dimensions Toolkit (EPS-HDT). (2011). Headwaters Economics. www.headwaterseconomics.org/eps-hdt. Edge, D.W.; Marcum, C.L.; Olson-Edge, S.L. 1987. Summer habitat selection by elk in western Montana: a multivariate approach. Journal of Wildlife Management. 51: 844-851. Edminster, C. B.; Mowrer, H. T.; Mathiasen, R. L.; Schuler, T. M.; Olsen, W. K.; Hawksworth, F. G. 1991. GENGYM: a variable density stand table projection system calibrated for mixed conifer and ponderosa pine stands in the southwest. Res. Paper RM-297. Fort Collins, CO: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 32p. Found online on 09/10/2010 at: http://babel.hathitrust.org Ehrenfeld, J. G., P. Koutev, and W. Huang 2001. Changes in soil functions following invasions of exotic understory plants in deciduous forests. Ecological Applications. 11(5): 1287–1300. Elkin Ché and Mary L. Reid. 2004. Attack and reproductive success of mountain pine beetles (Coleoptera: Scoltidae) in fire-damaged lodgepole pines. Environ. Entomol. 33(4): 1070-1080. Elliot, W. 2011. Web WEPP Watershed (W3) Tools, W. Elliot, USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station, Air Water and Aquatic Science Program Elliot, W. J., R. B. Foltz, and C. H. Luce. 1995. Validation of the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) Model for Low-Volume Forest Roads. Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Low-Volume Roads. Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board. 178-186. Elliot, W. J., R. B. Foltz, and M. D. Remboldt. 1994. Predicting Sedimentation from Roads at Stream Crossings with the WEPP Model. Paper No. 947511. Presented at the 1994 ASAE International Winter Meeting. St. Joseph, MI: ASAE. 10 p. Elliot, W.J., D.E. Hall, and D.L. Scheele. 2000. Disturbed WEPP (Draft 02/2000) WEPP Interface for Disturbed Forest and Range Runoff, Erosion, and Sediment Delivery. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station and San Dimas Technology and Development Center. Elliot, W.J., D.E. Hall, D.L. Scheele. 1999. WEPP: Road (Draft 02/2000), WEPP Interface for Predicting Forest Road Runoff, Erosion, and Sediment Delivery. USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Technology and Development Program. San Dimas, CA. http://forest.moscowfsl.wsu.edu/cgi-bin/fswepp/wr/wepproad.pl http://forest.moscowfsl.wsu.edu/fswepp/docs/wepproaddoc.html Elliot, W.J., D.E. Hall, D.L. Scheele. 2000. Disturbed WEPP (Draft 02/2000), WEPP Interface for Disturbed Forest and Range Runoff, Erosion and Sediment Delivery. USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Technology and Development Program. San Dimas, CA. http://forest.moscowfsl.wsu.edu/cgi-bin/fswepp/wd/weppdist.pl http://forest.moscowfsl.wsu.edu/fswepp/docs/distweppdoc.html Elliott, W.J. (2004) WEPP internet interfaces for forest erosion prediction, Journal of the American Water Resources Association 40 (2): 299–309. Elliott, W.J., D.E. Hall, D.L.Scheele. 1999. WEPP:Road (Draft 12/1999) WEPP Interface for predicting forest road runoff, erosion, and sediment delivery—Technical Documentation. USDA. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station and San Dimas Technology and Development Center. 29 pp. Elliott, W.J., D.E. Hall, D.L.Scheele. 2000. WEPP:Road (Draft 12/2000) WEPP interface for disturbed forest and range runoff, erosion, and sediment delivery. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station and San Dimas Technology and Development Center. 21 pp. Endicott, C.L., McMahon, T.E. 1996. Development of a TMDL to Reduce NonPoint Source Sediment Englebert, C. 2012a. Stonewall Vegetation Project Noxious Weed Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. 36 pp. Englebert, C. 2012b. Stonewall Vegetation Project Botany Report and Biological Evaluation. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. Evans, R.D.; R. Rimer; L. Sperry; J. Belnap. 2001. Exotic Plant Invasion Alters Nitrogen Dynamics in an Arid Grassland. Ecological Applications, Vol. 11, No. 5 (Oct., 2001), pp. 1301-1310. Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management, 1977. http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/executive-orders/1977-carter.html Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, 1977. http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/executive-orders/1977-carter.html Falk, Don. 1990. Discovering the future, creating the past: some reflections on restoration. Restoration & Management Notes. 8: 71-72. Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (Public Law 92-500) as amended in 1977 (Public Law 95-217) and 1987 (Public Law 100-4). http://www.epa.gov/region5/water/cwa.htm. Also known as the Clean Water Act. Fellin, David G. and Jerald E. Dewey. 2012. Western spruce budworm. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Insect & Disease Leaflet 53. Found online on 04/02/2012 at: http://dnrc.mt.gov/forestry/Assistance/Pests/Documents/FIDLs/ Fellin. D.G. 1979. A review of some relationships of harvesting, residue management and fire to forest insects and disease. USDA Forest Service General Tech Report INT-90. Fellows, Aaron W. and Michael L. Goulden. 2008. Has fire suppression increased the amount of carbon stored in western U.S. forests? Geophysical Research Letters. 4 p. Fiddler, Gary O., Dennis R. Hart, Phillip M. McDonald, and Susan J. Frankel. 1995. Silvicultural practices (commercial thinning) are influencing the health of natural pine stands in eastern California. In: Forest Health Through Silviculture; Proceedings of the 1995 National Silviculture Workshop. Lane G. Eskew, Station Editor. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Fiedler, Carl E. and Todd A. Morgan. 2002. Mortality as a source of coarse woody debris in managed stands. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. General Technical Report PSW-GTR-181. Filip, Gregory M. and Donald J. Goheen. 1995. Precommercial thinning in Pseudotsuga, Tsuga, and Abies stands affected by armillaria root disease: 10-year results. Can. J. For. Res. 25: 817-823. Filip, Gregory M.; Stephen A. Fitzgerald; Kristen L. Chadwick; and Timothy A. Max. 2009. Thinning ponderosa pine affected by armillaria root disease: 40 years of growth and mortality on an infected site in Central Oregon. WEST. J. APPL. FOR. 24(2): 88-94. Finney, M. A. 2006. Cumulative effects of fuel management on landscape-scale fire behavior and effects: Final report to the Joint Fire Science Committee. JFS Project 01-1-2-21.In USDA Forest Service. 2006. Fuel reduction effects on wildlife. RMRS GTR 173. 41 pp. Finney, M.A. 2006. An overview of FlamMap fire modeling capabilities. In: Andrews, P.L.; Butler, B.W., comps. Fuels Management-How to Measure Success: Conference Proceedings. 28-30 March 2006; Portland, OR. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station Proceedings RMRS-P-41, pp. 213-220 Finney, M.A. and J. D. Cohen. 2003. Expectation and evaluation of fuel management objectives. In P.N. Omi (ed). Proc. of Fire, Fuel Treatments, and Ecological Restoration, April 14-17, Ft. Collins CO, pp 353-366. In Omi, Philip N.; Joyce, Linda A., technical editors. 2003. Fire, fuel treatments, and ecological restoration: Conference proceedings; 2002 16-18 April; Fort Collins, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-29. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 475 p. Finney, M.A., McHugh, C.W., Grenfell, I.C., 2005. Stand and Landscape level effects of prescribed burning on two Arizona wildfires. Can. J. Forestry Res 35. 1714.1722. http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/pdf/10.1139/x05-090 Finney, Mark A. 2007, "A computational method for optimizing fuel treatment locations ", International Journal of Wildland Fire, 16, 6: 702-711. Finney, Mark A., Seli, Rob C., McHugh, Charles W., Ager, Alan A., Bahro, Bernhard and Agee, James K. (2007), "Simulation of long-term landscape-level fuel treatment effects on large wildfires", International Journal of Wildland Fire, 16, 6: 712-727 Fischer, William C. and Anne F. Bradley. 1987. Fire ecology of western Montana forest habitat types. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-223. Fischer, William C. and Bruce D. Clayton. 1983. Fire ecology of Montana forest habitat types east of the Continental Divide. General Technical Report INT-141. Ogden, Utah: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. May Fischer, William C. and Bruce D. Clayton. 1983. Fire ecology of Montana forest habitat types east of the continental divide. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-141. 88 p. Fleming, R.L., R.F. Powers, N.W. Foster, J.M. Kranabetter, D.A. Scott, F. Ponder Jr., S. Berch, W.K. Chapman, R.D. Kabzems, K.H. Ludovici, D.M. Morris, D.S. Page-Dumroese, P.T. Sanborn, F.G. Sanchez, D.M. Stone, and A.E. Tiarks. 2006. Effects of Organic Matter Removal, Soil Compaction, and Vegetation Control on 5-year Seedling Performance: A Regional Comparison of Long-Term Soil Productivity Sites. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 36:529-550. Foltz, R.B, and E. Maillard. 2003. Infiltration rates on abandoned road-stream crossings. Paper Number 035009. ASAE Annual International Meeting. Las Vegas, Nevada. 11p. Forest Service Handbook 1909 (FSH) 1909.12 (72.1) – Wilderness Evaluation. Forest Service Manual 2300 (FSM) 2300 – Recreation, Wilderness and Related Resource Management, guides management of recreation and wilderness resources on National Forest System lands Foy, C.L. and Inderjit. 2001. Understanding the Role of Allelopathy in Week Interference and Declining Plant Diversity. Weed Technology, 15(4):873-878. FRCC. 2005. Interagency fire regime condition class guidebook, Version 1.2. National Interagency Fuels, Fire, & Vegetation Technology Transfer. Found online on 5/21/2011 at: http://www.fire.org Frisina, M.R., C.L. Wambolt, W.W. Fraas and G. Guenther. 2006. Mule deer and elk winter diet as an indicator of habitat competition. In USDA Forest Service 2006. Proceedings Shrublands Under Fire: Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World. pp. 123-126. RMRS-P-52. 204 pp. Fritts, S.H. and L.D. Mech. 1981. Dynamics, movements, and feeding ecology of a newly protected wolf population in northwestern Minnesota. Wildl. Monog. 80. 79 pp. in Tucker, P. 1988. Annotated gray wolf bibliography. Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. 117 pp. Froehlich, H.A., D.W.R. Miles, and R.W. Robbins. 1985. Soil Bulk Density Recovery on Compacted Skid Trails in Central Idaho. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 49:1015-1017. Fryer, Janet L. 2002. Pinus albicaulis. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2010, June 21]. Fulé, P.Z., Cocke, A.E., Heinlein, T.A., and Covington, W.W., 2004. Effects of an intense prescribed forest fire: Is it ecological restoration? Restoration Ecology 12, 220–230. In Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Fulé, P.Z., McHugh, C., Heinlein, T.A., Covington, W.W., 2001. Potential fire behavior is reduced following forest restoration treatments. In: Proceedings of the RMRS-P-22. USDA Forest Service, Ogden, UT, pp. 28–35 Fulé, Peter Z. and W. Wallace Covington. 1997. Fire regimes and forest structure in the Sierra Madre Occidental, Durango, Mexico. Acta Botánica Mexicana. 41: 43-79. Furnis M. J., T.D Roelofs and C Yee. 1991. Road construction and Maintenance. IN: Influences of Forest and Rangeland Management on Salmonid Fishes and Their Habitats. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 19: 297-310. Furniss, M. M.; M. D. McGregor; M. W. Foiles; A. D. Partridge. 1979. Chronology and characteristics of a Douglas-fir beetle outbreak in Northern Idaho. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range experiment Station. General Technical Report INT-59. 27p. Furniss, Malcolm M. 1962. Infestation patterns of Douglas-fir beetle in standing and windthrown trees in southern Idaho. Journal of Economic Entomology. 55(4): 486-491. Furniss, Malcolm M. 1965. Susceptibility of fire-injured Douglas-fir to bark beetle attack in Southern Idaho. Journal of forestry. January, 1965. Pages 8-12. Furniss, R. L., and V. M. Carolin. 1977. Western forest insects (Scolytidae, Platypodidae,. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Miscellaneous Publication. Pp 338-413) Garrison-Johnston, M.T., P.G. Mika, D.L. Miller, P. Cannon, and L.R. Johnson. 2007. Ash Cap Influences on Site Productivity and Fertilizer Response in Forests of the Inland Northwest. USDA Forest Service Proceedings, RMRS-P-44. Garrison-Johnston, Mariann T.; James A. Moore; Stephen P. Cook; Gerald J. Niehoff. 2003. Douglas-fir beetle infestations area associated with certain rock and stand types in the inland northwestern United States. Environ. Entomol. 32(6): 1354-1363. Geils, Brian W.; Cibrián Tovar, Jose; Moody, Benjamin, tech. coords. 2002. Mistletoes of North American Conifers. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS–GTR–98. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 123 p. Goggans, R. 1985. Habitat use by Flammulated Owls in northeastern Oregon. Master’s thesis, Oregon State Univ., Corvallis. Goggans, R., R. D, Dixon, and L. C. Seminara. 1988. Habitat use by three-toed and black-backed woodpecker, Deschutes National Forest. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Nongame Wildlife Program and USDA-Deschutes National Forest. Tech Rep. 87-3-02. 43 pp. In USDA Forest Service 2007c. Black-backed Woodpecker. Northern Region Overview. Key Findings and Project Considerations. Prepared by the Black-backed Woodpecker Working Group. 41 pp. Gomez, A., R.F. Powers, M.J. Singer, and W.R. Horwath. 2002. Soil Compaction Effects on Growth of Young Ponderosa Pine Following Litter Removal in California’s Sierra Nevada. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 66:1334-1343. Gonzalez, P., R.P. Neilson, K.S. McKelvey, J.M. Lenihan, and R.J. Drapek. 2007. Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Habitat and Conservation Priority Areas fo Lynx Canadensis (Canada Lynx). Report to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, VA. Graham, R.T., A.E. Harvey, M.F. Jurgensen, T.B. Jain, J.R. Tonn, and D.S. Page-Dumroese. 1994. Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Forests of the Rocky Mountains. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Research Paper INT-RP-477. Graham, Russell T., S. McCafferrey, and T.B. Jain, tech. eds. 2004. Science basis for changing forest structures to modify wildfire behavior and severity. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 43 p. Graham, Russell T.,Alen E. Harvey, Threasa B. Jain, Jonalea R. Tonn, 1999. September. The Effects of Thinning and Similar Stand Treatments on Fire Behavior in Western Forests. USDA, Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station. USDI, BLM, General Technical Report, PNW-GTR-463. 28p. Graham, Russell T.; Jain, Theresa B.; Loseke, Mark. 2009. Fuel treatments, fire suppression, and their interaction with wildfire and its impacts the Warm Lake experience during the Cascade Complex of wildfires in central Idaho, 2007. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-229. Fort Collins, CO U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 36 p Graham, Russell T.; McCaffrey, Sarah; Jain, Theresa B. (tech. eds.) 2004. Science basis for changing forest structure to modify wildfire behavior and severity. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 43 p. Graham, Russell T.; McCaffrey, Sarah; Jain, Theresa B. (tech. eds.) 2004. Science basis for changing forest structure to modify wildfire behavior and severity. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 43 p. Gravelle, J. A., and T. E. Link. 2007. Influence of timber harvesting on water temperatures in a northern Idaho watershed. Forest Science, v. 53, n. 2, 189-205. Green, P., J. Joy, D. Sirucek, W. Hann, A. Zack, and B. Naumann. 2005 (Errata). 1992. Old-growth forest types of the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. R-1 SES 4/92. Errata 2005. Green, P; J. Joy; D. Sirucek; W. Hann; A. Zack; B. Naumann. 1992. Old-growth forest types of the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Region. 60p. Greenwald, N.D., D. Coleman Crocker-Bedford, L. Broberg, K.F. Sucklin, and T. Tibbitts. 2005. A review of northern goshawk habitat selection in the home range and implications for forest management in the western United States. Wildlife Society Bulletin. Groot, Arthur; Rongzhou Man; Jim Wood. 2009. Spatial and temporal patterns of Populus tremuloides regeneration in small forest openings in northern Ontario. The Forestry Chronicle. 85(4): 548-557. Grove, A.J., C.L. Wambolt, and M.R. Frisina. 2005. Douglas-fir’s effect on mountain big sagebrush wildlife habitats. Wildl. Soc. Bull. 33(1):74-80 Grubb, R. T., R.L. Sheley, J. Stivers 2003. Understanding Montana’s noxious weed laws. Montana State University Extension Service, Report No. MT199605AG Gruell (1986) In http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/animals/mammal/odhe/all.html#17. Accessed 9/1/11. Gruell, George E. 1983. Fire and vegetative trends in the northern Rockies: Interpretations from 1871-1982 photographs. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. General Technical Report INT-158. Ogden, Utah: December. Gruver, Jeffery C. and Douglas A. Keinath. 2006. Townsend's big-eared bat (Corynorhinus townsendii): A technical conservation assessment. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region, Species Conservation Project. Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/projects/scp/assessments/townsendsbigearedbat.pdf. (Accessed 9/8/11. Gucker, Corey L. 2008. Verbascum thapsus. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, June 30]. Gundale, M.J., T.H. DeLuca, C.E. Fiedler, P.W. Ramsey, M.G. Harrington, and J.E. Gannon. 2005. Restoration Treatments in a Montana Ponderosa Pine Forest: Effects on Soil Physical, Chemical, and Biological Properties. Forest Ecology and Management, 213:25-38. Halofsky, J.E., D.C. Donato, D.E. Hibbs, J.L. Campbell, M. D. Cannon, J.B. Fontaine, J.R. Thompson, R.G. Anthony, B.T. Bormann, L.J. Kayes, B.E. Law, D.L. Peterson and T.A. Spies. 2011. Mixed-severity fire regimes: lessons and hypotheses’ from the Klamath-Siskiyou Ecorgeion. Ecosphere. Volume 2(4) Article 40. 19 pp. Han, H., D. Page-Dumroese, S. Han, and J. Tirocke. 2006. Effects of Slash, Machine Passes, and Soil Moisture on Penetration Resistance in a Cut-to-Length Harvesting System. International Journal of Forest Engineering. Han, S., H. Han, D.S. Page-Dumroese, and L.R. Johnson. 2009. Soil Compaction Associated with Cut-to-Length and Whole-Tree Harvesting of a Coniferous Forest. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 39:976-989. Hann, Wendel J. etal. 2008. Interagency Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) Guidebook. www.frames.com Hardy, Colin C. et al. 2001. Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed and Wildland Fire. National Wildfire Coordinating Group PMS 420-2 NFES 1279. Pg 29. http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/pubs/journals/pnw_2001_ottmar001.pdf Harrington, M.G.; Hawksworth, F.G. 1990. Interactions of fire and dwarf mistletoe on mortality of southwestern ponderosa pine. In: Krammes, J.S., tech. coord. Effects of fire in management of southwestern natural resources: Proceedings of Symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-191. USDA Forest Service: 234-240. Hart, S.C., T.H. DeLuca, G.S. Newman, M.D. Mackenzie, and S.I. Boyle. 2005. Post-fire Vegetation Dynamics as Drivers of Microbial Community Structure and Function in Forest Soils. Forest Ecology and Management, 220: 166-184. Harvey, A.E., M.F. Jurgensen, M.J. Larsen, and R.T. Graham. 1987. Decaying organic materials and soil quality in the inland northwest: a management opportunity. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical Report INT-225. Ogden, UT. 20p Hatler, D. F. 1989. A wolverine management strategy for British Columbia. Wildlife Bulletin No. B-60. B.C. Ministry of Environment, Wildlife Branch. Victoria, BC. 124 pp. Hawksworth, FG and DW Johnson. 1989. Biology and management of dwarf mistletoe in lodgepole pine in the Rocky Mountains. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountains Forest and Range Experiment Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-169. Hayden, J. G. Ardt, M. Fleming, T.W. Keegan, J. Peek, T.O. Smith, and A. Wood. 2008. Habitat guidelines for mule deer, Northern forest ecosystem. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 48 pp. Hayward G.D., and R.E. Escano. 1989. Goshawk nest site characteristics in western Montana and northern Idaho. Condor 91: 476 – 479. Hayward, Gregory D. and Jon Verner. 1994. Flammulated, boreal, and great gray owls in the United States: A technical conservation assessment. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. General Technical Report RM-253. September. Heinemeyer, K.S. 1993. Temporal dynamics in the movements, habitat use, activity, and spacing of reintroduced fishers in northwestern Montana. M. Sc. Thesis, Univ. of Montana, Missoula. 154 pp. Heinemeyer, Kimberly S. and Jeffery L. Jones. 1994. Fisher biology and management in the Western United States: A literature review and adaptive management strategy. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Region and the Interagency Forest Carnivore Working Group. Hejl, S.J. 2011. A strategy for maintaining healthy populations of Western coniferous forest birds. Available at: http://www.birds.cornell.edu/pifcapemay/hejl.htm. Accessed 9/28/11. Hejl, Sallie J., and Mary McFadzen. 2000. Maintaining fire-associated bird species across forest landscapes in the Northern Rockies—Final Report. [INT-99543-RJVA]. USDA Forest Service, RMRS Forest Sciences Laboratory (21pp.). Helena National Forest, 2010. Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction — Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project, Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact. USDA Forest Service, Helena, MT. Helena National Forest, 2010. Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction — Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project, Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact. USDA Forest Service, Helena, MT. Helena National Forest. 1986. The Helena National Forest Plan. USDA Forest Service, Helena, MT. Helena National Forest. 2011. Helena National Forest Transportation Atlas: GIS Corporate Data (spatial) and Infra Travel Routes Records (tabular). USDA Forest Service, Helena, MT. Helena National Forest. 2011. Helena National Forest Transportation Atlas: GIS Corporate Data (spatial) and Infra Travel Routes Records (tabular). USDA Forest Service, Helena, MT. Hendricks, Paul and Paul Maxell. 2005. Bat surveys on USFS Northern Region lands in Montana: 2005. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Montana Natural Heritage Program. Herrero, S., 1972. Aspects of evolution and adaptation in American black bear (Ursus americanus Pallus) and brown and grizzly bears (Ursus arctos Linne.) of North America. Int. Conf. Bear Res. Manage. 2, 221–231. In Nielson, S.E. M.S. Boyce and G.B. Stenhouse. 2004. Grizzly bears and forestry. Selection of clearcuts by grizzly bears in west-central Alberta Canada. Forest Ecology and Management 199 (2004) 51-65. 15 pp. Hewlett, J.D. and Hibbert, A.R. 1967: Factors affecting the response of small watersheds to precipitation in humid areas. In Sopper, W.E. and Lull, H.W., editors, Forest hydrology, New York: Pergamon Press, 275–90. Hibbert, A. R., 1967. Forest treatment effects on water yield. In: W. E. Sopper and H. W. Lull (Editors), International Symposium For Hydrology. Pergamon, Oxford, 813 pp Hicks B.J., J.D. Hall, P.A. Bisson, and J.R. Sedell. 1991. Responses of Salmonids to Habitat Changes. In: Influences of Forest and Rangeland Management on Slamonid Fishes and Their Habitats. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 19: pages 483-485. Higgs, Eric S. 1997. What is good ecological restoration? Conservation Biology. 11(2): 338-348. Hillis, J.M, and B. Kennedy. 2003. Draft U.S. Forest Service Region One wolverine natal den assessment. Unpublished report on file at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. 8 p. Hillis, J.M., M.J. Thompson, J.E. Canfield, L.J. Lyon, C.L. Marcum, P.M. Dolan, D.W. Cleery. 1991. Defining elk security: The Hillis Paradigm. in Elk Vulnerability - A Symposium. Montana State Univ., Bozeman, April 10-12, 1991. Hillis, M. and D. Lockman. 2003. U.S. Forest Service Region One American marten assessment. Prepared for Region 1, USDA, Forest Service, Missoula, Montana. Hills, M., V. Applegate, S. Slaughter and M.G. Harrington. 2001. Simulating historical disturbance regimes and stand structures in old-forest ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests. USDA Forest Service Proceedings, RMRS-P-19. pp. 32-39. Hitchcox, Susan M. 1996. Abundance and nesting success of cavity-nesting birds in unlogged and salvage-logged burned forest in northwestern Montana. M.S. thesis. University of Montana, Missoula, MT. Hobbs, N. T.; Spowart, R. A. 1984. Effects of prescribed fire on nutrition of mountain sheep and mule deer during winter and spring. Journal of Wildlife Management. 48(2): 551-560. In USDA Forest Service. Database 2011c. Hobbs, R. J. and J. A. Harris. 2001. Restoration ecology: repairing the earth’s ecosystems in the new millennium. Restoration Ecology. 9(2): 239–246. Hobbs, Richard J. 2004. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 2(1): 43-48. Hobson, K. A. and J. Shieck. 1999. Changes in bird communities in boreal mixed wood forest: harvest and wildfire effects over 30 years. Ecological Applications 9:849-863. In Covert, K.A. 2003. Hairy woodpecker winter ecology following wildfire: Effects of burn severity and age. MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. 98 pp. Hoff, Raymond J; Dennis E. Ferguson; Geral I. McDonald; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Strategies for managing whitebark pine in the presence of white pine blister rust. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 346-366. Holden Zachary A.; Penelope Morgan; Matthew G. Rollins; Kathleen Kavanagh. 2007. Effects of multiple wildland fires on ponderosa pine stand structure in two southwestern wilderness areas, USA. Fire Ecology Special Issue 3( 2): 18-33. Hollingsworth, Lawen. 2010 and 2011. Personal communication and email correspondence. On file. Holtrop, 2008. United States Department of Agriculture. Forest Service. Secretary’s Memorandum 1042-156 Authority to Approve Road Construction and Timber Harvesting in Certain Lands Administered by the Forest Service.Southwestern Crown Collaborative. 2011. Current Projects. Lincoln Ranger District. Available at: <http://www.swcrown.org/projects/>. Hood, Sharon and Barbara Bentz. 2007. Predicting postfire Douglas-fir beetle attacks and tree mortality in the northern Rocky Mountains. Can. J. For. Res. 37: 1058-1069. Hornocker, Maurine G. and Howard S. Hash. 1981. Ecology of the wolverine in northwestern Montana. Canadian Journal of Zoology 59, (September 1980): 1286-1301. Horton, Scott P. and R. William Mannan. 1988. Effects of prescribed fire on snags and cavity-nesting birds in southeastern Arizona pine forests. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 16(1): 37-44. Huff, Mark H. et al. 1995. Historical and Current Forest Landscapes in Eastern Oregon and Wasington. Part II Linking Vegetation Characteristics to Potential Fire Behavior and Related Smoke Production. Pacific Northwest Research Station, PNW-GTR-355. Huffman, Ronald D.; Mary Ann Fajvan; Petra Bohall Wood. 1999. Effects of residual overstory on aspen development in Minnesota. Can. J. For. Res. 29:284-289. Hulme, Philip E. 2006. Beyond control: wider implications for the management of biological invasions. Journal of Applied Ecology. 43: 835-847. Hutchins, H. E. and R. M. Lanner. The central role of Clark’s nutcracker in the dispersal and establishment of whitebark pine. Oecologia. 55: 192-201. Hutchins, H. E., and R. M. Lanner. 1982. The central role of Clark's nutcrackers in the dispersal and establishment of whitebark pine. Oecologia 55:192-201. In Keane, R.E. and R.A. Parsons, 2007. Restoring whitebark pine forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains, USA. 22 pp. Hutchins, H.E. 1989. Whitebark pine seed dispersal and establishment: Who’s responsible? Whitebark In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Hutto, Richard L. 1995. Composition of bird communities following stand-replacement fires in northern Rocky Mountain (U.S.A.) conifer forests. Conservation Biology 9, 1041–58. Hutto, Richard L. and Jock S. Young. 2002. Regional landbird monitoring: Perspectives from the Northern Rocky Mountains. Wildlife Society Bulletin 30, no. 3 738–50. Inman, R.M., K.H. Inman, A.J. McCue, and M.L. Packila. 2007. Wolverine harvest in Montana: survival rates and spatial considerations for harvest management. Pages 85-96 in Wildlife Conservation Society. Greater Yellowstone Wolverine Program, Cumulative Report, May 2007. Ennis, MT. Interagency Fire Regime Condition Class Guide Book. 2010. Version 3.0 September 2010. Intermountain West Joint Venture. 2005. Coordinated Bird Conservation Plan. Version 1.1. December 2005. 94 pp. Johnson, S.L. 2004. Factors influencing stream temperatures in small streams: substrate effects and a shading experiment. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 61:913-923. Ketcheson, G.L. and Megahan, W.F. 1996. Sediment production and downslope sediment transport from forest roads in granitic watersheds. Res. Pap. INT-RP-486. Ogden, UT: USDA-Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 11pp. On order Jones, Bobette E.; Tom H. Rickman; Alfred Vazquez; Yukako Sado; Kenneth W. Tate. 2005. Removal of encroaching conifers to regenerate degraded aspen stands in the Sierra Nevada. Restoration Ecology. 13(2): 373-379. Jones, J. L. 1991. Habitat use of fisher in north central Idaho. Thesis, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, USA. In Samson , F. B. 2006b. Habitat estimates for maintaining viable populations of the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl, pileated woodpecker, American martin, and fisher. Unpublished report on file, Northern Region, Missoula, Montana, USA. Jones, J. R.; DeByle, N. V. 1985a. Soils. In: DeByle, N. V.; Winokur, R. P., eds. Aspen: ecology and management in the Western United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-119. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 65-70. Joy, S. M. 2002. Northern Goshawk habitat on the Kaibab National Forest Arizona: Factors affecting nest locations and territory quality. Dissertation. University of Colorado. 2002. Julander, Odell. 1966. Howe mule deer use mountain rangeland in Utah. Utah Acad. Scol, Arts. And Lett. Proc. 43(2), pp. 22-28 In Thomas, Jack Ward. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forests the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Agriculture Handbook No. 553. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute, U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. September. Jurgensen, M.F., A.E. Harvey, R.T. Graham, D.S. Page-Dumrose, J.R. Tonn, M.J. Larson, and T.B. Jain. 1997. Impacts of timber harvests on soil organic matter, nitrogen, productivity and health of inland northwest forests. Forest Science 43: 234-251. Karl, Thomas R.; Jerry M. Melillo; and Thomas C. Peterson (eds.). 2009. Global climate change impacts in the United States. Cambridge University Press. 196 p. Kauffman, J.B., 2004. Death rides the forest: Perceptions of fire, land use, and ecological restoration of western forests. Conservation Biology 18, 878–882. In Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Kaufman, M. G., E. D. Odelson D. A. Walker, and M. J. Klug. 2000. Microbial community ecology and insect nutrition. American Entomologist 46, 173–84. Kay, Charles E. 2001. Evaluation of burned aspen communities in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. Shepperd, Wayne D.; Binkley, Dan; Bartos, Dale L.; Stohlgren, Thomas J.; and Eskew, Lane G., compilers. 2001. Sustaining aspen in western landscapes: symposium proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Pp 215-224. Keane, R., Ryan, K., Veblen, Tom., Allen, C., Logan, J. 2002. Cascading Effects of Fire Exclusion in Rocky Mountain Ecosystems. Quinney Natural Resources Research Library. 33 p. Keane, R.E. and R.A. Parsons, 2007. Restoring whitebark pine forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains, USA. 22 pp. Keane, Robert E. 2001. Successional dynamics: modeling an anthropogenic threat. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 159-192. Keane, Robert E. 2008. A Range-wide Restoration Strategy for Whitebark Pine Forests. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service. Rocky Mountain Research Station. 82 pp. Kendall, K. C. 1983. Use of pine nuts by grizzly and black bears in the Yellowstone area. Int. Conf. Bear Res. and Manage. 5:166-173 Keane, Robert E. and Russell A. Parsons. 2010a. Restoring whitebark pine forests of the northern Rocky Mountains, USA. Ecological Restoration. 28(1): 56-70. Keane, Robert E. and Russell A. Parsons. 2010b. Management guide to ecosystem restoration treatments: Whitebark pine forests of the northern Rocky Mountains, U.S.A. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-232. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 133 p. Keane, Robert E. and Stephen F. Arno. 1996. Whitebark pine ecosystem restoration in western Montana. In: Hardy, Colin C.; Arno, Stephen F., eds. 1996. The use of fire in forest restoration. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-341. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Keane, Robert E. and Stephen F. Arno. 2001. Restoration concepts and techniques. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 367-400. Keane, Robert E. and Stephen F. Arno. 2001. Restoration concepts and techniques. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 367-400. Keane, Robert E.; Menakis, James P.; Hann, Wendel J. 1996. Coarse-scale restoration planning and design in Interior Columbia River Basin ecosystems: An example for restoring declining whitebark pine forests. In: Hardy, Colin C.; Arno, Stephen F., eds. The use of fire in forest restoration. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-341. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. p. 14-19. Keane, Robert E.; Penelope Morgan; James P. Menakis. 1994. Landscape assessment of the decline of whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) in the Bob Marshall Wilderness complex, Montana, USA. Northwest Science. 68(3): 213-229. Keane, Robert E.; Ryan, Kevin C.; Running, Steven W. 1996 Simulating effects on fire on Northern Rocky Mountain landscapes with the ecological process model Fire-BGC. Tree Physiology 319-331. Kendall, K. C. 1983. Use of pine nuts by grizzly and black bears in the Yellowstone area. Int. Conf. Bear Res. and Manage. 5:166-173. Kendall, K. C., and R. E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine decline : infection, mortality, and population trends. pp. 221-242. Whitebark pine communities : ecology and restoration. Washington D.C. : Island Press c2001. In Keane, R.E. and R.A. Parsons, 2007. Restoring whitebark pine forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains, USA. 22 pp. Kendall, K.; D. Schirokauer; E. Shanahan; R. Watt; D. Reinhart; R. Renkin; S. Cain. G. Green. 1996a. Whitebark pine health in northern Rockies national park ecosystems: a preliminary report. Nutcracker Notes. 7: 16. Found online on 4/8/2011 at: http://www.whitebarkfound.org/Nutcracker-Notes/number7.htm#gallatin Kendall, K.; D. Tyers; D. Schirokauer. 1996b. Preliminary status report on whitebark pine in Gallatin National Forest, Montana. Nutcracker Notes. 7:19. Found online on 4/8/2011 at: http://www.whitebarkfound.org/Nutcracker-Notes/number7.htm#gallatin Kendall, Katherine C. and Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine decline: infection, mortality, and population trends. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 222-242. Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Kennedy, P.L. 1997. The northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis atricapillus): is there evidence of a population decline? Journal of Raptor Research. 31: 95-106. Kennedy, Patricia L. 2003. Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis atricapillus): A technical conservation assessment . USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/projects/scp/assessments/northerngoshawk.pdf . (Accessed 9/1/11). King, J.G. 1989. Streamflow responses to road building and harvesting: a comparison with the equivalent clearcut area procedure. Res. Pap. INT-401. Ogden, UT: USDA-FS, Intermountain Research Station. 13pp. Kirchhoff, D. and J.W. Schoen. 1987. Forest cover and snow: implications for deer habitat in southeast Alaska. Journal of Wildlife Management. 51(1): 28-33.Kirk, D. A., and B. J. Naylor. 1996. Habitat requirements of the pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus pileatus) with special reference to Ontario. Ontario Ministry of Environment, South Central Science and Technology Report 46, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Kirk, T. A. and W. J. Zielinski. 2009. Developing and testing a landscape habitat suitability model for the American marten (Martes americana) in the Cascades mountains of California. Landscape Ecology 24, no. 6 759–73. Klein, William H.; Douglas L. Parker; Chester E. Jensen. 1978. Attach, emergence, and stand depletion trends of the mountain pine beetle in a lodgepole pine stand an outbreak. Environmental Entomology. 7:732-737. Klein, William H.; Douglas L. Parker; Chester E. Jensen. 1978. Attack, emergence, and stand depletion trends of the mountain pine beetle in a lodgepole pine stand during an outbreak. Environ. Entomol. 7: 732-737. Klock, G.O. 1975. Impact of Five Postfire Salvage Logging Systems on Soils and Vegetation. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, March-April. Knapp, Eric E.; Jon E. Keeley; Elizabeth A. Ballenger; Teresa J. Brennan. 2005. Fuel reduction and coarse woody debris dynamics with early season and late season prescribed fire in a Sierra Nevada mixed conifer forest. Forest Ecology and Management. 208: 383–397. Knight, D. H., and L. L. Wallace. 1989. The Yellowstone fires: issues in landscape ecology. Bioscience 39:700-706. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Knight, G.C. 1989. Overview: Ecological and Cultural Prehistory of the Helena and Deerlodge National Forests, Montana. USDA Forest Service, Helena and Deerlodge National Forests, MT. Knight, J. 2011. Mule deer management for Montana landowners. Available at Montana State University Extension Publications. Available at: http://www.msuextension.org/store/Products/Manage-Your-Land-for-Wildlife. Accessed 9/12/11. Kochenderfer, J.N., P.J. Edwards, and F. Wood. 1997. “Hydrologic impacts of logging an Appalachian watershed using West Virginia’s best management practices.” Northern Journal of Applied Forestry 14(4): 207-218. Koehler, G.M. and J.D. Britell. 1990. Managing spruce-fir habitat for lynx and snowshoe hares. Journal of Forestry. October. pp. 10-14. Kolbe, J.A., J.R. Squires, D.H. Pletscher, and R.F. Ruggiero. 2007. The effect of snowmobile trails on coyote movements within lynx home ranges. Journal of Wildlife Management. 71(5):1409-1418. Kolbe, Jay (wildlife biologist Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks) 2012. Personal communication. (email) with Scott Reitz, Wildlife Biologist, TEAMS Enterprise Unit. June 15, 2012. Kolka, R.K. and M.F. Smidt. 2004. Effects of Forest Road Amelioration Techniques on Soil Bulk Density, Surface Runoff, Sediment Transport, Soil Moisture, and Seedling Growth. Forest Ecology and Management, 202:313-323. Kotliar, N. B., S. J. Hejl, R. L. Hutto, V. A. Saab, C. P. Melcher, and M. McFadzen. 2002. Effects of fire and post-fire salvage logging on avian communities in conifer-dominated forests of the western United States. In Effects of habitat fragmentation on birds in western landscapes: contrasts with paradigms from the eastern United States. ed. George, T. L. and D. S. Dobkin, Chap. Studies in Avian Biology No. 25, 49–64. Camarillo, California: Cooper Ornithological Society Kotliar, N.B., Kennedy, P.L., Ferree, K., 2007. Avifaunal responses to fire in southwestern montane forests along a burn severity gradient. Ecol. Appl. 17 (2), 491–501.In Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Kurtz, Jarel 2009. Unpublished Fire/Fuels Detailed NFMA Background Report for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, Helena National Forest. On file at Lincoln District Office. Kurtz, Jarel 2009. Unpublished Fire/Fuels Detailed NFMA Background Report for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, Helena National Forest. On file at Lincoln District Office. Kurtz, Jarel. (2009) Stone-dry EAWS Fuels Report. Internal Document. La Sorte, F.A.; Mannan, R.W.; Reynolds, R.T.Grubb, T.G.. 2004. Habitat associations of sympatric red-tailed hawks and northern goshawks on the Kaibab Plateau. Journal of Wildlife Management. 68: 307-317. Laflen, J.M., D.C. Flanagan, B.A. Engel, 2004. Soil erosion and sediment yield prediction accuracy using WEPP. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 40 (2): 289–297. Larsen, I.J., and L.H. MacDonald, 2007. Predicting post-fire sediment yields at the hillslope scale: Testing RUSLE and Disturbed WEPP. Water Resources Research 43, W11412, doi:10.1029/2006WR005560, 18ppLogan, Bob and Bud Clinch. 1991. Montana Forestry Best Management Practices. http://dnrweb.dnr.state.md.us:8080/FullDisp?itemid=00001380 Larson, Evan R.; Saskia L. Van de Gevel; Henri D. Grissino-Mayer. 2009. Variability in fire regimes of high-elevation whitebark pine communities, western Montana, USA. Ecoscience. 16(3): 282-298. Larsson, S; R. Oren; R. H. Waring; J. W. Barrett. 1983. Attacks of mountain pine beetle as related to tree vigor of ponderosa pine. Forest Science. 29(2): 395-402. Laurent, T. 2009. Thom-Seider Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Project, Soil Specialist Report. USDA Forest Service, Klamath National Forest, Yreka, CA. Lee, D.C., J.R. Sedell, B.E. Reiman, R.F. Thurow, J.E. Williams. 1997. An Assessment of Ecosystem Components in the Interior Columbia Basin and Portions of the Klamath and Great Basins, Vol. 3. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-405. Portland, OR: USDA, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Leege, T.A. 1979. Effects of repeated prescribed burns on northern Idaho elk browse. Northwest Science. 53(2): 107-113.Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/animals/mammal/ceca/all.html#. Accessed 8/15/11. Lehmkuhl, J. F., L. E. Gould, E. Cazares, and D. R. Hosford. 2004. Truffle abundance and mycophagy by northern flying squirrels in eastern Washington forests. Forest Ecology and Management 200:49-65. Lehmkuhl, J.F., K.D. Kistler, J.S. Begley and J. Boulanger. 2006. Demography of northern flying squirrels informs ecosystem management of western interior forests. Ecological Applications, 16(2), pp. 584-600. Lemke, P.L. 1994. Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentiles) habitat study. Beaverhead National Forest, Montana, Wisdom and Wise River Ranger Districts. Unpubl. report to Beaverhead National Forest. Lennie, Alison D.; Simon M. Landhäusser; Victor J. Lieffers; Derek Sidders. 2009. Regeneration of aspen following partial and strip understory protection harvest in boreal mixedwood forests. The Forestry Chronicle. 85(4): 631-638. Lenoir, J., J.C. Gegout, P.A. Marquet, P. deRuffray, H. Brisse 2008. A Significant Upward Shift in Plant Species Optimum Elevation During the 20th Century. Science 27 June 2008: Vol. 320 no. 5884 pp. 1768-1771 online at http://www.sciencemag.org/content/320/5884/1768.full Levine, J.M., M. Vilà, C. M. D’Antonio, J.S. Dukes, K. Grigulis, and S. Lavorel 2003. Mechanisms underlying the impacts of exotic plant invasions. Proceedings of the Royal Society Lond. B. 270: 775–781. Lincoln Area Snowmobile Trails Map. Compiled by Ponderosa Snow Warriors in cooperation with Lincoln Ranger District. Helena National Forest, Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks. Lincoln. Montana. Linkhart, B. D., R. T. Reynolds, and R. A. Ryder. 1998. Home range and habitat of breeding flammulated owls in Colorado. Wilson Bulletin 110: 342-351. In Samson, Fred B. 2006a. A conservation assessment of the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpeckers, flammulated owl, and pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Lodge, D.M. and K. Shrader-Frechette 2003. Nonindigenous Species: Ecological Explanation, Environmental Ethics, and Public Policy. Conservation Biology, Volume 17, No. 1, Pages 31–37. Lofroth, E. C., C. M. Raley, J. M. Higley, R. L. Truex, J. S. Yaeger, J. C. Lewis, P. J. Happe, L. L. Finley, R. H. Naney, L. J. Hale, A. L. Krause, S. A. Livingston, A. M. Myers, and R. N. Brown. 2010. Conservation of Fishers (Martes pennanti) in South-Central British Columbia, Western Washington, Western Oregon, and California–Volume I: Conservation Assessment. USDI Bureau of Land Management, Denver, Colorado, USA. Logan, R. 2001. Water Quality Best Management Practices for Montana Forests. Montana State University Extension Service. Available online @ http://dnrc.mt.gov/forestry/Assistance/Practices/Documents/2001WaterQualityBMPGuide.pdf, accessed 3/8/2011. Logan, R. 2001. Water Quality Best Management Practices for Montana Forests. Montana State University Extension Service. Available online @ http://dnrc.mt.gov/forestry/Assistance/Practices/Documents/2001WaterQualityBMPGuide.pdf, accessed 3/8/2011. Lonner, T. N. and J. D. Cada. 1982. Some effects of forest management on elk hunting opportunity. In The western states elk workshop. ed. Britt, T. L. and D. P. Theobald, 119–28. Flagstaff, Arizona: Arizona Fish and Game Department. Lonsdale, W.M. 1999. Global Patterns of Plant Invasions and the Concept of Invasibility. Ecology. 80(5): 1522-1536. Losensky, B.T. 1993. Historical vegetation in Region One by climatic section. USDA Forest Service Northern Region. Draft. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Louda, S.M., D. Kendall, J. Connor, and D. Simberloff 1997. Ecological Effects of an Insect Introduced for the Biological Control of Weeds. Science. 277: 1088-1090. Luce, C. and T. Black, 1999. Sediment Production from Forest Roads in Western Oregon. Water Resources Research 35(8):2561-2570. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/boise/publications/watershed/rmrs_1999_lucec001.pdf Luce, C. and T. Black, 2001. Spatial and Temporal Patterns in Erosion from Forest Roads. In: The Influence of Land Use on the Hydrologic-Geomorphic Responses of Watersheds, S. Wimosta and S.J. Burges, (editors). Water Resource Monographs, American Geophysical Union, Washington, District of Columbia. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_other/rmrs_2001_luce_c008.pdf Luce, C.H. 1997. Effectiveness of road ripping in restoring infiltration capacity of forest roads. Restoration Ecology 5 (3):265-270. Lyon, A.L., W.L. Gaines, J.F. Lehmkul and R.J. Harrod. 2008. Short-term effects of fire and fire surrogate treatments on foraging tree selection by cavity-nesting birds in dry forests of central Washington. Forest Ecology and Management 255, 3203-3211. Lyon, L. J., and A. G. Christensen. 1992. A partial glossary of elk management terms. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, General Technical Report INT-GTR-288, Portland, Oregon. Lyon, L.J. 1979. Habitat effectiveness for elk as influenced by roads and cover. J. Forestry 77(10): 658-660. Lyon, L.J.; Crawford, H.S.; Czuhai, E.; Fredriksen, R.L.; Harlow, F.; Metz, L.J.; Pearson, H.A. 1978. Effects of fire on fauna: a state-of-knowledge review. Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-GTR-6. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 22 pp. Lyon,, L. Jack and Jodie E. Canfield. 1991. Habitat Selections by Rocky Mountain Elk Under Hunting Season Stress. Proceedings: Elk Vulnerability Symposium, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, April 10-12, 1991. MacDonald, L.H., 1987. Forest harvest, snowmelt, and streamflow in the central Sierra Nevada. In: R.H. Swanson, P.Y. Bernier, and P.D. Woodard (eds.), Forest Hydrology and Watershed Management, Int. Assoc. Hydrol. Sci. Pub. No. 167, pp 273-283. MacDonald, L.H., A.W. Smart, and R.C. Wissmar. 1991. Monitoring Guidelines to Evaluate Effects of Forestry Activities on Streams in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska. CSS/EPA 910/9-91-001, Seattle, WA. pg. 125, 152. MacDonald, L.H., J.D. Stednick, 2003. Forests and Water: A State-of-the-Art Review for Colorado. Colorado Water Resources Research Institute Completion Report No. 196. 65 pp. Mack, M., C. D’Antonio, and R. Ley 2001. Alteration of ecosystem nitrogen dynamics by exotic plants: a case study of C4 grasses in Hawaii. Ecological Applications. 11: 1323–1335. Mack, R., D. Simberloff, W. Lonsdale, H. Evans, M. Clout and F. Bazzaz 2000. Biotic Invasions: Causes, Epidemiology, Global Consequences, and Control. Ecol App. 10(3). Pp 689-710. Mack, R., D. Simberloff, W. Lonsdale, H.Evans, M. Clout, F. Bazzaz 2000 Biotic Invasions: Causes, Epidemiology, Global Consequences and Control. Issues in Ecology, Ecological Applications: 10(3), pp. 689-710. Mackie, R.J., D.F. Pac, K.L. Hamlin, and G.L. Dusek. 1998. In: Ecology and Management of Mule Deer and White-tailed Deer in Montana. Federal Aid Project W-120-R. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks: 27-31. Mackie, Richard J. 1970. Range ecology and relations of mule deer, elk, and cattle in the Missouri river Breaks, Montana. Wildl. Monographs. 20, 79 pp. In Thomas, Jack Ward. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forests the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Agriculture Handbook No. 553. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute, U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. September. Magoun, A.J. and J.P. Copeland. 1998. Characteristics of Wolverine Reproductive Den Sites. Journal of Wildlife Management. 62(4): 1313-1320. Maini, J. S., and J. H. Cayford, eds. 1968. Growth and utilization of poplars in Canada. Department of Forestry and Rural Development, Forestry Branch, Departmental Publication 1205. Ottawa, ON. 257 p. Malm, William C. 1999. Introduction to Visibility. Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere. Pg 25. http://www.epa.gov/visibility/pdfs/introvis.pdf Marcum, C.L. 1975. Summer-fall habitat selection and use by a western Montana elk herd. PhD dissertation. University of Montana, 203 pp. In Thomas, Jack Ward. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forests the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Agriculture Handbook No. 553. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute, U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. September. Marcum, C.L. 1976. Habitat selection and use during summer and fall months by a western Montana elk herd. In Thomas, Jack Ward. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forests the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Agriculture Handbook No. 553. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute, U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. September. Marler, M.J., C.A. Zabinski, and R.M. Callaway 1999. Mycorrhizae indirectly enhance competitive effects of an invasive grass on a native bunchgrass. Ecology. 80:1180–1186. Marr, D. 2011a. Cabin Gulch Vegetation Project, Soils Specialist Report. USDA Forest Service, Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. Marr, D. 2011b. Personal communication with Dustin Walters (TEAMS Enterprise, Soil Scientist). Martin, P. 1980. Factors influencing globe huckleberry fruit production in Northwestern Montana. Proceedings of the International Conference on Bear Research and Management 5:159-165. In Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation Forest Management Bureau. Grizzly Bear Species Account. 2010. Missoula, MT 59804. 50 pp. Martinka, C. J. 1976 Fire and elk in Glacier National Park. In: Proceedings, Tall Timbers fire ecology conference and fire and land management symposium. 1974. October 8-10, Missoula MT. pp. 377-389. In http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/animals/mammal/ceca/all.html# elk. Maser, Chris, Ralph G. Anderson, Kermit Cromack, Jerry T. Williams and Robert E. Martin. 1979. "Dead and Down Woody Material". Wildlife Habitats in Managed Forests the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. Agriculture Handbook No. 553. http://www.fs.fed.us/r6/nr/wildlife/animalinn/hab_6ddwm.htm. Accessed 11/5/2011. Mattson, D.J., and C. Jonkel. 1989. Stone pines and bears. Whitebark Pine Symposium. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-270, p. 223-236. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Mattson, D.J., B.M. Blanchard, and R.R. Knight. 1992. Yellowstone grizzly bear mortality, human habituation, and whitebark pine seed crops. J. Wildl. Manage. 56(3):432-442. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Mawdsley, J., D. Ojima and R. O’Malley. Strategies for Managing the Effects of Climate Change on Wildlife and Ecosystems. The Heinz Center 45 pp. Maxell, Bryce A., J. Kirwin Werner, Paul Hendricks, and Dennis L. Flath. 2003. Herpetology in Montana. Society for Northwestern Vertebrate Biology. Northwest Fauna Number 5. 2003. MCA: Montana Code Annotated, 2009. Title 75, Chapter 5: Environmental Protection, Water Quality. http://data.opi.mt.gov/bills/mca_toc/75_5.htm McCaffery, M., T.A. Switalski, and L. Eby. 2007. Effects of road decommissioning on stream habitat characteristics in the South Fork Flathead River, Montana. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 136:553-561. McCallum, D. A. 1994. Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus). In The Birds of North America, No. 93 (A. Poole and F. Gill, Eds.). Philadelphia: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, D.C.: The American Ornithologists’ Union. McClelland, B. R. 1977 Relationships between hole-nesting birds, forest snags and decay in western larch – Douglas fir forests of the northern Rocky Mountains. PHD. Dissertation. University of Montana, Missoula, MT. McClelland, B.R. and P.T. McClelland. 1999. Pileated woodpecker nest and roost trees in Montana: Links with old-growth and forest health. Wildlife Society Bulletin, Vol. 27, No. 3. Pp. 846-857. McClelland, B.R.; Frissell, S.S.; Fischer, W.C.; Halvorson, C.H. 1979. Habitat management for hole-nesting birds in forest of western larch and Douglas-fir. Journal of Forestry. 77: 480-483. McDonald, G. I.; N. E. Martin; A. E. Harvey. 1987. Armillaria in the Northern Rockies: pathogenicity and host susceptibility on pristine and disturbed sites. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Research Note INT-371. McGrath, Michael T., Stephen DeStefano, Robert A. Riggs, Larry L. Irwin, and Gary J. Roloff. 2003. Spatially explicit influences on northern goshawk nesting habit in the Interior Pacific Northwest. Wildlife Monographs 154, 1–63. In Samson, Fred B. 2006a. A conservation assessment of the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpeckers, flammulated owl, and pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. McGregor, M.D.; G. D. Amman; R. F. Schmitz; R. D. Oakes. 1987. Partial cutting lodgepole pine stands to reduce losses to the mountain pine beetle. Canadian Journal of Forest Resources. 17:1234-1239. McHugh, Charles W.; Thomas E. Kolb; Jill L. Wilson. 2003. Bark beetle attacks on ponderosa pine following fire in Northern Arizona. Environ. Entomol. 32(3): 510-522. McIver, James D and Lynn Starr, tech. eds. 2000. Environmental effects of postfire logging: literature review and annotated bibliography. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-486. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 72 p. McMillin, Joel D. and Kurt K. Allen. 2000. Impacts of Douglas-fir beetle on overstory and understory conditions of Douglas-fir stands: Shoshone National Forest, Wyoming. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. Technical Report R2-64. 18 p. McNamara, M. 2012. Stonewall Vegetation Project Hydrology Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. Mech, L.D. 1970. The wolf: the ecology and behavior of an endangered species. Nat. Hist. Press, Garden City, NY. 384 pp. in Tucker, P. 1988. Annotated gray wolf bibliography. Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. 117 pp. Mech, L.D. 1973. Wolf numbers in the Superior National Forest of Minnesota . in Tucker, P. 1988. Annotated gray wolf bibliography. Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. 117 pp. Menalled, F., J. Mangold and E. Davis 2008. In MontGuide, Montana State University Extension Service. Cheatgrass: Identification, Biology and Integrated Management. MT200811AG. Menges, E. and R. Dolan 1998. Demographic Viability of Populations of Silene regia in Midwestern Prairies: Relationships with Fire Management, Genetic Variation, Geographic Location, Population Size and Isolation. J Ecol: Vlo. 86, No. 1 (Feb, 1998). Pp. 63-78. METI Corp/Economic Insights of Colorado, LLC (METI Corp). 2010. USDA Forest Service Protocols for Delineation of Economic Analysis Impact Areas. http://fsweb.ftcol.wo.fs.fed.us/PAG/Economics_Center/documents/StudyArea/TechnicalGuide.pdf Metlen, Kerry L., E.K. Dodson, and C.E. Fiedler 2006. Vegetation response to restoration treatments in ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir forests of western Montana. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, July 8]. Metlon, K.L. and C. E. Fiedler. 2006. Restoration treatment effects on the understory of ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests in western Montana, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 222, pp. 355-369. Meyer, J. F., and G. H. Fechner. 1980. Seed hairs and seed germination in Populus. Tree Planters' Notes 30 (3):3-4. Milburn, A., C. Anderson, and S. Johnson 2009. Unpublished data. Treatment Unit Diagnosis for the Stonedry Project collected 2008-2009. On file at the Lincoln Ranger District office, Helena National Forest. Milburn, A.; L. Olson; J. Kurtz; J. Lindgren. 2006. Stone Dry Vegetation Report. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. Milburn, Amanda. 2009. 2009 old growth analysis documentation. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. 4 p. Milburn, Amanda; LaWen Hollingsworth; Jarel Kurtz. 2009. Stonewall Vegetation Project, Helena National, Forest Forested Vegetation NFMA. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. Milburn, Amanda; Olsen, Lois; Lindgren, Jay; Kurtz, Jarel (2006). Stone-dry EAWS Vegetation Report. Internal Document. Millar, Constance I . 2003. Climate change as an ecosystem architect: implications to rare plant ecology, conservation, and restoration. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station, Sierra Nevada Research Center. 37p. Millar, Constance I. and Wallace B. Woolfenden. 1999. The role of climate change in interpreting historical variability. Ecological Applications. 9(4): 1207-1216. Millar, Constance I.; Nathan L. Stephenson; Scott L. Stephens. 2007. Ecological Applications. 17(8): 2145–2151. Miller, Carol. 2012. The Hidden Consequences of Fire Suppression. Park Science Volume 28 Number 3. Winter 2011-2012. Miner, C. L.; Walters, N. R.; Belli, M. L. 1988. A guide to the TWIGS program for the North Central United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-125. St. Paul, MN: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, North Central Experiment Station. 105p. Minnesota IMPLAN Group (MIG). 2003. IMPLAN Pro Version 2.0 User’s Guide, Analysis Guide, Data Guide. 418 p. Minnich, R. A.; M. G. Barbour; J. H. Burk; J. Sosa-Ramírez. 2000. Californian mixed-conifer forests under unmanaged fire regimes in the Sierra San Pedro Mártir, Baja California, Mexico. Journal of Biogeography. 27: 105-129.Mitchell, Russel G. and Haiganoush K. Preisler. 1991. Analysis of spatial patterns of lodgepole pine attacked by outbreak populations of the mountain pine beetle. Forest Science. 37(5): 1390-1408. Minnich, Richard A.; Michael G. Barbour; Jack H. Burk; Robert F. Frenau. 1995. Sixty years of change in Californian conifer forests of the San Bernardino Mountains. Conservation Biology. 9: 902-914. Minore, Don. 1979. Comparaative Autecological Characteristics of Northwestern Tree Species…A Literature Review. Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station USDA Forest Service. GTR-PNW-87. Mitchell, R. G., R. H. Waring, G. B. Pitman. 1983. Thinning lodgepole pine increases tree vigor and resistance to mountain pine beetle. Forest Science. 29(1):204-211. Mitchell, Russel G. and Haiganoush K. Preisler. 1991. Analysis of spatial patterns of lodgepole pine attached by outbreak populations of the mountain pine beetle. Forest Science. 37(5): 1390-1408. Montana Department of Commerce. 2008. Montana Department of Commerce Census and Economic Information Center website. http://ceic.mt.gov/1990STF1Cnty.asp. Montana Department of Environmental Quality, 2004. Blackfoot Headwaters Planning Area Water Quality and Habitat Restoration Plan and TMDL for Sediment. 54 pp. Montana Department of Environmental Quality, 2006. State of Montana 2006 Integrated 303(d)/305(b) Water Quality Report. http://www.deq.mt.gov/CWAIC/wq_reps.aspx?yr=2006qryId=0 Montana Department of Environmental Quality, Open Burning Regs ARM 17.8.601(1)(a)(iii). Accessed online July 7, 2011. Available at: http://www.mtrules.org/gateway/ruleno.asp?RN=17.8.601 Montana Department of Environmental Quality. Updated 8/2000. Montana Surface Water Quality Standards and Procedures. Administrative Rules of Montana 17.30.6 (17.30.601 through 17.30.641). http://www.deq.state.mt.us/wqinfo/Laws.asp Montana Department of Labor and Industry, 2008. Research and Analysis Bureau, Unemployment Rates and Labor Force Statistics website http://www.ourfactsyourfuture.org/cgi/dataanalysis/AreaSelection.asp?tableName=Labforce. Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation Forest Management Bureau. 2010. Grizzly Bear Species Account. Missoula, MT 59804. 50 pp. Montana DNRC. 2006. Forestry Best Management Practices Monitoring. 2006 Forestry BMP Audit Report. Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation, Forestry Division, Missoula, MT. Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks. 2004. State Elk Management Plan Wildlife Division. Helena Montana. 397 pp. Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks. 2005. Montana's comprehensive fish and wildlife conservation strategy. Helena, Montana: Montana Fish, Wildlife & Parks. Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks. 2006. Townsend’s big-eared bat. In Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks 2011a. Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks. 2011a. Montana Field Guide. Available at: http://fieldguide.mt.gov/. Accessed 7/22/11. Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks. 2011b. West Montana Planning Zone Ungulate Winter Range Assessment. By Mike Hillis, Cohesive Strategy Team 7 pp. Montana Forest Restoration Committee (MFRC). Website accessed 2011. http://www.montanarestoration.org/restoration-principles Montana Idaho Air Shed Group. 2010. Operating Guide. http://www.smokemu.org/docs/20100601OpsGuide.pdf Montana Natural Heritage Program 2010. Natural Heritage Tracker. Helena, MT. Available online: http://mtnhp.org/Tracker/NHTMap.aspx?rc=1&0.49258859274614996# Montana Natural Heritage Program. 2011. Available at: http://mtnhp.org/SpeciesOfConcern.9/11/11. Accessed 9/11/11. Montana Numeric Water Quality Standards, September 1999. Circular WQB-7. http://www.deq.state.mt.us/wqinfo/Standards/CompiledDEQ-7.pdf Montana Steering Committee: Intermountain West Joint Venture. 2005. Coordinated implementation plan for bird conservation in western Montana. Montana Stream Protection Act. 1991. http://dnrc.mt.gov/permits/stream_permitting/mspa.asp Montana Streamside Management Zones. Updated 2005. Montana Code Annotated. Title 77 State Lands, Chapter 5 Timber Resources, Part 3 Streamside Management Zones. http://data.opi.mt.gov/bills/mca_toc/77_5_3.htm Montana Water Quality Act. 1999. Title 75, Chapter 5, Montana Code as revised October 1999. http://www.deq.state.mt.us/wqinfo/Laws/WQA2003.pdf Morgan, Penelope and Michael P. Murray. 2001. Landscape ecology and isolation: implications for conservation of whitebark pine. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 290-309. Morgan, Penny and Stephen C. Bunting. 1990. Fire effect in whitebark pine forests. In: Proceedings-Symposium on whitebark pine ecosystems: ecology and management of a high-mountain resource. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Forest Service. Intermountain Research Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-270. Pages 166-170. Morgan, T.A.; Keegan, C.E., III.; Brandt, J.P. 2007. Employment and Labor Income Direct Response Coefficients for the U.S. Forest Products Industry. Bureau of Business and Economic Research, University of Montana-Missoula. 13 p. Mosher, B. A. and V. A. Saab. 2009. Implications of a recent mountain pine beetle epidemic for habitat and populations of birds, Elkhorn Mountains, Helena National Forest. 2009 Annual Progress Report. Moss, M. and M.N. LeFranc, Jr. 1987. Roads and highway impacts. Pages 69-71 In M.N. LeFrance, Jr., M. Moss, KA. Patnode, and W.C. Sugg III, (Eds.) Grizzly Bear Compendium. Sponsored by the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee. 540 pp. In USDA Forest Service 2005. Programmatic Biological Assessment for Activities that are Not Likely to Adversely Affect Listed Terrestrial Species. Region 1 Biological Assessment. Missoula Montana. 47 pp. Mowat, G., K. G. Poole, and M. O'Donoghue. 2000. Ecology of lynx in northern Canada and Alaska. Chapter 9 In Ruggiero, L.F., K. B. Aubry, S. W. Buskirk, et al., tech. eds. Ecology and conservation of lynx in the United States. 1999. Univ. Press of Colorado. Boulder, CO. 480 pp. Mueggler, W.F. and W.L. Stewart 1980. Grassland and Shrubland Habitat Types of Western Montana. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-66. Ogden, UT: U.S Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 164 p. Mueggler, Walter F. 1985. Vegetation associations. In: Debyle, Norbert V and Robert P. Winokur ed. Aspen: Ecology and Management in the Western United States. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. General Technical Report. RM-119. 285p. Murray, Michael P.; Stephen C. Bunting; Penny Morgan. 1998. Fire history of an isolated subalpine mountain range of the Intermountain Region, United States. Journal of Biogeography. 25: 1071-1080. Murray, Michael. 2008. Fires in the high Cascades; new findings for managing whitebark pine. Fire Management Today. 68(1): 27-29. National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. Public Law 91-190, 42 U.S.C. 4321-4347, January 1, 1970, as amended by Public Law 94-52, July 3, 1975, Public Law 94-83, August 9, 1975, and Public Law 97-258, § 4(b), September 13, 1982. National Historic Preservation Act 1966. Public Law 89-665; 16 U.S.C. 470 et seq. 36 CFR 800 –Protection of Historic Properties, Section 106, as amended. National Interagency Fuels, Fire and Vegetation Technology Transfer (NIFTT). 2010. Interagency Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) Guidebook (V 3.0) National Register of Historic Places 36 CFR Part 60 revised 2004. National Research Council. 1992. Restoration of aquatic ecosystems: science, technology, and public policy. National Academy Press, Washington D. C. Found online on 12/25/2010 at: http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309045347 National Wildfire Coordination Group. 1994. Intermediate Wildland Fire Behavior-S290 Glossary. National Wildfire Coordination Group. 2001. Fire Effect Guide NFES 2394. Glossary. National Wildfire Coordination Group. May 2012. NWCG Online Glossary of Wildland Fire Terminology. PMS 205 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990. 104 Stat. 3048 Public Law 101-601, November 16, 1990. Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1999. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Leaflet, No 11. American Elk 8 pp. Natural Resources Defense Council. 1999. End of the Road: The adverse ecological impacts of roads and logging: A compilation of independently reviewed research. 91 pp. Nature Serve. 2011. Nature Serve Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 5.0. Nature Serve, Arlington, Virginia. Available http://www.natureserve.org/explorer, /accessed 7/22/11. Negrón, José F. 1998. Probability of infestation and extent of mortality associated with the Douglas-fir beetle in the Colorado Front Range. Forest Ecology and Management. 107: 71–85 Negrón, José F.; John A. Anhold; A. Steve Munson. 2001. Within-stand spatial distribution of tree mortality caused by the Douglas-Fir Beetle (Coleoptera: Scolytidae). Environ. Entomology. 30(2): 215-224. Negrón, José F.; Kurt Allen; Blaine Cook; John R. Withrow Jr. 2008. Susceptibility of ponderosa pine, Pinus ponderosa (Dougl. ex Laws.), to mountain pine beetle, Dendroctonus ponderosae Hopkins, attack in uneven-aged stands in the Black Hills of South Dakota and Wyoming USA. Forest Ecology and Management. 254: 327-334. Niehoff, J., 2002, Soil NEPA Analysis Process and Source of Soil Disturbance Model Coefficients, Idaho Panhandle National Forests, unpublished report. Coeur d’Alene, Idaho. Nielson, S.E. M.S. Boyce and G.B. Stenhouse. 2004. Grizzly bears and forestry. Selection of clearcuts by grizzly bears in west-central Alberta Canada. Forest Ecology and Management 199 (2004) 51-65. 15 pp. North American Breeding Bird survey data. 2011. Available at http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/bbs.html. Accessed 9/12/11. Noss, R.F., Franklin, J.F., Baker, W.L., Schoennagel, T., and Moyle, P.B., 2006. Managing fire-prone forests in the western United States. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 4, 481–487. In Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Obedzinski, R. A.; J. M. Schmid; S. A. Mata; W. K. Olsen; R. R. Kessler. 1999. Growth of ponderosa pine stands in relation to mountain pine beetle susceptibility. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-28. 16 p. Oliver, William W. 1995. Is self-thinning in ponderosa pine ruled by Dendroctonus Bark beetles? In: Forest Health Through Silviculture: Proceedings of the 1995 National Silviculture Workshop; Mescalero, NM. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-267. Olsen, L. 2010. Unpublished Stonewall Sensitive Plants NFMA Report, Helena National Forest. On file at the Lincoln District Office. Olsen, W. K.; J. M. Schmid; S. A. Mata. 1996. Stand characteristics associated with mountain pine beetle infestations in ponderosa pine. Forest Science. 42(3): 310-327. Olson, B.E. and R.T. Wallander 1999. Oxeye daisy. In R.L. Sheley and J.K. Petroff , eds. Biology and Management of Noxious Rangeland Weeds. Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, OR Olson, Lois J. 2010. Stonewall Combination and Stonewall Project Analysis Areas, Helena National Forest, Fire Regime Condition Class Detailed NFMA Background Report. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. Omi, P. N., and E. J. Martinson. 2004. Effectiveness of thinning and prescribed fire in reducing wildfire severity. Pp. 87-92 in Proceedings of the Sierra Nevada science symposium: Science for management and conservation, ed. D. D. Murphy and P. A. Stine. General technical report PSW-193. Albany, Calif.: USDA Forest Service Omi, P.N., and E.J. Martinson. 2002. Effect of fuels treatment on wildfire severity. Final Report to Joint Fire Sciences Program Governing Board. Fort Collins, CO: Western Forest Fire Research Center, Colorado State University; 40 p Ortega, Y.K., K.S. McKelvey, D.L. Six. 2006. Invasion of an exotic forb impacts reproductive success and site fidelity of migratory songbird. Oceologia, 149: 340-351. Overton, C.K., J. McIntyre, R. Armstrong, S. Whitwell, K. Duncan. 1995. User’s guide to fish habitat: descriptions that represent natural conditions in the Salmon River Basin, Idaho. Gen. TEch, Rep. INT-GTR-322. Ogden, UT: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Pages 1, 23-67. Owens, John N.; Thanong Kittirat; Mary F. Mahalovich. 2008. Whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis Engelm.) seed production in natural stands. Forest Ecology and Management. 255: 803-809. Page-Dumroese, D.S. and M.F. Jurgensen. 2006. Soil Carbon and Nitrogen Pools in Mid- to Late- Successional Forest Stands of the Northwestern United States: Potential Impact of Fire. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 36: 2270-2284. Page-Dumroese, D.S., A.M. Abbot, and T.M. Rice. 2009. Forest Soil Disturbance Monitoring Protocol. Volume II: Supplementary Methods, Statistics, and Data Collection. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report WO-82b. Page-Dumroese, D.S., M.F. Jurgensen, A.E. Tiarks, F. Ponder Jr., F.G. Sanchez, R.L. Fleming, J.M. Kranabetter, R.F. Powers, D.M. Stone, J.D. Elioff, and D.A. Scott. 2006. Soil Physical Property Changes at the North American Long-Term Soil Productivity Study Sites: 1 and 5 Years after Compaction. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 36:551-564. Paige, Christine and Sharon A. Ritter. 1999. Managing sagebrush habitats for bird communities. Partners in Flight, Western Working Group. Paragi, Thomas F. and Dale A. Haggstrom. 2007. Short-term responses of aspen to fire and mechanical treatments in Interior Alaska. North. J. Appl. For. 24(2): 153-157. Parker, K.L., C.T. Robbins, and T.A. Hanley. 1984. Energy expenditures for locomotion by mule deer and elk. Journal of Wildlife Management. 48(2): 474-488. Parret, C., D.R. Johnson, 2004. Methods for estimating flood frequency in Montana based on data through water year 1998. USDI U.S. Geological Survey, Water-Resources Investigations Report 03-4308. 101 pp. Parret, C., D.R. Johnson, J.A. Hull, 1989. Estimates of monthly streamflow characteristic at selected sites in the Upper Missouri River Basin, Montana, base period water years 1937-86. USDI U.S. Geological Survey, Water-Resources Investigations Report 89-4082. 103 pp. Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Pasitschniak, Arts, M., and S. Larivière. 1995. Gulo gulo, Mammalian Species. Amer. Soc. of Mammalogists, 499: 1-10. Pauchard, A., P. Alaback and E. Edlund 2003. Plant Invasions in Protected Areas At Multiple Scales: Linaria vulgaris (Scrophulariaceae) in the West Yellowstone Area. Western North American Naturalist 63(4): 416-428. Pauchard, A., P.B. Alaback and E.G. Edlund 2003. Plant Invasions in protected areas at multiple scales: Linaria vulgaris (Scrophulariaceae) in the West Yellowstone area. Western North American Naturalist 63(4), pp. 416-428. Pendergrass, K., P. Miller, J. Kauffman and T. Kaye 1999. The role of Prescribed Burning in maintenance of an Endangered Plant Species, Lomatium bradshawii. Ecol. App. 9(4). Pp. 1420-1429. Perala, D. A. 2004. Quaking aspen. In: Burns, Russell M.; Honkala, Barbara H.; [Technical coordinators] 1990. Silvics of North America: Volume 2. Hardwoods. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service, Agriculture Handbook 654. Perrakis, Daniel D. B. and James K. Agee. 2006. Seasonal fire effects on mixed-conifer forest structure and ponderosa pine resin properties. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 36, no. 1 238–54. Peters D. 1990. Inventory of Fishery Resources in the Blackfoot River and Major Tributaries. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Missoula Mt. Peterson, A. T., and C. R. Robins. 2003. Using ecological-niche modeling to predict barred owl invasions with implications for spotted owl conservation. Conservation Biology 17: 1161-1165. In Samson, Fred B. 2006a. A conservation assessment of the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpeckers, flammulated owl, and pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Peterson, David L.; Johnson, Morris C.; Agee, James K.; Jain, Theresa B.; McKenzie, Donald; Reinhardt, Elizabeth D. 2005. Forest structure and fire hazard in dry forests of the Western United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-628. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 30 p. Peterson, K.L. and L. B. Best. 1987. Effects of prescribed burning on non-game birds in a sagebrush community. Wildlife Society Bulletin, Vol 15, No. 3, pp. 317-329. Peterson, R.O. 1977. Wolf ecology and prey relationships on Isle Royale. Natl. Park Serv. Sci. Monog. No. 11. 210 pp. in Tucker, P. 1988. Annotated gray wolf bibliography. Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. 117 pp. Peterson. 2007. Reintroducing Fire in Regenerated Dry Forests Following Stand-Replacing Wildfire: in Powers, Robert F., tech. editor. 2007. Restoring fire-adapted ecosystems: proceedings of the 2005 national silviculture workshop Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-203, Albany, CA: Pacific Southwest Research Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 306 p http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr203/ Pfadenhauer, Jörg and Ab Grootjans. 1999. Wetland restoration in Central Europe: aims and methods. Applied Vegetation Science.2(1): 95-106. Pfankuch, D. 1973. Vegetation manipulation guidelines for the Lolo National Forest; a revision and updating of the October 1967 procedures. USDA Forest Service. Lolo National Forest. April, 1973. 69 p. http://www.epa.gov/warsss/pla/pdf/7st9tabV10.pdf Pfister, Robert D.; Bernard L. Kovalchik; Stephen F. Arno; Richard C. Presby. 1977. Forest habitat types of Montana. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-34. 185 pp. Pierce R. and C. Podner. 2006. The Big Blackfoot River Fisheries Restoration Report for 2004 and 2005. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Missoula Mt. Pierce R. C. Podner, M.Davidson, L. Knotek, and J.Thabes. 2008. The Big Blackfoot River Fisheries and Restoration Investigations for 2006 and 2007. Montana Department of Fish Wildlife and Parks. Missoula. Mt. Pierce R., C. Podner, and J. McFee. 2002a. A Hierarchical Strategy for Prioritizing the Restoration of 83 Impaired Tributaries of the Big Blackfoot River. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Missoula Mt. Pierce R., C. Podner, and J. McFee. 2002b. Blackfoot River Fisheries Restoration Report for 2001. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Missoula Mt. Pierce R., D. Peters, and T. Swanberg. 1997. Blackfoot River Restoration Project Progress Report. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Missoula Mt. Pierce R., R. Anderson, and C. Podner. 2004. The Big Blackfoot River Fisheries Restoration Report for 2002 and 2003. Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Missoula Mt. Platts, W.S., W.F. Megahan, G.W. Minshall. 1983. Methods for evaluating stream, riparian, and biotic conditions. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-138. Ogden, UT: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Station. Pages 15-20. Pollet, J., and P.N. Omi. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burning on crown fire severity in ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 11:1-10. Poole, Jackie and Bonnie Heidel 1993. Sensitive Plant Surveys in the Big Belt and Elkhorn Mountains, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT: Montana Natural Heritage Program. 129 p. plus printouts and maps. Potts, D.F. 1984. Hydrologic impacts of a large scale mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae Hopkins) epidemic. Water Resources Bulletin, Paper No. 83122: 373-377. Potyondy, J.P., 1981. Technical guide for erosion prevention and control on timber sale areas. USDA Forest Service, Region 4, Soil and Water Management. xx pp. Powell, H. D. W. 2000. The influence of prey density on post-fire habitat use of the black-backed woodpecker. M. Sc. Thesis, Univ. of Montana, Missoula. 99 pp. In USDA Forest Service 2007c. Black-backed Woodpecker. Northern Region Overview. Key Findings and Project Considerations. Prepared by the Black-backed Woodpecker Working Group. 41 pp. Powell, R.A. and W.J. Zielinski. 1994. pages 38-73. In Ruggiero, L.F. et al. eds. The scientific basis for conserving forest carnivores: American marten, fisher, lynx and wolverine in western U. S. 1994. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-254, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range experiment station. 184 pp. Powell, R.A., S.W. Buskirk and W. J. Zielinski. 2003. Fisher and Marten In Wild Mammals of North America, Biology, Management and Conservation. Second Edition, John Hopkins University Press, pp. 634-649. Powers, R. F., A.E. Tiarks, and J.R. Boyle. 1998. Assessing soil quality: practical standards for sustainable forest productivity in the United States. In: The contribution of soil science to the development and implementation of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management. SSSA Spec. Publ. 53. Madison, WI: SSSA: 53-80. Powers, R.F. 1990. Are We Maintaining the Productivity of Forest Lands? Establishing Guidelines Through a Network of Long-Term Studies. Presented at the Symposium on Management and Productivity of Western-Montane Forest Soils, Boise, ID, April 10-12, 1990. Powers, R.F. 2002. Effects of Soil Disturbance on the Fundamental, Sustainable Productivity of Managed Forests. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report, PSW-GTR-183. Prévost, Marcel and David Pothier. 2002. Partial cuts in a trembling aspen-conifer stand: effects on microenvironmental conditions and regeneration dynamics. Can. J. For. Res. 33: 1-15. Prichard, D. 1998. Riparian Area Management – A users Guide to Assessing Proper Functioning Condition and Supporting Science for Lotic Areas. USDI Bureau of Land Management, Technical Reference 1737-15. 126 pp. Pritchard D. 1998. Riparian Area Management: A User Guide to Assessing Proper Functioning Condition and the Supporting Science for Lotic Areas. Technical Reference 1737-15. U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. National Applied Resources Science Center, Denver Colorado. Public Law 88-577 (16 U.S. C. 1131-1136) Wilderness Act of 1964. Act of September 3, 1964. 88th Congress, Second Session. Quesnel, H.J. and M.P. Curran. 2000. Shelterwood Harvesting in Root-Disease Infected Stands – Post-Harvest Soil Disturbance and Compaction. Forest Ecology and Management, 133: 89-113. Ralls, K., S.R. Beissinger and J.F. Cochrane. 2002. Guidelines for Using Population Viability Analysis in Endangered-Species Management. In: Population Viability Analysis. Eds. Beissinger and McCullough. The University of Chicago Press. pg 521 Randall, Carol and Greg Tensmeyer. 1999. Douglas-fir beetle hazard rating system using the Oracle database and the Forest Service IBM platform. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Intermountain Region. Report-99-6. Raphael, M. G., K. V. Rosenberg, and B. G. Marcot. 1988. Large-scale changes in bird populations of Douglas-fir forests, northwestern California. Bird Conservation 3:63-83. In Hejl, S.J. 2011. A strategy for maintaining healthy populations of Western coniferous forest birds. Reed, R.A., J. Johnson-Barnard, and W.L. Baker. 1996. Contribution of roads to forest fragmentation in the Rocky Mountains. Conservation Biology 10(4):1098-1106. Reel, S., L. Schassberger, W. Ruediger 1989. Caring for Our Natural Community: Region1 – Threatened, Endangered & Sensitive Species Program. USDA Forest Service, Northern Region, Wildlife and Fisheries. 309 pp. Reeves, G.H., J.D. Hall, T.D. Roelofs, T.L. Hickman, and C.O. Baker. 1991. Rehabilitating and Modifying Stream Habitats. In: Influences of Forests and Rangeland Management on Salmonid Fishes and Their Habitats. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 19: pg. 529Rieman, B. E., D. Lee, J. McIntyre, K. Overton, and R. Thurow. 1993. Consideration of Extinction Risks for Salmonids. Fish Habitat Relationships Technical Bulletin. 14, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Intermountain Research Station Work Unit 4203 Boise, Idaho. 12 pp. Regelin, W. L., and O. C. Wallmo. 1978. Duration of deer forage benefits after clearcut logging of subalpine forest in Colorado. U.S. Forest Service Research Note RM-356, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. In Hayden, J. G. Ardt, M. Fleming, T.W. Keegan, J. Peek, T.O. Smith, and A. Wood. 2008. Habitat guidelines for mule deer, Northern forest ecosystem. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 48 pp. Reich, Robin M., Suzanne M. Joy, and Richard T. Reynolds. 2004. Predicting the location of northern goshawk nests: modeling the spatial dependency between nest locations and forest structure. Ecological Modeling 176, (2004): 109-33. Reichel, J. and D. Flath. 1995. Identification of Montana’s amphibians and reptiles. Montana Outdoors. May/June. 19 pp. In Nature Serve. 2011. Nature Serve Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 5.0. Nature Serve, Arlington, Virginia. Available http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. Accessed 9/17/11. Reid, M.L. and S. S. Blubish. 2001. Tree size and growth history predict breeding densities of Douglas-fir beetles in fallen trees. The Canadian Entomologist. 133: 697-704. Reinhardt, E.D.; Keane, R.E.; Brown, J.K. 1997. First Order Fire Effects Model: FOFEM 4.0, user’s guide. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-344. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 65 p. Reinhardt, Elizabeth D. Holsinger, Lisa, Keane, Robert. 2010. Effects of Biomass Removal Treatments on Stand-Level Fire Characteristics in Major Forest Types of the Northern Rocky Mountains. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 25(1) Reinhardt, Elizabeth D.; Keane, Robert E.; Calkin, David E.; Cohen, Jack D. 2008. Objectives and considerations for wildland fuel treatment in forested ecosystems of the interior western United States. Forest Ecology and Management. 256: 1997-2006. Reinhardt, Elizabeth; Crookston, Nicholas L. (Technical Editors). 2003. The Fire and Fuels Extension to the Forest Vegetation Simulator. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-116. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 209 p. Reynolds, R. T., R. T. Graham and M. H. Reiser. 1992. Management recommendations for the northern goshawk in the southwestern United States. General Technical Report RM-217. Ft. Collins, CO: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 184 pp. Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, and D.A. Boyce. 2007. Northern goshawk habitat: an intersection of science, management, and conservation. Journal of Wildlife Management 72:1047-1055. Ritter, S.A. and C. Paige. 2000. Keeping birds in the sagebrush sea. Joslyn and Morris Inc., Boise, ID.in United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2009c. Northern Goshawk Northern Region Overview. Key Findings and Project Considerations. Available at: http://fsweb.r1.fs.fed.us/wildlife/wwfrp/TESnew.htm Reynolds, Richard T., J. David Wiens, and Susan R. Salafsky. 2006. A review and evaluation of factors limiting northern goshawk populations. Studies in Avian Biology 31, 260–73. Rice, Peter M., J.C. Toney, D.J. Bedunah, and C.E. Carlson 1997. Plant community diversity and growth form responses to herbicide applications for control on Centaurea maculosa. Journal of Applied Ecology. 34(6): 1397-1412. Ridenour, W.M., R. M. Callaway 2001. The relative importance of allelopathy in interference: the effects of an invasive weed on a native bunchgrass. Oecologia. 126:444–450. Rief, A. 2012 Stonewall Vegetation Project Aquatic Resources Report and Biological Evaluation. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. Riley, S.J. and A.R. Dodd. 2008. Summer Movements, Home Range, Habitat Use, and Behavior of Mule Deer Fawns. J. Wildl. Manage. 48(4): 1302-1310. Rippy, R., Stewart, J., Zambino, P., Klopfenstein, N., Tirocke, J., Kim, M-S. and Thies, W. (2005). Root diseases in coniferous forests of the inland west : potential implications of fuels treatments. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-141, 26 pp. Roberson, A. M., D. E. Andersen, and P. L. Kennedy. 2003. The Northern Goshawk (Accipter gentilis atricapillus) in the Western Great Lakes Region: A Technical Conservation Assessment. Roe, Arthur L. and Gene D. Amman. 1970. Mountain pine beetle in lodgepole pine forests. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Research Paper INT-71. 28 p. Roe, N.A., K.G. Poole and D.L. Day. 2000. “A review of lynx behavior and ecology and its application to ski area planning and management.” Unpublished report. IRIS Environmental Systems. Calgary, Alberta. 62 p. In United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2007a. Final Environmental Impact Statement Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction. USDA Forest Service, USDI Bureau of Land Management. Northern Region, Missoula, MT 534 pp. Appendix P. Rollins, Matthew; Tom Swetnam; Penelope Morgan. 2000. Twentieth-century fire patterns in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness Area, Idaho/Montana, and the Gila/Aldo Leopold Wilderness Complex, New Mexico. In: Cole, David N.; McCool, Stephen F.; Borrie, William T.; OLoughlin, Jennifer, comps. 2000. Wilderness science in a time of change conference-Volume 5: Wilderness ecosystems, threats, and management; 1999 May 23-27; Missoula, MT. Proceedings RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. p. 283-287. Romme, William H. 1982. Fire and landscape diversity in subalpine forests of the Yellowstone National Park. Ecological Monographs. 52(2): 199-221. Rose, Cathy L., Bruce G. Marcot, T. Kim Mellen, Janet L. Ohmann, Karen L. Waddell, Deborah L. Lindley, and Barry Schreiber. 2001. Decaying wood in Pacific Northwest forests: Concepts and tools for habitat management. 44 pp. Rothermel, R.C. 1972. A mathematical model for predicting fire spread in wildland fuels. Res. Pap. INT-115. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 40 p. Rothermel, Richard C. 1983. How to predict the spread and intensity of forest and range fires, Gen Tech Rep. INT-143, USDA, FS, Intermountain Range and Experiment Station, Ogden, UT, 161 p. Rowland, M.M., M.J. Wisdom, B.K. Johnson, and J.G. Kie. 2000. Elk distribution and modeling in relation to roads. J. Wildl. Manage. 64(3): 672-684. Ruediger, Bill, Jim Claar, Steve Gniadek, Bryon Holt, Lyle Lewis, Steve Mighton, Bob Naney, Gary Patton, Tony Rinaldi, Joel Trick, Anne Vandehey, Fred Wahl, Nancy Warren, Dick Wenger, and A1 Williamson. 2000. Canada Lynx Conservation Assessment and Strategy. USDA Forest Service, USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, USDI Bureau of Land Management, and USDI National Park Service. Forest Service Publication #R1-00-53, Missoula, M~F. 142 pp. Ruggiero, L.F., G.D. Hayward, and J.R. Squires. 1994. Viability Analysis in Biological Evaluations: Concepts of Population Viability Analysis, Biological Population and Ecological Scale. Conservation Biology, Vol. 8 ( 2), 364-372. Ruggiero, Leonard F., Keith B. Aubry, Steven W. Buskirk, L. Jack Lyon, and William J. Zielinski. 1994. The scientific basis for conserving forest carnivore’s American marten, fisher, lynx, and wolverine in the western United States. General Technical Report RM-254. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Ruggiero, Leonard F.; Aubry, Keith B.; Buskirk, Steven W.; Koehler, Gary M.; Krebs, Charles J.; McKelvey, Kevin S.; Squires, John R. 1999. Ecology and conservation of lynx in the United States. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-30WWW. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr030.html Russell, K.R.; Van Lear, D.H.; Guynn, D.C., Jr. 1999. Prescribed fire effects on herpetofauna: review and management implications. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 27: 374-384. Russell, R. E., V. A. Saab, J. Dudley, and J. J. Rotella. 2006. Snag longevity in relation to wildfire and post fire salvage logging. Forest Ecology and Management 232:179–187. Russell, R.E, V.A. Saab, and J. Dudley. 2007. Habitat suitability models for cavity-nesting birds in a post fire landscape. Journal of Wildlife Management. Russell, R.E., J.F. Lehmkuhl, S.T. Buckland and V.A. Saab. 2010. Short-term responses of red squirrels to prescribed burning in the interior pacific northwest, USA. Journal of Wildlife Management, 74(1) pp. 12-17. Ryan Kevin C. and Gene D. Amman. 1996. Bark beetle activity and delayed tree mortality in the Greater Yellowstone area following the 1988 fires. In: RE Keane, KC Ryan and SW Running (eds.), Ecological Implications of fire in Greater Yellowstone Proceedings. International Association of Wildland Fire, Fairland, WA. pp. 151-158. Ryan, Kevin C. and Elizabeth D. Reinhardt. 1988. Predicting postfire mortality of seven western conifers. Can. J. For. Res. 18(10): 1291–1297. Ryerson, Daniel E.; Thomas W. Swetnam; Ann M. Lynch. 2003. A tree-ring reconstruction of western spruce budworm outbreaks in the San Juan Mountains, Colorado, U.S.A. Can. J. For. Res. 33: 1010–1028. Saab, V.A, and H.D.W. Powell. 2005. Fire and avian ecology in North America: Process influencing pattern. Studies in Avian Biology No. 30: 1-13. Saab, V.A., R.E. Russell, and J.G. Dudley. 2007. Nest densities of cavity-nesting birds in relation to post fire salvage logging and time since wildfire. The Condor 109:97-108. Saab, V.A.; Dudley, J. 1998. Responses of cavity-nesting birds to stand-replacement fire and salvage logging in ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests of southwestern Idaho. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-11. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 17 p. Saab, V.A.; Dudley, J.; Thompson, W.L. 2004. Factors influencing occupancy of nest cavities in recently burned forests. The Condor. 106: 20-36. Sachro, L. L., W. L. Strong, et al. (2005). "Prescribed burning effects on summer elk forage availability in the subalpine zone, Banff National Park, Canada." Journal of Environmental Management 77(3): 183-193. Safranyik. L.; T.L. Shore; A.L. Carroll; D.A. Linton. 2004. Bark beetle (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) diversity in spaced and unmanaged mature lodgepole pine (Pinaceae) in southeastern British Columbia. Forest Ecology and Management. 200:23–38. Salabanks, R. and E.B. Arnett. 2002. Accommodating birds in managed forests of North America: A review of a bird-forestry relationship. General Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-191 28 pp. Salwasser, Hal, D. Bosworth, and J.Lowe 1995. Letter to Forest Supervisors Streamlining Biological Evaluations and Conclusions for Determining Effects to Listed, Proposed and Sensitive Species, from the Regional Foresters of Region 1, 4, and 6. Dated Augsut 17, 1995. On file in Helena National Forest Supervisor’s Office. Samson, Fred B. 2006a. A conservation assessment of the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpeckers, flammulated owl, and pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Samson, Fred B. 2006b. Habitat estimates for maintaining viable populations of the northern goshawk, black-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl, pileated woodpecker, American marten, and fisher. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Sanchez, F.G., A.E. Tiarks, J.M. Kranabetter, D.S. Page-Dumroese, R.F. Powers, P.T. Sanborn, and W.K. Chapman. 2006. Effects of Organic Matter Removal and Soil Compaction of Fifth-Year Mineral Soil Carbon and Nitrogen Contents for Sites Across the United States and Canada. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 36:565-576. Sanchez-Martinez, Guillermo and Michael R. Wagner. 2002. Bark beetle community structure under four ponderosa pine forest stand conditions in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management. 170:145-160. Sandberg, David V.; Ottmar, Roger D; Peterson, Janice L.; Core, John. 2002. Wildland Fire On Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on Air. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 5. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 79 p. Sartwell, Charles and R. E. Stevens. 1975. Mountain pine beetle in ponderosa pine - prospects for silvicultural control in second-growth stands. Journal of Forestry. 73(3):136-140. Sartwell, Charles and Robert E. Dolph Jr. 1976. Silviculture and direct control of mountain pine beetle in second-growth ponderosa pine. Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. PNW-268. 7 p. Schaaf, M., K. Norville, 2002. Users Guide Smoke Impact Spreadsheet (SIS) Version 12-15-2003. Air Sciences, Inc. Portland, OR. http://www.airsci.com/SISmodel/SIS_Users_Manual-6.17.03.pdf Schmid, J.M. and S. A. Mata. 2005. Mountain pine beetle-caused tree mortality in partially cut plots surrounded by unmanaged stands. Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Research Paper RMRS-RP-5. 11 p. Schmidt, K. M.; Menakis, J.P.; Hardy, C.C.; Hann, W.J.; Bunnell, D.L. 2002. Development of coarse-scale spatial data for wildland fire and fuel management. USFS Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-87. Schmitz, Richard F. and Kenneth E. Gibson. 1996. Douglas-fir beetle. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Insect & Disease Leaflet 5. 8p. Schmitz, Richard F.; McGregor, Mark D.; Amman, Gene D. 1981. Mountain pine beetle response to lodgepole pine stands of different characteristics. In: Berryman, A. A.; Safranyik, L., eds. Dispersal of forest insects; evaluation, theory and management implications: Proceedings, second IUFRO conference; 1979 August 27-31; Sandpoint, ID. Washington State University, Cooperative Extension Service, Pullman, WA: 234-243. Schoennagel, T., T. T. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 2004. The interaction of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain Forests. BioScience 54(7). Schoennagel, T., Veblen, T.T., and Romme, W.H., 2004. The interaction of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain forests. Bioscience 54, 661–676. In Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Schwartz, C.C., J.P. Copeland, N.J. Anderson, J.R. Squires, R.M. Inman, K.S. McKelvey, K.L. Pilgrim, L.P. Waits, and S.A. Cushman. 2009. Wolverine gene flow across a narrow climatic niche. Ecology, 90(11), pp. 3222-3232. Scott, J.H. 2008. FireWords Glossary of Fire Science Terminology. Version 1.0.2. http://www.firewords.net/ (Accessed online August 19, 2011) Scott, J.H., and R.E. Burgan. 2005. Standard fire behavior fuel models: A comprehensive set for use with Rothermel's surface fire spread model. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-153. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. Scott, J.H.; Reinhardt, E.D. 2001. Assessing crown fire potential by linking models of surface and crown fire behavior. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-29. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 59 p. Scott, Joe H. 2003. Canopy fuel treatment standards for the wildland-urban interface. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29 Scott, Joe H.; Reinhardt, Elizabeth D. 2001. Assessing crown fire potential by linking models of surface and crown fire behavior. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-29. Fort Collins, CO: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 59p Scott, S. 2001. Historical Overview on the Helena National Forest. USDA Forest Service, Helena National Forests, MT. Self, S.E.; Kerns, S.J. 1992. Pine marten-Pacific fisher study, phase II report, 10 June 1992. Redding, CA: Wildland Resource Managers; [Unpub. rep.]. 34 p. In Ruggiero, Leonard F., Keith B. Aubry, Steven W. Buskirk, L. Jack Lyon, and William J. Zielinski. 1994. The scientific basis for conserving forest carnivore’s American marten, fisher, lynx, and wolverine in the western United States. General Technical Report RM-254. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Shea, K., D. Kelly, A.W. Sheppard and T.L. Woodburn 2005. Context-dependent biological control of an invasive thistle. Ecology. 86(12): 3174-3181. Shepperd, Wayne D. 2001. Manipulations to regenerate aspen ecosystems. Shepperd, Wayne D.; Binkley, Dan; Bartos, Dale L.; Stohlgren, Thomas J.; and Eskew, Lane G., compilers. 2001. Sustaining aspen in western landscapes: symposium proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Pp 355-366. Shepperd, Wayne D., Paul C. Rogers, David Burton, and Dale L. Bartos. 2006. Ecology, biodiversity, management, and restoration of aspen in the Sierra Nevada. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-178. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Sieg, C. H., B. Philips, and L. Moser 2003. Exotic and Noxious Plants. Pages 251-267 In Frederici, P., ed. Restoration Handbook for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C. Six, Diana L. and Kjerstin Skov. 2009. Response of bark beetles and their natural enemies to fire and fire surrogate treatments in mixed-conifer forests in western Montana. Forest Ecology and Management. 258: 761–772. Skinner, Carl N. 1995. Changes in spatial characteristics of forest openings in the Klamath Mountains of northwestern California, USA. Landscape Ecology. 10(4): 219-228. Skinner, Carl N. 2002. Influence of fire on the dynamics of dead woody material in forests of California and southwestern Oregon. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-181. 10 p. Skovlin, J.M., P. Zager, and Johnson, B.K. 2002. Elk habitat selection and evaluation In North American elk ecology and management. Ed. Toweill, D.E., Jack Ward Thomas and Daniel P. Metz, Chap. 12: 531-555. Smithsonian Institution Press. Slough, B. G. 1989. Movements and habitat use by transplanted marten in the Yukon Territory. Journal of Wildlife Management 53, no. 4 (October 1989): 991-7. Smallwood, K. S. 1999. Scale domains of abundance amongst species of mammalian Carnivora. Environmental Conservation 26(2):102-111. In U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012d. Fisher (Martes pennanti) habitat model and assessment for USDA Forest Service Northern Region. Unpublished paper on file at USDA Forest Service Northern Region, Missoula, MT. 16 pp. Smith, Jane Kapler, ed. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of fire on fauna. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 1. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 83 p. Smith, Jonathan P. and James T. Hoffman. 2000. Status of white pine blister rust in the intermountain west. Western North American Naturalist. 60(2): 165-179. Sousa, P. J. 1987. Habitat suitability index models: Hairy woodpecker. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Biological Report 82(10.146). Southwestern Crown Collaborative. 2010. Southwestern Crown of the Continent Landscape Restoration Strategy. http://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLR/documents/2010Proposals/Region1/SWCrown/May_SW_Crown_Landscape_Strategy_FINAL.pdf Southwestern Crown Collaborative. 2010. Southwestern Crown of the Continent Landscape Restoration Strategy. <http://swcrown.com>. Southwestern Crown Collaborative. 2011. Current Projects. Lincoln Ranger District. <http://www.swcrown.org/projects/>. Squires, J. R. (Wildlife Biologist, Rocky Mountain Research Station).1999. Personal communication with Pat Shanley, Wildlife Biologist, Lincoln Ranger District, Helena National Forest. Squires, J. R., and P. L. Kennedy. 2006. Northern goshawk ecology: an assessment of current knowledge and information needs for conservation management. Studies in Avian Biology 31: 8-62. Squires, J. R., and R. T. Reynolds. 1997. Northern Goshawk. No. 298. In Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The birds of North America. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and The American Ornithologists' Union, Washington, DC, USA. Squires, J. R., N.J. DeCesare, J.A. Kolbe, and L. F. Ruggiero. 2010. Seasonal resource selection of Canada lynx in managed forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains. Journal of Wildlife Management 74:1648-1660. Squires, J.R., and L.F. Ruggiero. 1996. Nest-site preference of Northern goshawks in South-central Wyoming. Journal of Wildlife Management, Vol 60 No. 1, pp. 170-177. Squires, J.R., L.F. Ruggiero, J.A. Kolbe and N.J. DeCasare. 2006. Lynx Ecology in the Intermountain West. Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, Montana. 51 pp. St. Hilaire, L. 2001. Amerorchis rotundifolia (Banks ex Pursh) Hulten (Small Round-leaved Orchis) Conservation and Research Plan for New England. New England Wild Flower Society, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. Stage, Albert R. 1973. Prognosis model for stand development. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Ogden, Utah. INT-137. 40 p. Stam, B. R., J. C. Malechek, D. L. Bartos, J. E. Brown, and E. B. Godfrey. 2008. Effect of conifer encroachment into aspen stands on understory biomass. Rangeland Ecology and Management 61, 93–7. Stankey, George H.; Clark, Roger N.; Bormann, Bernard T. 2005. Adaptive management of natural resources: theory, concepts, and management institutions. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-654. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 73 p. Stanturf, John A.2005.What is forest restoration? Chapter 1 in: Restoration of boreal and temperate forests. CRC Press, Boca Raton, p. 3-11. Steele, Robert; Stephen V. Cooper; David M. Ondov; David W. Roberts; Robert D. Pfister. 1983. Forest habitat types of eastern Idaho-Western Wyoming. U.S.D.A. Forest Service. Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-144. 129 p. Stephens, Scott L. and Jason J. Moghaddas. 2005. Fuel treatment effects on snags and coarse woody debris in a Sierra Nevada mixed conifer forest. Forest Ecology and Management 214: 53–64. Stone, Douglas M.; John D. Elioff; Donald V. Potter; Donald B. Peterson; Robert Wagner. 2001. Restoration of aspen-dominated ecosystems in the Lake States. Shepperd, Wayne D.; Dan Binkley; Dale L. Bartos; Thomas J. Stohlgren; and Land G. Eskew; compilers. 2001. Sustaining aspen in western landscapes: symposium proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Pp. 137-143. Story, Mark; Dzomba, Thomas; 2005. Smoke NEPA Guidance: Describing Air Resource Impacts from Prescribed Fire on National Forests & Grasslands of Montana, Idaho, North Dakota, & South Dakota in Regions 1 & 4. November Stowell, R., A. Espinosa, T.C. Bjornn, W.S. Platts, D.C. Burns, and J.S. Irving. 1983. Guide for Predicting Salmonid Response to Sediment Yields in Idaho Batholith Watersheds. U.S. Forest Service, Northern Region, Ogden Utah. 94 pp. Stratton, Richard D. 2006. Guidance on spatial wildland fire analysis: models, tools, and techniques. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-183. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 15 p. Stuart, G.W. and P.J. Edwards. 2006. “Concepts about forests and water.” Northern Journal of Applied Forestry 23:1, 11-19. Sullivan, Brian T.; Christopher J. Fettig; William J. Otrosina; Mark J. Dalusky; C. Wayne Berisford. 2003. Association between severity of prescribed burns and subsequent activity of conifer-infesting beetles in stands of longleaf pine. Forest Ecology and Management. 185: 327–340. Suttle K. B. M.E. Power, J.M. Levine, and C. McNeely. 2004 How fine Sediment in Riverbeds Impairs Growth and Survival of Juvenile Salmonids. Ecological Applications, 14 (4): 969-974. Swank, Wayne T.; Meyer, Judith L.; Crossley, Deyree A., Jr. 2001. Long-term ecological research: Coweeta history and perspectives. In: Barrett, Gary W.; Barrett, Terry L. Holistic Science: The Evolution of the Georgia Institute of Ecology (1940-2000). Ann Arbor, MI: Sheridan Books: 143-163.Swift, L.W., Jr. 1985. “Forest road design to minimize erosion in the southern Appalachians.” In: Blackmon, B.G., ed. Proceedings, forestry and water quality: a mid-South symposium; 1985 May 8-9; Little Rock, AR. Monticello, AR: University of Arkansas, Department of Forest Resources: pp 141-151. Swetnam, Thomas W. and Ann M. Lynch. 1993. Multicentury, regional-scale patterns of western spruce budworm outbreaks. Ecological Monographs, 63(4): 399-424 Swift, L.W., Jr. 1988. “Forest access roads: design, maintenance, and soil loss.” In: Swank, W.T.; Crossley, D.A., Jr., eds. Forest hydrology and ecology at Coweeta. Ecological Studies, Vol. 66. New York: Springer-Verlag: pp 313-324. Switalski, T.A., J.A. Bissonette, T.H. DeLuca, C.H. Luce, and M.A. Madej. 2004. Benefits and impacts of road removal. Front. Ecol. Environ. 2(1): 21-28 Tande, G. F. 1979. Fire history and vegetation pattern of coniferous forests in Jasper National Park, Alberta. Canadian Journal of Botany 57:1912–1931. Available at: http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/abs/10.1139/b79-241. Accessed 11/20/2012. Temple, S.A. and B.A. Wilcox. 2000. Introduction: Predicting effects of habitat patchiness and fragmentation. Pages 261-262 in Eds. J. Verner, M.L. Morrison, and C.J. Ralph, Wildlife 2000: Modeling Habitat Relationships of Terrestrial Vertebrates. The University of Wisconsin Press. Thomas, J.W., D.A. Leckenby, M. Henjum, R.J. Pedersen and L. D. Bryant. 1988. Habitat Effectiveness Index for Elk on Blue Mountain Winter Ranges. Pacific Northwest Research Station. PNW-GTR-218. August 1988. 34 pp. Thomas, Jack Ward, C. Maser, and J. E. Rodierk. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed rangelands—The Great Basin of southeastern Oregon: Riparian zones. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. General Technical Report PNW-80. Thomas, Jack Ward. 1979. Wildlife habitats in managed forests the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Agriculture Handbook No. 553. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute, U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. September. Thompson, Ian D. and Patrick. W. Colgan. 1994. Marten activity in uncut and logged boreal forests in Ontario. Journal of Wildlife Management 58, no. 2 (April 1994): 280-8. Thompson, M.J., G.R. Baty and C.L. Marcum. 2005. Elk Forage and Cover in Response to Wildfire and Severe Snow Conditions. 16 pp. Thysell, David R. and A.B. Carey 2001. Manipulation of density of Pseudotsuga menziesii canopies: Preliminary effects on understory vegetation. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 31: 1513–1525. Tinker, D.B., C. Resor, G.P. Beauvals’, K.F. Kipfmueller, C.I. Fernandes, and W.L. Baker, 1998. Watershed analysis of forest fragmentation by clearcuts and roads in Wyoming forest. Landscape Ecology 13 (3): 149-165. Tomback, D. F. 1982. Dispersal of whitebark pine seeds by Clark's nutcracker: a mutualism hypothesis. J. of Animal Ecol. 51:451-467. In Partners in Flight. 2000. Partners in flight: Bird conservation plan Montana. Version 1.1. Kalispell, MT. April 2000. 288 pp. Tomback, D. F., A. J. Anderies, K. S. Carsey, M. L. Powell, and S. Mellmann-Brown. 2001. Delayed seed germination in whitebark pine and regeneration patterns following the Yellowstone fires. Ecology 82:2587-2600. Tomback, Diana F. 1982. Dispersal of whitebark pine seeds by Clark’s nutcracker: a mutualism hypothesis. The Journal of Animal Ecology. 51(2): 451-467. Tomback, Diana F. 2001. Clark’s nutcracker: agent of regeneration. In: Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. Pages 89-104. Tomback, Diana F.; Stephen F. Arno; Robert E. Keane. 2001. Whitebark pine communities: ecology and restoration. Island Press. 441 p. Torgersen, T. R., and E. L. Bull. 1995. Down logs as habitat for forest-dwelling ants -- the primary prey of pileated woodpeckers in northeastern Oregon. Northwest Science (Vol. 69, pp. 294-303). Tri County Community Wildfire Protection Plan. 2005 and 2010. Troendle C.A., J.M. Nankervis, and A. Peavy. 2007. Historical and future impacts of vegetation management and natural disturbance on water yield from Forest Service land in the South Platter River basin. Final Report submitted to Polly Hays Watershed Program Manager USFS Rocky Mountain Region, Lakewood, CO. Technical Services in Support of Agency-Wide Ecosystem Management Programs. February 2, 2007. 28 pp. http://www.fs.fed.us/r5/hfqlg/monitoring/resource_reports/2007/Water_Yield_May07_Report.pdf Troendle, C.A., 1987. The potential effect of partial cutting and thinning on streamflow from the subalpine forest. USDA Forest Service Research Paper RM-274, Fort Collins, CO, 7 pp. Troendle, C.A.; King, RM. 1987. The effect of partial and clearcutting on streamflow at Deadhorse Creek, Colorado. Journal of Hydrology. 90 (1987): 145-157. Tucker, P. 1988. Annotated gray wolf bibliography. Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. 117 pp. Turner, Monica G., Yegang Wu, Linda L. Wallace, William H. Romme, and Antoinette Brenkert. 1994. Simulating winter interactions among ungulates, vegetation, and fire in northern Yellowstone Park. Ecological Applications 4, no. 3 472–96. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1998. Interim air quality policy on wildfire and prescribed fires. Final report. U.S. Environmental Policy Agency. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2011a. Proposed terms. http://www.epa.gov/OCEPATerms/pterms.html. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2011b. Criteria Pollutant Area Summary Report (Green Book). http://www.epa.gov/air/oaqps/greenbk/ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1999. Regional Haze Regulations, Final Rule, 40 CFR Part 51. U.S. Geological Survey. 2008. All Fired Up: Whitebark pines are crucial in the Cascades and Beyond. Fire science Brief. Issue 21, 6 pp. U.S. Geological Survey. 2011 – Whitebark Pine Communities, Northern Rocky Mountain Science Center. 4 pp. Available at; http://www.nrmsc.usgs.gov/research/whitebar.htm. Accessed 9/11/11. United States Department of Agriculture, 2011c. Forest Vegetation Simulator 2010 Staff Report. Found online on 6/6/2011 at: http://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/AnnualReport2010/FVSsubmenu.shtml United States Department of Agriculture, Farm Service. Agency. 2011. National Agriculture Imagery Program information sheet. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm Service Agency. Found online on 03/22/2012 at: http://www.fsa.usda.gov/Internet/FSA_File/naip_2010_infosheet.pdfUSDA Forest Service. 1986. Helena National Forest Plan. Northern Region, Helena, MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2009c. Northern Goshawk Northern Region Overview. Key Findings and Project Considerations. Available at: http://fsweb.r1.fs.fed.us/wildlife/wwfrp/TESnew.htm. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2012g. Blackfoot Travel Plan. Draft Environmental Impact Statement. Lincoln Ranger District, Helena National Forest. 533 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, and United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2008. Memorandum of understanding between the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to promote the conservation of migratory birds. FS Agreement # 08-MU-1113-2400-264. Washington, DC: December. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service and USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2006. Canada Lynx Conservation Agreement. USFWS Agreement #0-MU-11015600-013. Missoula, MT. Unpublished. 13 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 1978. Forest Hydrology Part II: Hydrologic Effects of Vegetation Manipulation. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 1980. An approach to water resources evaluation of non-point silvicultural sources (a procedural handbook). Environmental Research Laboratory, US EPA, EPA-600/8-80-012. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 2004. Roads Analysis Report, Helena National Forest 2002-2004. Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. 110 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 2010. FSH 2509.22: Forest Service National Core BMPs – Nonpoint Source Pollution Control for Water Quality Management. July 2010. 173 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 2011. Forest Service Manuals and Handbooks, 7700 Series: Travel Management. USDA Forest Service. [Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/im/directives/; accessed December 6, 2010]. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1980a. Visual Character Types and Variety Class Description, Forest Service publication R1 80-11. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1985. National Forest Landscape Management: Volume 2, Chapter 6: "Fire." Agriculture Handbook 608. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 89 pages. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986. Forest Plan Helena National Forest. Unpublished report on file at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. 290p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986. Helena National Forest Revised Land and Resource Management Plan. USDA Forest Service, Northern Region, Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986. Helena National Forest Revised Land and Resource Management Plan, Corrected Final Environmental Impact Statement. USDA Forest Service, Northern Region, Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986. Helena National Forest. Forest Plan. Available online at: http://www.fs.fed.us/r1/helena/projects/index.shtml United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986. Land and Resource Management Plan. Helena National Forest. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986a. Helena National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (Forest Plan) Helena National Forest. Helena, Montana. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986b. Helena National Forest. Forest Plan Final Environmental Impact Statement. Appendix C. (C-1 – C-65). Northern Region. Helena National Forest. Helena MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1986c. Helena National Forest. Forest Plan Record of Decision. Northern Region. Helena National Forest. Helena MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1990. Forest Service Manual; Series 2000, National Forest Resource Management; Section 2500, Watershed and Air Management; Chapter 2530, Water Resource Management, (Amended 1990); Sections 2532.02, 2532.03. http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/directives/html/fsm2000.shtml United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1994. Field Guide to Intermountain Rushes. Intermountain Research Station. GTR INT-306. pp. 28-29. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1995. INFISH. Inland native fish strategy Environmental Assessment. Intermountain, Northern, and Pacific Northwest Regions. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1995a. Blackfoot Landscape Analysis, Helena National Forest, Helena, Mt. 139 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1995a. Inland Native Fish Strategy Environmental Assessment (INFISH), Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact, 1995, Intermountain, Northern, and Pacific Northwest Regions. July 28. Online via http://www.fs.fed.us/r6/fish/9506-infish.pdf. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1995b. Blackfoot Landscape Analysis. Helena National Forest Supervisors Office. Helena, Mt. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1996. Quigley, T.M., Haynes, R.W., and Graham, R.T., tech eds. 1996. Integrated scientific assessment for ecosystem management in the interior Columbia Basin and portions of the Klamath and Great Basins, PNW Research Station. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1997. Northern Region Connectivity Protocol. Northern Region. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1998. Peatlands on National Forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains: Ecology and Conservation. Intermountain Research Station. RMRS-GTR-11. 80 pps. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1999. Aerial survey standards. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Health Monitoring Program. 8 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1999. Regional Viability Strategy. Memorandum to Regional Leadership Teams, Northern Region and Intermountain Regions April 21, 1999. 5 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2000. Northern Region snag management protocol. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Region. Missoula, MT. 34 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2000. Watershed Baseline Conditions for the Blackfoot Portion of the Upper Clark Fork Section 7 Watershed. Helena National Forest, Helena Mt. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2000a. Northern Region Snag Management Protocol. Prepared by the Snag Protocol Team for the USDA Forest Service Northern Region. 34 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2000b. The role of fire in nongame wildlife management and community restoration: traditional uses and new direction. Northeastern Research Station. General Technical Report NE-288. 152 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2001. Forest Service Manual 2000 - Natural Resource Management. Zero Code 2080 - Noxious Weed Management. Supplement R1 2000-2001-1. Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2003. National ROS Inventory Mapping Protocol. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2003. Studebaker’s California Interagency Incident Management Team. Lincoln Complex Helena National Forest. Incident Narrative of the Snow Talon Fire. Internal Document. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2004. Helena Forest Roads Analysis. Helena Forest Planning Files. Supervisors Office. Helena, Mt. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2005. Aerial survey geographic information system handbook; sketchmaps to digital geographic information, U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Health Monitoring Program. 80 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2005. Final Environmental Impact Statement and Record of Decision. North Belts Travel Management Plan. Helena, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2005. Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Phase II Amendment to the 1997 Revised Land and Resource Management Plan for the Black Hills National Forest. U.S. Department of Agriculture-Forest Service, Black Hills National Forest. Custer, South Dakota. October 2005. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2005. Forest Service Manual 2600 – Wildlife, Fish, and Sensitive Plant Habitat Management. Chapter 2670 – Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Plants and Animals, .National Headquarters, Washington DC. Effective: September 23, 2005 United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2005. Programmatic Biological Assessment for Activities that are Not Likely to Adversely Affect Listed Terrestrial Species. Region 1 Biological Assessment. Missoula Montana. 47 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2006. Ecosystem Restoration: A Framework for Restoring and Maintaining the National Forests and Grasslands. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2006c. Final Environmental Impact Statement: Helena National Forest Weed Treatment Project. Helena, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. 352 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2006d. Helena National Forest Noxious Weed Record of Decision. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Helena, MT United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2006a Region One Vegetation Classification, Mapping, Inventory, and Analysis Report: Region One Vegetation Council Classification Algorithms. Numbered report 05-01. Revised 2006. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2006b. Wildlife and invertebrate response to fuel reduction treatments in dry coniferous forests of the western United States: A synthesis. RMRS-GTR-173. 41 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2006c. Final Environmental Impact Statement: Helena National Forest Weed Treatment Project. Helena, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. 352 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2007a. Final Environmental Impact Statement Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction. USDA Forest Service, USDI Bureau of Land Management. Northern Region, Missoula, MT 534 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2007b.Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction, Record of Decision. National Forests in Montana and parts of Idaho, Wyoming and Utah. 71 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2007c. Black-backed Woodpecker. Northern Region Overview. Key Findings and Project Considerations. Prepared by the Black-backed Woodpecker Working Group. 41 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2007d. Region 1 Grid Intensification Using CSE Protocols Field Protocols. Forest Service. Version 1.1. May 2007. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2007e. Region One vegetation classification, mapping, inventory and analysis report. Numbered Report 06-04 v1.2. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2007f. Research and Development Information Sheet – Effects of Climate Change on Wildlife. 2 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2008. Forest Service Manual 2360. Heritage Program Management. Washington, DC: Forest Service National Headquarters. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2008a. Sheppard Creek Post-Fire Project. Draft Environmental Impact Statement. Flathead National Forest. Tally Lake Ranger District. 690 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2008b. Estimates of Snag Densities for Eastside Forests of the Northern Region. 56 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2008c. Biological Assessment for Terrestrial Wildlife Species. Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel. Lincoln Ranger District, Helena National Forest. 38 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2009. Region 1. Helena National Forest. National Visitor Use Monitoring Results. <http://www.fs.fed.us/recreation/programs/nvum/2009/Helena_FY2008.pdf>. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2009. VMapPK and Stonewall_g spatial data metadata. Helena National Forest, Stonewall Vegetation Project analysis file. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2009a. Criteria for wildlife models. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest Version June 2009. Helena, Montana. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2009b. Effects of Fuels Management in the Tahoe Basin: A Scientific Literature Review. Final Report. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010. Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction — Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact. Helena National Forest. 67 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010. Stonewall vegetation project scoping. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Helena National Forest United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010a. Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction — Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Helena National Forest. 67 p. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010a. Management guide to ecosystem restoration treatments: Whitebark pine forests of the Northern Rocky Mountains, U.S.A., 143 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010a. Our Approach to Roadless Analysis and Analysis of Unroaded Lands Contiguous to Roadless Areas. Draft 12/2/2010. Northern Region. Missoula MT United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010b. 2010 Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction Project – Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project, Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact. Northern Region. Helena National Forest. Helena MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2010b. Stonewall vegetation project scoping. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Helena National Forest United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011. Forest Service Manuals and Handbooks, 7700 Series: Travel Management. USDA Forest Service. [Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/im/directives/; accessed December 6, 2010]. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011. Helena National Forest Fire Management Plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Helena National Forest. Helena, MT. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011a. Region 1 Sensitive Species List. February, 2011, p5 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011a. VMapPK spatial data metadata. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Helena National Forest, Stonewall Vegetation Project analysis file. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011b. Forest Service Database. Available at http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/animals/mammal. (Accessed 9/15/11). United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011b. Forest inventory and analysis national program. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Inventory & Analysis National Office. Found online on 5/21/2011 at: http://www.fia.fs.fed.us/. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2011c. NRM Database. Available at: (http://www.fs.fed.us/nrm/index.shtml). Accessed 10/25/11. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012a. Stonewall Vegetation Project, Silviculture Report. Unpublished. 82 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012b. Stonedry Range Report, Unpublished. 5 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012c – Stonewall Vegetation Project Snag Analysis. Unpublished, 10 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012d – Stonewall Fire/Fuels Report. Unpublished. 49 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012e. Fire Effects Information System. Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/. Accessed 11/27/2012. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012f. Fisher (Martes pennanti) habitat model and assessment for USDA Forest Service Northern Region. Unpublished paper on file at USDA Forest Service Northern Region, Missoula, MT. 16 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2012g – Stonewall Air Quality Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. February 1995. Inland Native Fish Strategy, Environmental Assessment. Intermountain, Northern and Pacific Northwest Regions. Attachment A—Inland Native Fish Strategy Selected Interim Direction. 15 pp. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Service Manual 2380, Landscape Management. 2003. 15 pages. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Helena National Forest. 1986. “Land and Resource Management Plan”. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Helena National Forest. 2009. Stone Dry Vegetation Treatment NFMA Report for Scenery and Recreation September 30, 2009 United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. National Forest Landscape Management: Volume 1. Agriculture Handbook 434. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 1973. 76 pages. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. National Forest Landscape Management: Volume 2, Chapter 1: "The Visual Management System" Agriculture Handbook 462. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 1974. 47 pages. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. National Forest Landscape Management: Volume 2, Chapter 4: "Roads." Agriculture Handbook 483. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 1977. 62 pages. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. National Forest Landscape Management: Volume 2, Chapter 5: "Timber." Agriculture Handbook 559. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 1980. 223 pages. United States Department of Agriculture. United States Department of the Interior. 2009. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (2009). http://www.nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf United States Department of Commerce. 2008 and 2010. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Information System, Washington D.C. (accessed via EPS-HDT 2011) United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2013. Federal Register. Proposal to list the distinct population segment of North American wolverine occurring in the contiguous United States as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act. 28 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 1983. Habitat Suitability Index Models: Fisher. Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group, Fort Collins, CO. 29 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 1987. Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver, Colorado. 119 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 1993. Grizzly bear recovery plan. Missoula, MT. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2003. Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Removing the Western Distinct Population Segment of Gray Wolf From the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife. Federal Register: April 1, 2003, Volume 68. No. 62. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2006. Final Environmental Assessment: Designation of Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population Segment of the Canada Lynx. Denver, Colorado. 74 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2007a. National Bald Eagle Management Guidelines. 25 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2007b. Biological Opinion on the effects of the Northern Rocky Mountain Lynx Amendment on the Distinct Population Segment (DPS) of Canada Lynx (Lynx canadensis) in the contiguous United States. 85 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2008. Birds of Conservation Concern. Arlington, Virginia. 87 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2009. Federal Register Revised Designation of Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population Segment of the Canada Lynx. Vol. 74, No. 36. 87 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2010. Federal Register. 12 month Finding on a Petition to List the North American Wolverine as Endangered or Threatened. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011a. Federal Register. Reissuance of Final Rule to Identify the Northern Rocky Mountain Population of Gray Wolf as a Distinct Population Segment and to Revise the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife. pp. 25590-25592. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011b. Threatened, Endangered and Candidate Species for the Helena National Forest, 11/2/11. Ecological Services, Montana Field Office, Helena Montana 2 pp. United States Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2012. Montana, helping wildlife become connected to the landscape. Available at: http://www.fws.gov/news/blog/index.cfm/2011/5/4/Montana-Helping-Wildlife-Make-Connections-on-the-Landscape. accessed 12/5/2012. United States Department of Interior, U.S. Geological Survey. 2008. Northern Rockies Information Sheet – Wildlife and Climate Change. Northern Rocky Mountain Science Center. 2 pp. United States Department of Interior-BOC. 1994. Montana Bald Eagle Recover Plan. Bureau of Reclamation, Billings, Montana. 104 pp. In Montana Fish Wildlife and Parks 2011a. United States Department of the Interior and United States Department of Agriculture. 2000. Managing the Impacts of Wildland Fires on Communities and the Environment - A Report to the President (aka National Fire Plan) http://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/ United States Department of the Interior and United States Department of Agriculture. 2006. A Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risk to Communities and the Environment: 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy: Implementation Plan Available at: http://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/ United States Department of the Interior et al. (USDI/ USDA/ DOE/ DOF/DOC/EPA/FEMA/NAOSF).1995. Federal Wildland Fire Policy. http://www.nifc.gov/fire_policy/index.htm and for 2001 updates http://www.nifc.gov/fire_policy/history/index.htm United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2008. Biological Opinion of the Effects to Bull Trout and Bull Trout Critical Habitat from Road Management Activities on National Forest System Bureau of Land Management Lands in Western Montana. Montana Field Office of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Helena, Mt. United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2005. Bull Trout (Salvelinus confluentus) Draft Recovery Plan. Chapter 3, Clark Fork River. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Portland, Oregon. Online via http//www.fws.gov/pacific/bulltrout/Recovery.html United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011a. Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; 12-Month Finding on a Petition to List Pinus albicaulis as Endangered or Threatened with Critical Habitat. FR 76 (138): 42631-42654. United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011b. Threatened, Endangered, and Candidate Species for the Helena National Forest 8/2/2011. http://www.fws.gov/montanafieldoffice/Endangered_Species/Listed_Species/Forests/Helena_sp_list.pdf United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Nez Perce Tribe, National Park Service, and USDA Wildlife Services. 2003. Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery 2002 Annual Report. USFWS, Helena Montana, 35 pp. Unsworth, J.W. and L. Kuck. 1991. Pages 85-88 in A.G. Christensen, L.J. Lyon, and T.N. Lonner, comps., Proceedings of Elk Vulnerability – a Symposium, Montana State University, Bozeman. 330 pp. Upper Blackfoot Historical Society, 1994. Gold Pans and Singletrees. Anderson Publications. Fairfield, MT. USDA Forest Service and Natural Resource Conservation Service. 2001. “Soil Survey of Helena National Forest Area, Montana”. On file at Helena National Forest Supervisors Office. USDA Forest Service. 1986. Helena National Forest Management Plan. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Helena, MT. USDA Forest Service. 1999. Forest Service Manual, R-1 Supplement 2500-99-1. Soil Management, Soil Quality Monitoring. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Missoula, MT. 6p. USDA Forest Service. 2003. Maudlow-Toston Salvage Project Monitoring Report. Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. USDA Forest Service. 2005. South Helena Hazardous Fuels Reduction Project, Monitoring Report. Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. USDA Forest Service. 2007. Helena National Forest Annual Monitoring Report for Fiscal Year 2004. Helena National Forest, Helena, MT. USDA Forest Service. 2009. Region 1 Soil Technical Guide. USDA. 2001. A collaborative approach for reducing wildland fire risks to communities and the environment: 10-year comprehensive strategy. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. USDA. 2005. Ecosystem restoration: a framework for restoring and maintaining the national forests and grasslands. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. USDA. 2010. FSM 2000 – NATIONAL FOREST RESOURCE MANAGEMENT: CHAPTER 2020 – ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION AND RESILIENCE: Interim Directive No.: 2020-2010-1. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Service Manual. Valentine, S. 2012a. Stonewall Vegetation Project Inventoried Roadless Area Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. Valentine, S. 2012b. Stonewall Vegetation Project Recreation Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Helena National Forest. Stonewall Vegetation Project file. van Diggelen, R; Ab P. Grootjans; J. A. Harris. 2001. Ecological restoration; state of the art or state of the science. Restoration Ecology. 9(2): 115–118. Van Dyke, F., and J.A Darragh. 2007. Short and long-term changes in elk use and forage production in sagebrush communities following prescribed burning. Van Dyke, F., and J.A. Darragh. 2006. Short- and longer-term effects of fire and herbivory on sagebrush communities in South-Central Montana. Environmental Management Vol. 38, No. 3. Pp. 365-376. Van Wagner, C.E. 1973. Height of crown scorch in forest fires. Can. J. for. Res. 3: 373-378. Van Wagner, C.E. 1977. Conditions for the start and spread of crown fire. Can. J. For. Res. 7: 23-34. Vaux, H.J., Jr., P.D. Gardner, and T.J. Mills. 1984. Methods for assessing the impact of fire on forest recreation. USDA Forest Service. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-79 Vinkey, R. 2003. An evaluation of fisher (Martes pennanti) introductions in Montana. M.S. thesis, University of Montana, Missoula. Vitousek, P. M and L.P. Walker 1989. Biological invasions by Myrica faya in Hawaii: plant demography, nitrogen fixation and ecosystem effects. Ecological Monographs. 59(3): 247–265. Vitousek, P.M. 1990. Biological invasions and ecosystem processes: towards an integration of population biology and ecosystem studies. Oikos. 57(1): 7–13. Walch L. 2009. Fisheries Specialist Report for the Hazard Tree Removal Project. Fishery Files Helena National Forest. Supervisors Office, Helena, Montana. Waller, J.R. and R.D. Mace. 1997a. Grizzly bear habitat selection in the Swan Mountains, Montana. Journal of Wildlife Management 61:1032-1039. In Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation Forest Management Bureau. Grizzly Bear Species Account. Missoula, MT 59804. 50 pp. Wallin, Kimberly F.; Thomas E. Kolb; Kjerstin R. Skov; Michael R. Wagner. 2003. Effects of crown scorch on ponderosa pine resistance to bark beetles in Northern Arizona. Environ. Entomol. 32(3): 652-661. Wallmo, O. C., W. L. Regelin, and D. W. Reichert. 1972. Forage use by mule deer relative to logging in Colorado. Journal of Range Management 36:1025-1033. In Hayden, J. G. Ardt, M. Fleming, T.W. Keegan, J. Peek, T.O. Smith, and A. Wood. 2008. Habitat guidelines for mule deer, Northern forest ecosystem. Mule Deer Working Group, Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, USA. 48 pp. Walters, D. 2011. Stonewall Vegetation Project Soils Report. Helena National Forest. Washington Wildlife Habitat Connectivity Working Group (WHCWG) 2010. Washington Connected Landscapes Project: Statewide Analysis. Washington Departments of Fish and Wildlife Transportation, Olympia, WA. 223 pp. Waters, T.F. 1995. Sediment in Streams: Sources, Biological Effects, and Control. American Fisheries Society Monograph 7. Weatherby, Julie C. and R. W. Thier. 1993. A preliminary validation of a Douglas-fir beetle hazard rating system. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Boise National Forest. Report No. R4-93-05 Weaver, S.M. 1987. Fire and elk: summer prescription burning on elk winter range, a new direction in habitat management on the Nez Perce National Forest. Bugle: The quarterly Journal of the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation. 4(2): 41-42. Available at. http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/animals/mammal/ceca/all.html#. Accessed 9/1/11. Weldon, L.A.C. 2011. Letter from Regional Forester to Forest and Grassland Supervisors dated February 25, 2011, Regional Forester’s Sensitive Species List, 2011 Update. On file at Helena National Forest Supervisor’s Office. Weldon, L.A.C. 2011a. Letter from Regional Forester to Forest and Grassland Supervisors dated August 26, 2011, Sensitive Species Designation for Whitebark Pine. On file at Helena National Forest Supervisor’s Office Wemple, B.C. and J.A. Jones. 2003. Runoff production on forest roads in a steep, mountain catchment. Water Resources Research 39(8), 1220, doi:10.1029/2002WR001744, 2003. http://terra.geo.orst.edu/people/faculty/publications/jonesj/2002WR001744.pdf Werner, J.K. et al. 2004. Amphibians and Reptiles of Montana. Mountain Press Publishing Co. Missoula, MT. In NatureServe. 2011. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 5.0. NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. Werner, R. A., and K. E. Post. 1985. Effects of wood-boring insects and bark beetles on survival and growth of burned white-spruce. Pages 14-16. In Early results of the Rosie Creek fire research project-1984. Agricultural Experiment Station Publication 85-2, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska, USA. In Samson, F. B. 2006a. A Conservation assessment of the northern goshawk, blacked-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl, and pileated woodpecker in the Northern Region, USDA Forest Service. Unpublished report on file, Northern Region, Missoula, Montana, USA. Western Bat Working Group. 2005. Species Accounts, Townsend’s big-eared bat. Available at http://www.wbwg.org/speciesinfo/species_accounts/vespertilonidae/coto.pdf. Accessed 9/11/11. Whitehead, Roger J. and Glenda L. Russo. 2005. “Beetle-proofed” lodgepole pine stands in interior British Columbia have less damage from mountain pine beetle. Canadian Forest Service. Pacific Forestry Centre. Victoria, British Columbia. Information Report BC-X-402. Wiedinmyer C., and Hurteau 2010. Prescribed Fire As a Means of Reducing Forest Carbon Emissions in the Western United States. Environmental Science & Technology 2010 44 (6), 1926-1932 Wielgus, R.B., Vernier, P., 2003. Grizzly bear selection of managed and unmanaged forests in the Selkirk Mountains. Can. J. For. Res. 33, 822–829. In Nielson, S.E. M.S. Boyce and G.B. Stenhouse. 2004. Grizzly bears and forestry. Selection of clearcuts by grizzly bears in west-central Alberta Canada. Forest Ecology and Management 199 (2004) 51-65. 15 pp. Wightman, C. and V. Saab. 2008. Management Indicator Species Surveys on the Payette National Forest 2008: Field testing of methods. 25 pp. Wild Things Unlimited. 2011. Snow-tracking surveys on the Helena National Forest. December 2010 to April 2011 and December 2009 to March 2010. Prepared by Steve Gehman, Betsy Robinson, Gregg Treinish and Kalon Baugan. 50 pp. Williamson, J.R. and W.A. Nielsen. 2000. The Influence of Forest Site on Rate and Extent of Soil Compaction and Profile Disturbance of Skid Trails during Ground-Based Harvesting. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 30: 1196-1205. Witmer, G.W. and D.S. deCalesta. 1985. Effects of forest roads on habitat use by Roosevelt elk. Northwest Sci. 59(2): 122-125. Witmer, G.W., S.K. Martin and R.D. Sayler. 1998. Forest Carnivore Conservation and Management in the Interior Columbia Basin: Issues and Environmental Correlates. Pacific Northwest Research Station. General Technical Report, PNW-GTR-240, 60 pp. Wolverine Network. 2012. Wolverines and Climate Change. Available at: http://www.wolverinenetwork.org/news/story/wolverines_and_climate_change_publication.Accessed 12/16/2012. Wright, Henry A. and Arthur W. Bailey. 1982. Fire ecology, United States and Canada. John Wiley & Sons. New York, New York. 501 pp. Wright, V. 1996. Multi-scale analysis of flammulated owl habitat use: owl distribution, habitat management, and conservation. Master’s thesis, University of Montana, Missoula, Montana, USA. Wright, V. 2000. The Aldo Leopold Wilderness Research Institute: A national wilderness research program in support of wilderness management. Wilderness science in a time of change, ed. McCool, Stephen F., David N. Cole, William T. Borrie, and Jennifer O'Loughlin, 260–8. Missoula, Montana, May 23, 1999. RMRS-P-15-Vol. 3. Ogden, Utah: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Wright, Vita. 1992. Multi-scale analysis of flammulated owl habitat: Owl distribution, habitat, and conservation. M.S. thesis, University of Montana. Missoula, MT. Yager, L.Y., Hinderliter, M.G., Heise, C.D., and Epperson, D.M., 2007. Gopher tortoise response to habitat management by prescribed burning. Journal of Wildlife Management 71, 428–434. In Kennedy, P. L. and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of Knowledge on the Effects of Fire and Fire surrogates on Wildlife in U.S. Dry Forests. Special Report 1096, Oregon State University. 133 pp. Young, J., R.Evans, R. Eckert, and B. Kay 1987. Cheatgrass. Rangelands 9(6). Pp. 266-270. Youngblood, Andrew; James B. Grace; James D. McIver. 2009. Delayed conifer mortality after fuel reduction treatments: interactive effects of fuel, fire intensity, and bark beetles. Ecological Applications, 19(2): 321–337. Yung, Laurie. [No Date]. Prescribed Fires in Wilderness – Case Study. Accessed from Wilderness.net Fire Management Toolbox. <http://www.wilderness.net/index.cfm?fuse=toolboxes&sec=fire> Zager, P., Jonkel, C., Habeck, J., 1983. Logging and wildlife influence on grizzly bear habitat in northwestern Montana. Int. Conf. Bear Res. Manage. 5, 124–132. In Nielson, S.E. M.S. Boyce and G.B. Stenhouse. 2004. Grizzly bears and forestry. Selection of clearcuts by grizzly bears in west-central Alberta Canada. Forest Ecology and Management 199 (2004) 51-65. 15 pp. Zausen, G. L..; T. E. Kolb; J. D, Bailey; and M. R. Wagner. 2005. Long-term impacts of stand management on ponderosa pine physiology and bark beetle abundance in northern Arizona: a replicated landsc ape study. Forest Ecology and Management. 218:291-305. Zinn, L.Z. and T.J. Tibbitts. 1990. Goshawk nesting survey – 1990, North Kaibab Ranger District, Kaibab National Forest, Arizona. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Phoenix, Arizona 36 pp. in Squires, J.J. and P.L. Kennedy. 2006. Northern Goshawk ecology: an assessment of current knowledge and information needs for conservation and management. Studies in Avian Biology, No. 31: 8-62 Ziska, Lewis H. 2006. Climate Change Impacts on Weeds. Proceedings: Climate Change and Agriculture: Promoting Practical and Profitable Responses. 2006, February 21; Beltsville, MD. Zouhar, Kris 2001. Centaurea maculosa. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, June 30]. Zouhar, Kris 2001a. Cirsium arvense. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, June 30]. Zouhar, Kris 2002. Cynoglossum officinale. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, June 30]. Zouhar, Kris 2003. Linaria spp. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, June 30]. Zouhar, Kris 2004. Hypericum perforatum. In: Fire Effects Information System, Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [ 2011, June 30] Zwolak, R. and K.R. Foresman, 2007. Effects of a stand replacing fire on small mammal communities in montane forest. Canadian Journal of Zoology. Vol. 85. pp. 815-822  Glossary Active Crown Fire – The surface fire ignites crowns and the fire spread is able to propagate through the tree canopy Background – The distant part of a landscape, picture, etc.: surroundings, especially those behind something and providing harmony or contrast: surrounding area or surface. Area located from 3-5 miles to infinity from the viewer. (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 44.) Broadcast burning – Allowing a prescribed fire to burn over a designated area within well-defined boundaries for reduction of fuel hazard, as a resource management treatment, or both. Burn severity – A qualitative assessment of the heat pulse directed toward the ground during a fire. Burn severity relates to soil heating, large fuel and duff consumption, consumption of the litter and organic layer beneath trees and isolated shrubs, and mortality of buried plant parts. Closure – Roadway blockade to restrict motor vehicle traffic. Color - A phenomenon of light (as red, brown. pink, etc.) or visual perception that enables one to differentiate otherwise Identical objects. A hue as contrasted with black, white, or gray. (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 44.) Danger tree – A standing tree that presents a hazard to people due to conditions such as deterioration of or damage to the root system, trunk, stem, or limbs or the direction or lean of the tree Distance Zones – Areas of landscape denoted by specific distances from the observer. Used as a frame of reference in which to discuss landscape characteristics or activities of man. (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 44.) Existing visual condition – Current state of the landscape, considering previous human alterations. (USDA Forest Service 1995, Glossary-2) Foreground – The detailed landscape found within 0 to . - . from the observer. (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 45) Forest road - A road wholly or partly within or adjacent to and serving the National Forest System that the Forest Service determines is necessary for the protection, administration, and utilization of the National Forest System and the use and development of its resources. Forest transportation atlas – A display of the system of roads, trails, and airfields of an administrative unit Forest transportation system – The system of National Forest System roads, National Forest System trails, and airfields on National Forest System lands Form – The shape or structure of something as opposed to the material of which it is composed. (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 45) Goal – A concise statement that describes a desired condition to be achieved sometime in the future. It is normally expressed in broad, general terms and is timeless in that it has no specific date by which it is to be completed. Goal statements form the principle basis from which objectives are developed. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-4) Line – An intersection of two planes; a point that has been extended; a silhouette of a form (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 45) Low Severity Fire – Any surface fire replacing less than 25 percent of the dominant upper canopy layer in a succession class; as a result, low severity fires can open or maintain a given succession class. Maintenance – The upkeep of the entire Forest transportation facility including surface and shoulders, parking and side areas, structures, and such traffic-control devices as are necessary for its safe and efficient utilization. Management Standards – A principle requiring a specific level of attainment; a rule to measure against. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-6) Maximum Modification – A VQO meaning man’s activity may dominate the characteristic landscape, but should appear as a natural occurrence when viewed as background. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-18) Middleground – The space between the foreground and background in a picture or landscape. The area located from .-. to3-5 miles from viewer (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 45.) Mixed-severity fire – A generally broad fire severity classification that refers to fire effects intermediate between the low severity and replacement severity ends of the fire regimes continuum. For FRCC purposes, mixed-severity fires refer to fires producing between 25 and 75 percent upper-layer replacement during a given event. Mixed-severity fires can open or maintain a succession class. Modification – A VQO meaning man’s activity may dominate the characteristic landscape, but must, at the same time, use naturally established form, line, color, and texture. It should appear as a natural occurrence when viewed in foreground or middleground. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-18) Mosaic fire – Generally refers to mixed-severity fires. However, the term can be problematic because other fire severity types can produce landscape mosaic patterns composed of a mix of burned and unburned patches. Accordingly, more-precise terms such as low, mixed, or replacement fire may be better terms for describing fire regimes for multiple analysis scales. National Forest System road – A forest road other than a road which has been authorized by a legally documented right-of-way held by a State, county, or other local public road authority. Objective – A concise, time-specific statement of measurable planned results that respond to pre-established goals. An objective forms the basis for further planning to define the precise steps to be taken and the resources to be used in achieving identified goals. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-9) Partial Retention – A VQO that in general means man’s activities may be evident but must remain subordinate to the characteristic landscape (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-18) Passive Crown Fire – Consuming single or small groups of trees or bushes. Prescribed burning – Controlled application of fire to wildland fuels in either their natural or modified state, under specified environmental conditions that allows the fire to be confined to a predetermined area, and produce the fire behavior and fire characteristics required to attain planned fire treatment and resource management objectives. Prescribed fire – An intentionally or naturally ignited fire that burns under specified conditions that allow the fire to be confined to a predetermined area and produce the fire behavior and fire characteristics required to attain planned fire treatment and resource management objectives. Rehabilitation – A short-term management alternative used to return existing visual impacts in the natural landscape to a desired visual quality (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 45.) Retention – A VQO that in general means man’s activities are not evident to the casual Forest visitor. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-18) Road – A motor vehicle route over 50 inches wide, unless identified and managed as a trail. Road decommissioning – Activities that result in the stabilization and restoration of unneeded roads to a more natural state. Road obliteration – A type of road decommissioning in which the road prism is recontoured;, cut and fill slopes are restored to natural grades; and slash, stumps, and woody debris is placed on top of the corridor to effectively block vehicle travel. Roaded Modified – A subclass of Roaded Natural that has typically been defined as areas exhibiting evidence of Forest management activities that are dominant on the landscape (USDA Forest Service 2003). Roaded Natural – A classification of the recreation opportunity spectrum where timber harvest or other surface-use practices are evident. Motorized vehicles are permitted on all parts of the road system (USDA Forest Service 1986). Roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal - A short-term road constructed solely for use as a project haul route; the road is then decommissioned by obliteration as soon as timber management activities are completed Seen Area – Total area observed. May be measured in terms of foreground, middleground, and background (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 46.) Semi-Primitive – A classification of recreation opportunity spectrum that characterizes a predominately natural or natural appearing environment of a moderate to large size. Concentration of users is low, but there is often evidence of other area users. The area is managed in such a way that minimum onsite controls and restrictions may be present, but subtle. In areas designated as Semi-Primitive Motorized, motorized use may occur on primitive roads and motorized trails. Subordinate – Inferior to or place below another in size, brightness, etc.; secondary in visual impact (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 46.) Surface Fire – Fire that burns loose debris on the surface, which include dead branches, leaves, and low vegetation. Surface fire burns only in the surface fuelbed. Surface Fuels – Fuels that contact the surface of the ground, consisting of leaf and needle litter, dead branch material, downed logs, bark, tree cones, and low stature living plants. Texture – The visual or tactile surface or characteristics of something. (USDA Forest Service 1974, page 46.) Underburning – Prescribed burning in activity-created or natural fuels beneath a forest canopy, usually with the objective of preserving the dominant over story trees. Visual Quality Objectives (VQO) – A desired level of excellence based on physical and sociological characteristics of an area. Refers to the degree of acceptable alteration of the characteristic landscape. (USDA Forest Service 1986, p. Glossary VI-18)  Index A Air Quality, x, xxviii, 5, 45, 67, 204, 205, 208, 575, 577, 650, 717 Alternative 1, iv, vii, viii, xv, xxii, xxiv, xxv, xxxiv, xxxvi, 35, 64, 65, 72, 80, 82, 83, 130, 156, 157, 158, 159, 161, 164, 177, 189, 209, 230, 319, 328, 344, 345, 346, 349, 350, 352, 354, 355, 356, 358, 359, 360, 363, 365, 367, 371, 372, 382, 391, 397, 398, 406, 410, 411, 413, 417, 419, 420, 422, 423, 426, 428, 429, 433, 436, 438, 442, 444, 446, 450, 451, 452, 454, 468, 469, 474, 482, 486, 492, 511, 541, 549, 561, 565, 572, 573, 579, 596, 601, 615, 629, 638, 639, 641 Alternative 2, i, iv, viii, ix, xv, xvi, xxii, xxiii, xxv, xxvi, xxvii, xxxiv, xxxv, xxxvi, xxxvii, xxxviii, xxxix, 26, 35, 39, 41, 46, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 57, 65, 66, 72, 73, 80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 132, 133, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 147, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 165, 190, 191, 193, 196, 199, 211, 212, 231, 232, 319, 344, 346, 357, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 366, 371, 372, 382, 383, 391, 392, 400, 401, 414, 421, 424, 427, 430, 432, 433, 434, 435, 439, 440, 441, 443, 444, 446, 447, 448, 450, 454, 456, 458, 470, 484, 486, 492, 511, 518, 519, 524, 545, 547, 548, 549, 550, 551, 565, 573, 575, 579, 596, 597, 615, 630, 639, 641, 642, 643 Alternative 3, i, iv, viii, xv, xvi, xxii, xxvii, xxxv, xxxvii, xxxviii, xxxix, 41, 43, 46, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 57, 59, 65, 72, 73, 80, 83, 85, 143, 144, 147, 148, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 168, 171, 190, 192, 193, 200, 202, 211, 236, 237, 238, 319, 344, 347, 361, 363, 371, 372, 374, 382, 383, 391, 393, 400, 401, 403, 414, 421, 424, 430, 432, 433, 435, 439, 440, 443, 446, 447, 450, 454, 458, 470, 485, 486, 492, 511, 524, 529, 547, 548, 549, 550, 576, 577, 578, 599, 600, 622, 630, 639, 641, 642, 643 Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Detailed Study, 61 Aspen, vii, xxxix, 17, 37, 56, 64, 118, 121, 131, 132, 139, 153, 156, 192, 251, 255, 256, 316, 317, 320, 358, 389, 611, 613, 670, 672, 683, 695 B Beaver Creek, i, ii, xix, xxiii, xxiv, xxxix, 56, 77, 81, 82, 249, 256, 278, 282, 288, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 309, 310, 311, 326, 341, 379, 389, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 456, 457, 459, 534, 535, 536, 538, 539, 540, 542, 543, 544, 548, 549, 550, 551, 553, 554, 555, 557, 558, 559, 560, 567, 569, 592, 594 Biophysical Settings, viii, xxviii, xxxv, 12, 18, 65, 104, 120, 130, 132, 138, 151, 160, 175, 176, 244, 321 BpS, viii, xxviii, xxxiv, xxxv, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 65, 91, 92, 104, 118, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 138, 151, 158, 160, 175 C Critical Habitat, xii, xv, 69, 72, 246, 265, 394, 396, 718, 719 Cultural, xxvi, xxxvii, 84, 626, 629, 667, 686 D Decision Framework, vi, 28 E Economics, 632, 640, 670, 673, 692 Elk, xii, xiv, xix, xxxvi, xxxix, 56, 69, 71, 77, 243, 246, 247, 248, 250, 260, 277, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 326, 339, 449, 450, 451, 454, 456, 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 496, 595, 599, 655, 657, 668, 669, 681, 689,694, 696, 703, 707, 709, 710, 719, 721 F Fire and Fuels, ix, 66, 91, 172, 244, 250, 645, 702 Fisheries, 49, 552, 553, 649, 668, 669, 676, 680, 682, 691, 699, 701, 720, 721 FRCC, xxviii, xxxv, 12, 16, 89, 92, 104, 118, 173, 175, 176, 177, 197, 252, 676, 679, 695, 726 G Goshawk, xiii, xviii, xxxvi, 56, 70, 76, 247, 248, 250, 278, 284, 289, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 301, 325, 428, 429, 430, 432, 436, 666, 679, 683, 702, 707, 711, 723 Grizzly, xii, xiii, xv, xxxvi, 57, 69, 70, 72, 246, 248, 249, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 322, 397, 398, 401, 402, 405, 680, 690, 694, 695, 696, 718, 720, 722, 723 H Habitats of Special Concern, xi, 68, 215 Hydrology, 7, 516, 529, 562, 563, 649, 680, 689, 691, 710, 711 I Index, 709, 717, 729 INFISH, xxviii, xxxviii, 8, 35, 41, 51, 58, 59, 320, 338, 341, 374, 376, 380, 389, 401, 415, 426, 427, 454, 462, 464, 466, 470, 471, 473, 474, 538, 555, 563, 712, 713 Inventoried Roadless, i, iv, xxv, xxviii, xxxvii, 35, 41, 83, 243, 339, 567, 580, 582, 587, 591, 598, 602, 720 IRA, i, iv, xxv, xxviii, xxxvii, xl, 35, 83, 576, 580, 585, 587, 589, 591, 592, 593, 594, 595, 597, 598, 599, 600, 601, 602, 612, 613, 614 Issues, ii, xii, 29, 31, 69, 91, 163, 173, 203, 205, 246, 270, 479, 495, 504, 535, 552, 567, 580, 603, 627, 689, 722 K Keep Cool Creek, i, ii, xxiii, xxiv, 81, 82, 305, 306, 307, 309, 341, 389, 450, 451, 453, 454, 457, 459, 534, 535, 536, 538, 539, 540, 543, 544, 548, 549, 550, 551, 553, 554, 557, 559, 560, 567 L Lincoln Creek, xxiii, 53, 81, 534, 535, 537, 538, 540, 541, 542, 543, 547, 548, 549, 550, 551, 562 Lynx, iii, xii, xiii, xv, xxviii, xxxv, xxxvi, xxxix, 8, 29, 57, 69, 70, 72, 243, 246, 248, 249, 261, 262, 263, 265, 266, 269, 321, 339, 367, 371, 381, 382, 392, 393, 396, 668, 677, 702, 703, 708, 711, 714, 715, 718 M Management Area, xxxiv, xxxv, 9, 89, 167, 168, 170, 171, 200, 215, 270, 462, 464, 466, 473, 474, 580, 589, 602, 613, 664 Management indicator species, 287 Methodology, 89, 162, 172, 204, 215, 241, 250, 261, 269, 274, 278, 281, 282, 284, 286, 287, 289, 297, 300, 301, 302, 311, 315, 318, 477, 494, 502, 529, 568, 583, 591, 603, 605, 615, 627, 632 Migratory birds, 4, 315, 474 MIS, iii, iv, 29, 41, 56, 240, 241, 242, 248, 287, 288, 290, 317, 348, 351, 552, 553, 561 Monitoring, 60, 250, 270, 316, 502, 503, 513, 516, 517, 518, 569, 641, 663, 689, 694, 697, 713, 714, 715, 719, 720 Mule deer, xxxix, 311, 312, 313, 314, 469, 472, 676, 686 N Noxious weeds, 7, 481, 483, 496, 500, 514, 650 O Old growth, 218, 287, 288, 325, 661, 662 P Project design feature, xxi, xxv, xxvi, xxxiv, 8, 35, 41, 45, 79, 83, 84, 167, 191, 318, 327, 329, 484, 492, 498, 512, 514, 517, 518, 545, 562, 573, 574, 577, 579, 597, 601, 616, 630, 631 R Recreation, xxv, xxxix, 47, 63, 83, 341, 516, 567, 568, 570, 571, 572, 575, 578, 580, 585, 594, 602, 609, 613, 649, 650, 676, 717, 720 Riparian, xxxvii, 12, 51, 250, 254, 255, 310, 316, 317, 320, 354, 401, 402, 403, 415, 534, 540, 544, 550, 563, 700, 709 S Scenery, 603, 609, 613, 717 Sensitive species, 241, 475 Snag, xi, xxxv, xxxvi, 68, 215, 219, 221, 229, 231, 236, 244, 251, 258, 287, 299, 300, 317, 320, 345, 361, 660, 667, 703, 713, 715, 716 Soil, xxiii, xxviii, xxxvii, 49, 52, 81, 356, 478, 502, 504, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 514, 515, 519, 520, 524, 525, 530, 532, 649, 650, 661, 668, 672, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 685, 686, 687, 690, 696, 697, 700, 705, 719, 720, 722 T Threatened and Endangered, xiii, xv, 70, 72, 241, 246, 248, 261, 367 Transportation, ix, xxxviii, 48, 66, 162, 164, 166, 168, 169, 171, 504, 535, 552, 563, 621, 626, 651, 673, 680, 721 W Whitebark pine, xxii, 17, 18, 37, 80, 99, 119, 121, 141, 154, 157, 192, 253, 254, 322, 352, 353, 397, 475, 477, 478, 479, 481, 483, 484, 491, 492, 493, 661, 662, 681, 682, 683, 684, 685, 694, 697, 710, 711, 716  United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service April 2013  Forest Service Shield USDA LogoDraft Environmental Impact Statement Stonewall Vegetation Project Volume 2 – Appendices Lincoln Ranger District, Helena National Forest Lewis & Clark and Powell Counties, Montana     The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TTY). To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TTY). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Table of Contents Volume 2 – Appendices Appendix A – Public Involvement Summary................................................................................................1 Helena National Forest Scoping Summary ...............................................................................................2 Analysis Issues ..........................................................................................................................................5 Additional Public Concerns ......................................................................................................................7 Specific Alternatives Suggested for Consideration in Public Comments and Forest Service Response ..9 Summary of Public Comments and Forest Service Response ................................................................12 Appendix B – Proposed Treatment Descriptions and Silviculture Summary .............................................67 Treatment Type and Prescription Descriptions .......................................................................................68 Proposed Treatments by Group and Unit ................................................................................................70 Fuels Treatments .....................................................................................................................................76 Silviculture Summary .............................................................................................................................77 Appendix C – Cumulative Effects .............................................................................................................107 Stonewall Vegetation Project Cumulative Effects Activities ...............................................................108 Appendix D – Stonewall Roadless Area Characteristics Worksheet ........................................................131 List of Tables Table A- 1. Scoping contacts Stonewall Vegetation Project ______________________________________________ 2 Table A- 2. Summary of public comments and Forest Service responses ___________________________________ 12 Table B- 1. Alternative 2 proposed treatments by group and unit ________________________________________ 70 Table B- 2. Alternative 3 proposed treatments by group and unit ________________________________________ 72 Table B- 3. Treatment unit management area acreages _______________________________________________ 74 Table B- 4. Alternative 1 compliance with Forest Plan forestwide standards _______________________________ 77 Table B- 5. Alternative 1 compliance with management area standards __________________________________ 79 Table B- 6. Alternative 1 compliance with other Forest Service management direction _______________________ 82 Table B- 7. Alternative 2 compliance with Forest Plan forestwide standards _______________________________ 82 Table B- 8. Alternative 2 compliance with management area standards __________________________________ 84 Table B- 9. Alternative 2 compliance with Forest Service regeneration harvest direction _____________________ 87 Table B- 10. Alternative 3 compliance with Forest Plan forestwide standards ______________________________ 88 Table B- 11. Alternative 3 compliance with management area standards _________________________________ 89 Table B- 12. Alternative 3 compliance with Forest Service regeneration harvest direction ____________________ 92 Table C- 1. Number of fires in the Stonewall watersheds by decade and size class _________________________ 108 Table C- 2. Acres of past fire and fuels activities in the project area* ____________________________________ 109 Table C- 3. Past activities _______________________________________________________________________ 110 Table C- 4. Ongoing Activities 2010-present ________________________________________________________ 117 Table C- 5. Foreseeable future activities ___________________________________________________________ 120 Table C- 6. Acres of past harvest and fuels activities in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA ______________ 124 Table C- 7. Ongoing and reasonably foreseeable future actions in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA _____ 125 Table D- 1. Effects to roadless characteristics _______________________________________________________ 132 List of Figures Figure C- 1. Past, Ongoing and Foreseeable Projects within the Cumulative Effects Boundaries (wildfire location information not available, not mapped ___________________________________________________________ 123 Appendix A – Public Involvement Summary  Helena National Forest Scoping Summary June 7, 2011 The initial ‘scoping’ conducted in January of 2010 received 80 comments from our interested publics. Table A-1 lists the letter’s number (used as a reference later in this report) tied to names of the individuals, organizations, and agencies that provided comments from scoping for the Stonewall Vegetation Project, Helena National Forest. Table A- 1. Scoping contacts Stonewall Vegetation Project Letter # Name 1 Jean Public 2 Chris Castagne 3 Dick Artley 4 Steve Flynn, Sun Mountain Lumber 5 Michael Garrity, Alliance for the Wild Rockies and Sara Johnson, Native Ecosystem Council 6 Larry Hoffman, Lincoln County Weed Coordinator 7 Bob Bushnell 8 Chris Castagne 9 Richard Debick 10 Don Doyle 11 KD Feeback 12 Dale Gardner, Helena Trail Riders 13 Melvin and Charlette Hagan 14 Bill Hammer 15 Kelly Ingalls 16 Orrin Johnson 17 Richard Juntunen 18 Marc Kneedler 19 Marvin P. Love 20 S.J. Maras 21 Susan Murphy 22 James L. and Maida Paris 23 Harry Poett 24 Ellen Simpson, Mt Wood Products Association 25 Pauline Webb 26 Capital Trail Vehicle Association 27 Ann and Les Bramblett 28 Thomas Kindrick 29 Jim Palagi 30 Bob and Jan Braico 31 Daniel S. Comer 32 Duane Halverson 33 Steven Kloetzel Letter # Name 34 Joe Marino 35 Robert Petritz 36 Marc S. Ryckman 37 Nelson Wert 38 Jim Fortune 39 Julie Fortune 40 Albert Clark 41 Miles Partin 42 Phyllis Clark 43 Linda Pope and Bruce Baker 44 Robert Ruthemeyer 45 Richard Thieltges 46 Becky Thurman 47 Joe Baze 48 Jerry Burns 49 Charles Sherman 50 Jim Suek 51 Mrs. K Reeve 52 Ray Geist 53 Julie A. Dalsoglio, US Environmental Protection Agency, Region 8 54 Diana Reichenberg 55 Lu Gardella 56 Dick Noel 57 Sharon Paul 58 Gary Lee Petersen 59 Emily Rundell 60 Ellen Mulcare 61 Don Pettit Sunny Slope 62 Jeanette Nordahl 63 Robert Berry 64 Heidi Bray 65 Kim Gray 66 Sarah Johnson, Native Ecosystem Council - Michael Garrity, Alliance for the Wild Rockies 67 Gary E. Sutton Sr. 68 DeWayne Williams 69 Gregg Brittain 70 Mr. and Mrs. Mark Aquino 71 Lincoln Restoration Committee 72 Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks 73 Paul N. Spengler, TRICO 74 Stan Frazier, Helena Hunters and Anglers 75 Janey Holm Letter # Name 76 Bill Koehnke 77 Teresa Martinez, Continental Divide Trail Alliance 78 Wayne and Rebecca Shong, B&W Ranch 79 Andrea Stinson 80 Jerry and Ruth Massee The scoping document listed preliminary issues considered during development of the proposed action: 1. Restoration of vegetation communities 2. Grizzly bear habitat 3. Lynx habitat 4. Wildfire hazard, risk, and fuels 5. Habitats including ponderosa pine, western larch and aspen The scoping document noted proposed actions are anticipated to benefit the project area in the following ways: · Restore ponderosa pine, dry Douglas-fir, and western larch sites to a more natural fire regime condition · Maintain vigor and restore aspen groves · Enhance wildlife habitat conditions Summary of Public Scoping Comments Table A- 2 displays the summary of public comments received during scoping identified by letter number (see table A- 1), and then by comment number from within each letter. Table A- 2 also includes each comment’s main topic, and the Forest Service response to the comment as well as identification of significant issues. The comments from public scoping identify those issues that may have a significant cause-effect relationship with the proposal, and determine the scope of issues addressed in specialists’ analyses. The evaluation of these issues may also be the ‘driver’ or foundation of developing additional alternatives. This discussion of issues is based on the approach in the April 1, 2011 FSH 1909.15 (12.41). Of the 80 scoping responses received, 30 were in support of the proposed project activities. The majority of responses suggested information to include in the analysis documents, identified language to clarify, or listed elements pertaining to a specific resource to include in the effects analyses. The final resource specialists’ reports would include this information as well as the analysis of the project effects on the various resources. The resource specialists’ reports would be filed in the project record and incorporated by reference and summarized in Chapter 3 – Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences of the EIS. Eight responses expressed concerns or suggestions regarding travel management of area roads and motorized winter recreation opportunities. The Stonewall Vegetation Project is not a travel planning project and does not propose to change the permanent road system in the project area. Travel management of existing routes is being addressed in the ongoing analyses “Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel Plan” and the “Blackfoot Travel Plan (Non-Winter)”. A few responses included items of literature to be considered, some noted as opposing science information. As part of the analysis for this project, resource specialists will review and consider relevant scientific literature, including submitted articles. The literature review would be included and filed in the project record. Comments/Issues that Warrant the Development of Additional Alternatives (Significant Issue): Table A- 2 includes a full listing of comments received during scoping, by letter and comment number (denoted by L#, c#). The interdisciplinary team reviewed the comments received during scoping and identified one significant issue theme (see below). We also reviewed the proposed activities and it was determined appropriate to develop an alternative to address the following significant issue: Wildlife Habitat: Proposed actions may impact habitat for: threatened, endangered and sensitive species and designated critical habitat; management indicator species (MIS); and big game hiding cover, thermal cover, and security cover. The public also commented on habitat connectivity. The public is also concerned about viability of old-growth and snag-dependent species. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L5, c22; L66, c2, 3, 5, 6, 27, 28, 38; L74, c74 Indicators: · Total and open-road density during and after activities within the project area relevant to grizzly bear habitat and elk habitat · Acres of elk hiding cover, thermal cover, and security habitat within the project area and elk herd units · Acres of lynx habitat or other species that utilize multi-storied forest habitat within the project area · Maintaining or providing habitat connectivity · Acres by type of treatment by alternative versus no treatment · Acres of old growth affected and effects to snag dependent species · Acres of suitable MIS and sensitive species habitat impacted Analysis Issues In addition to the significant issue identified above, we would analyze the effects of the proposed action and alternatives based on the following issues to display differences between alternatives: Weed Spread/Infestation: Proposed actions may disturb landscapes allowing existing weed populations to expand or allowing additional species to become established. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L5, c2, 3, 4, 5, 29; L33, c33; L48, c17; L62, c1; L71, c10 Indicators: · Acres by type of treatment by alternative versus no treatment · Acres of ground disturbance · Costs of weed treatment by alternative Use of roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal and use of existing roads: Comments indicated concern for the effects to soil, water quality, fisheries, and wildlife habitat from roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal, road reconstruction, and use of existing roads. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L3, c12; L66, c34, 35, 36; L71, c9 Indicators: · Miles of roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal · Miles of roads that would be built then obliterated immediately following timber removal and reconstruction of existing roads within the INFISH buffers · Number of new stream crossings · Miles and location of haul routes Amount of Prescribed Fire: Concern that the Forest Service has limited experience implementing prescribed fire in mixed-severity fire regimes. Concern with the amount of acres proposed for prescribed burning; proximity to private land and timing of burns introduce risk to private lands (e.g., loss of homes, buildings, smoke effects to air quality). Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L1, c3; L57, c1; L75, c4; L79, c1; and public meetings Indicators: · Acres of prescribed fire immediately adjacent to private land and the qualitative values of risk and potential consequences · Acres of prescribed fire by fire regime within the project area · Acres and type of pretreatment prior to use of prescribed fire · Estimated emissions from burning Other Issues The following lists other issues considered in the analysis; however, they did not rise to the level of significant issues. The proposed action is not expected to have significant impacts on these issues. The effects are limited in intensity and context. For some of these issues, potential impacts are limited through project design. Analysis of potential effects related to these issues would be addressed in Chapter 3; however, analysis may not be as in-depth as for the significant issue. The Forest Service response follows each issue. Some members of the public feel use of timber harvest, including regeneration harvest, to achieve restoration goals is a contradiction. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L1, c2; L3, c4, c7; and public meetings Timber harvest and prescribed burning are means to diversify areas to achieve broader restoration goals across the landscape. To promote a resilient forest a combination of treatments to restore the broader landscape were considered. The proposed action includes regeneration harvests for some areas where the majority of the existing overstory trees have been killed by bark beetles. Due to the amount of mortality caused by insects and/or diseases across the Stonewall Vegetation Project area, restoration opportunities exist to reforest lands for the following purposes: . Establishment of tree species most able to cope with disturbance . Promote a diverse species mix as well as genetic diversity . Promote desired species distribution across the Stonewall Vegetation Project area . Enhance regeneration of forested lands to create diverse structures across the Stonewall Vegetation Project area . Manage for species persistence within/across the Stonewall Vegetation Project area . Maintain adequate seed bank of desired species Resource effects would be noted in Chapter 3 of the DEIS, e.g., wildlife habitat elements that may be affected and how the proposed actions may restore those habitat elements. The proposed actions may have short-term adverse impacts with long-term benefits for some resources. Merchantability and Economic Feasibility of Harvest - trees being dead too long, agency action/response too slow. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L4, c4; L33, c3; L35, c1 Insect-caused mortality effects are greater than anticipated when the project started. Fuels reduction in wildland urban interface (WUI) and restoration goals throughout the broader landscape have benefits that would be realized through the proposed actions. In the fall of 2010, timber industry representatives made an on-site field review of forested areas on the Lincoln Ranger District experiencing insect-caused mortality. Industry representatives indicated timber merchantability is still present and anticipated to be present at the time of contract award (A.Kamps, personal communication). Proposed treatments would increase sediment and adversely affect cutthroat trout habitat. Scoping letters and comments pertaining to this issue: L5, c 23, 26, 27, 28, 30; L16, c1 Effects to fisheries would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The proposed action would include the best management practices (BMPs) to ensure proper drainage and reduce potential increases to sediment from proposed activities. The INFISH management direction would be incorporated to reduce potential effects to cutthroat trout habitat. A literature review and local Forest monitoring of BMP effectiveness would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Additional Public Concerns The following is a summary list of additional public concerns considered in the analysis of issues; however, they did not rise to the level of significant issues. The proposed action is not expected to have significant impacts on these issues. The effects are limited in intensity and context. For some of these issues, potential impacts are limited through project design. Analysis of potential effects related to these issues would be addressed in chapter 3; however, analysis may not be as in-depth as for the significant issue. These other issues were expressed as concerns. Individual responses to comments are located in table A- 2. There are concerns that: · Ground disturbance and prescribed fire in the Historic Lincoln Townsite could result in loss of the historical integrity of this site · Dust from increased road use could temporarily reduce sight-distance and cause safety concerns on native and aggregate surfaced roads used for timber hauling · Removal of commercial-sized timber and thinning treatments to reduce hazardous fuel conditions may increase fine fuels on the ground that exacerbates fire behavior and increases fire risk · To ensure project effects are appropriately disclosed, the analysis needs to use the best science available, disclose ecological liabilities from past actions, incorporate past monitoring information, and address conflicting science literature brought forward by the public during scoping · Ground disturbance from timber removal and prescribed fire may impact threatened, endangered, rare and sensitive plant, animal and fish species, or their viability within the project area · Proposed timber removal and prescribed burn activities could exacerbate climate change due to the loss of carbon storage · Control lines used for prescribed burning in the inventoried roadless areas may increase unauthorized motorized use into new areas, which could affect the inventoried roadless character · Evaluate if jobs would be available due to the proposed actions · The proposed use of fire is going to require a major educational effort before it is acceptable to many of the residents · Proposed activities should allow for multiple uses, and timing may impact recreational users (road and trail users, campers, berry picking), areas should be open for firewood gathering prior to burning · Concern that proposed treatments may have a visual impact, especially along property lines and in-holdings · Proposed timber removal may change densely vegetated areas that currently prevent livestock movement and change grazing patterns in the project area Some concerns raised for the Stonewall Vegetation Project were outside the scope of the proposed action, or decision to be made, or were already decided by law, regulation, Forest Plan, or other higher level decision. Individual responses to comments are located in table A- 2. These items included: · Management of private lands including building locations and vegetation management, Insurance of private structures · Terminology, wording and phrasing used in scoping document · Scope of the Purpose and Need · Designating the contracting process (stewardship and size of commercial harvest sales) for potential implementation of project activities · Developing a detailed long-term program for maintaining the safer conditions, including how areas would be treated in the future following proposed treatments, or how areas not needing treatment now would be treated as the need arises · Travel management concerns regarding the existing National Forest System roads being analyzed under the Blackfoot –North Divide Winter Travel Plan and Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter). · Items related to Forest Plan programmatic direction (e.g. long-term fire management plans, roadless area evaluations) · Need to update allotment management plans · Allocation of funding · Staffing of controlled burns; this would be addressed through the site-specific burn plan · Explore monitoring partnerships Specific Alternatives Suggested for Consideration in Public Comments and Forest Service Response Maximize timber harvest and fuels reduction activities, particularly in the WUI. (L1, c2) The WUI was identified during development of the “Tri-County Regional Community Wildfire Protection Plan” (2005). The proposed action was designed to address fuels concerns on National Forest System lands adjacent to private lands. Treatments on private lands are outside the scope of our proposed action, but past, current and planned treatments would be considered in the individual specialist’s cumulative effects reports, where applicable. We reviewed the project area to identify potential vegetative treatments based on site conditions. This alternative would be similar to the proposed action, and would not be analyzed in detail. The roadless areas within the project area were created by the Rare 2 process identifying possible additions to the wilderness system. Management should reflect this quality. In addition, burning whitebark pine seedling and sapling areas, present in the roadless areas, could reduce white bark pine habitat, an important food source for grizzly bears. Consider an alternative that does not include prescribed burning in the roadless areas, but allows for the use of natural prescribed fire without mechanical treatments, including cutting trees and brush, in the roadless areas. (L5 c7; L48 c8) The large prescribed burn units in the roadless areas are proposed to improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape making it more diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. In particular, the burns in the roadless areas would be designed to encourage whitebark pine regeneration in proximity to existing mature whitebark pine trees. Portions of some units are lacking adequate ground fuels to carry fire across the desired burn unit locations. Without the prep work, burn prescriptions could not be implemented and fire lines could not be prepared. For any action alternative, design features could be incorporated to exclude large concentrations of whitebark pine regeneration from burning, and protect mature whitebark trees that may provide seed sources. The no action alternative does not include slash treatments or prescribed burning in the roadless area and would address this issue. This alternative would not address the purpose and need to improve the mix of vegetation composition and structure, or modify fire behavior to create conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process across the roadless area portions of the landscape. This alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Burning activities proposed may char merchantable timber and decrease its value in areas managed for timber products. Consider an alternative that does not include prescribed burning in areas managed for timber products. Prescribed fire units in management areas T1-5 include all of units 2 and 78, and portions of units 77, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86 and 87. (L79, c2, c3) The Forest Plan identifies prescribed burning as an appropriate tool for vegetation and fuels management (pages II/33 – 34), and the Forest Fire Management Plan direction in place at the time of implementation would be followed. The no-action alternative would include no controlled burning in areas managed for timber products. This alternative would not address the purpose and need to modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Therefore, this alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Proposed actions may disturb landscapes allowing existing weed populations to expand or allowing additional species to become established. Consider an alternative that eliminates units that have noxious weeds present on roads within units from fire management proposals. (L5 c2) The Forest Weeds FEIS (USDA Forest Service 2006) identified most of the roads in the project area for weed monitoring and treatment due to the presence of weeds. Appropriate preventive measures would be incorporated in the project design features including post treatment spraying of landings in year 1 after mechanical treatment, and monitoring at years 3 and 5, with retreatment if needed. The no action alternative addresses this suggestion. Eliminating units with noxious weeds would eliminate fire management treatments in all units in the WUI accessed by existing roads. Not treating areas within the WUI would not enhance community protection. This alternative would not meet the purpose and need for the project of modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Eliminating the units within the WUI would not meet the purpose and need for the project of modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection. In addition, the appropriate project design and mitigation of relevant best management practices would be applied to any developed action alternative. Therefore, developing an alternative that eliminates units that have noxious weeds present on the roads within them from fire management proposals is not necessary. This alternative would not be considered in detail. Public comments noted the continued loss of motorized recreational opportunities as a primary concern. A recommendation was made to consider a Pro-Recreation Alternative that would address recreation opportunities and include the following characteristics (L26 c1, 2, 4): 1. Dispersed camping within 300 feet of all existing routes 2. Use of seasonal closures, where required, to protect the environment and wildlife with the intention of keeping routes open for the summer recreation season 3. All of the existing routes are needed as OHV routes due to the cumulative effects of all other closures 4. Additional OHV routes are needed to address the growing popularity of OHV recreation and the greater needs of the public for access and motorized recreation  Effects to recreation resources would be addressed in analysis and project design features would be included to minimize potential impacts to recreation opportunities within the project area. Travel management is being evaluated in the current Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter) and the appropriate project design and mitigation of the relevant best management practices would be applied to any developed action alternative. Developing a pro-recreation alternative with additional OHV routes was considered, but this would not address the purpose and need identified for this project for fuels reduction in the WUI or restoration across the landscape. Therefore, this alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. Consider a watershed or ecosystem restoration alternative or incorporate restoration elements in the alternatives considered. (L53 c6, 10, 11) The Stone Dry Watershed Assessment (2009) was considered when developing the proposed action. The purpose and need includes a restoration element. The proposed action was designed to incorporate treatments that move the project area towards a more resilient forest to address restoration of vegetative composition and structural diversity elements. Effects to vegetation and watershed resources would be discussed in chapter 3 of the EIS. Watershed restoration and reducing sedimentation is often focused on changes to roads, and includes fixing drainage structures, road design or decommissioning roads. Changes to existing road alignments and decommissioning existing roads are being evaluated in the current analysis for the Blackfoot Travel Management Plan (Non-Winter) and therefore not being considered in this proposal. Since many of the watershed elements of concern are being evaluated in the current Blackfoot Travel Plan (Non-Winter), and the appropriate project design and mitigation of relevant best management practices would be applied to any developed action alternative, a true or purer watershed restoration type alternative is not necessary; therefore, this type of alternative will not be considered in detail.  Summary of Public Comments and Forest Service Response Nonsignificant issues are categorized as those: (1) outside the scope of the proposed action, or decision to be made; (2) already decided by law, regulation, Forest Plan, or other higher-level decision; (3) comments pertaining to disclosing the effects to various resources, which are addressed by the specialists’ analyses and the discussions in the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS); or (4) comments in support of the project. Table A- 2. Summary of public comments and Forest Service responses Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 1 Private land 1. Stop allowing home owners to build near the forest. Simply zone out those areas as home sites. let home owners who insist on building there know that there is always a possibility of fire - and try to change their minds and you can do that This analysis pertains to the management of National Forest System lands. Management of private lands is outside the scope of this analysis and beyond the purpose & need of this analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 1 Restoration  2. I am in favor of letting the survivor trees that are growing there continue to grow. They seem to be taking advantage of what grows there and they should be left alone. What used to grow there grows there no longer and spending huge sums of tax dollars for that purpose is a waste. The no action alternative addresses leaving survivor trees alone. Proposed treatment prescriptions in the Stonewall vegetation project include either thinning treatments where many trees that have survived the recent bark beetle epidemic would be retained or regeneration treatments where some live trees would be retained for shelter and as a seed source.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 1 Prescribed Burning Air Quality 3. It isn’t the “smoke” which you can see easily, but it is the fine particulate matter which needs a microscope to [s]ee it gets into American citizens bodies and kills and injures them. You are causing health problems when you burn. Stop harming fellow Americans now. Air quality impacts, including smoke from proposed burn activities, would be analyzed and a summary of the effects anticipated under all alternatives would be included in the DEIS. The no action alternative addresses no prescribed or pile burning. The Montana/Idaho Airshed Group coordinates burning on all forest and range lands. They analyze information for proposed burns, meteorology and air quality and decide if restrictions to burning are needed. The airshed group is comprised of members of regulatory health agencies and those that conduct extensive prescribed burning. Burning would be dependent upon site conditions and weather conditions, and is generally anticipated for fall of the year. Notice of the Alternative 3 proposes a reduced level of prescribed burning, and therefore reduces total impacts. The no-action alternative would not include prescribed burning. Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) pile and prescribed burning timeframes, or burn windows, would be shared with the public through paper notices and announcements on the Forest website. Local notices would be attempted to ensure people are aware of the burning activities. Smoke sensitive receptors would be identified and modeling outputs will show impacts to these areas. Smoke management techniques such as phase burning and the time of year burns are ignited are designed to reduce smoke impacts. 2 Support for the Project 1. I do believe with projects like this one, our outcome would be far more positive than doing nothing. Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 3 Opposing Science 1. To restrain you from ignoring the opposing science attached to this letter, I will educate you on 5 recent court cases dealing with opposing science. I expect you to comply with the precedence set by these cases. As you can see from reading the judge’s opinions in the 5 court cases below, you must respond to each scientific statement individually. In doing so you have several choices: 1) Tell the public that the opposing science statement does not apply to your project and explain why. 2) Tell the public that the science statement is not true and explain why. 3) Tell the public that the science statement is true and applies to your project; however you choose to ignore it as you plan your project. If this is the case, you MUST explain why. 4) Tell the public that the scientist(s) making statements that oppose your project are not recognized by the USFS as real scientists. If this is the case, you MUST provide the reader with your reasons. I will then email your reasons to the scientist. Literature submitted in response to scoping would be reviewed and considered by the interdisciplinary team, with other relevant literature for this analysis. The literature review would be available in the project record. The literature review would discuss why literature is relevant or not relevant to the project.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 5) Tell the public that the science statements have not been peer reviewed. If this is done, the USFS line-officer must omit all references used to support the project that are not peer reviewed. I highly recommend that you read these 5 opinions in their entirety. The links are included after a key quote from the judge’s opinion. League of Wilderness Defenders et al. v. Elaine Marquis-Brong. In the United States District Court for the District of Oregon, Judge Ancer L. Haggerty,Civil No. 02-75-HA. April 18, 2003, League of Wilderness Defenders et al. v. United States Forest Service. In the United States District Court for the District of Oregon, Judge Ancer L.Haggerty, Civil No. 04-488-HA. November 19, 2004, and Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project et.al v. Blackwood, 161 F.3d 1208, 1211 (9th Cir.1998). Betty B. Fletcher, circuit Judge. Appeal from the United States District Court for the District of Oregon Ann Aiken, District Judge, Presiding, this direction is clear. Center for Biological Diversity v. U.S. Forest Service, 349 F.3d 1157 (9th Cir. 2003). Donald C. Pogue, circuit court Judge. Appeal from the United States District Court for the District of Arizona, Robert C. Broomfield District Judge Presiding. Friends of the Clearwater et al. v. D. Robert Lohn et al., In the United States District Court for the District of Idaho, Judge Edward J. Lodge, CV04-384-C-EJL, March 31, 2005. 3 Scoping letter is vague 2. Nowhere does your scoping document tell the public the total acres that would be logged and the total acres that would be burned all in one place. On page 4 the public must struggle with 8 different groups to The proposed action descriptions would be reviewed and revised, where needed, to better display the proposed harvest and broadcast prescribed burn information. These figures would be clearly displayed in chapter 2 under  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) determine what will really occur in each group in the treatment descriptions. Your proposed action for the timber sale should be obvious to the public! alternatives comparison section of the DEIS. 3 Fire behavior 3. To any thinking person, the notion of removing commercial-sized timber to reduce the risk of wildfire is ridiculous. It is the fine fuel that carries a fire. Even more importantly, the weather determines the size, intensity, flame height and rate of spread of a wildfire. In your FEIS please include the science showing that fuels is more important in determining fire behavior than weather. See science attachment # 3. Effects to fire/fuels would be analyzed in the fire/fuels report and would be summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Fire models used to analyze potential changes to anticipated fire behavior (e.g., flame length) would be discussed in the DEIS. Existing fire models consider various factors including existing and activity created fuels and the larger dead trees that are anticipated to fall over time. Opening the forest canopy can reduce crown fire potential which would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The no-action alternative and the untreated areas in any action alternative would display the effect of leaving existing trees and the potential crown fire anticipated. Both fuels and weather contribute to fire behavior  Nonsignificant issue (3) 3 Insects 4. Insect activity in a forest is an indicator of a properly functioning forest. The survival of some species of birds is dependent on forest insects. Let Nature play out her cycles that have occurred for thousands of years. This includes insects! The project area contains areas of mortality that are not proposed for treatment The effects to various bird species including management indicator pileated and hairy woodpeckers along with migratory birds would be analyzed. Untreated areas in the project area would continue to provide habitat for species associated with insect activity. The activities of insects are a natural process in western forests, and the scale and frequency of insect activity can be an indicator of a properly functioning forest. However, the recent bark beetle epidemic in the western United States is of a magnitude never before recorded, and can be considered an indicator of unhealthy forest conditions created by decades of fire exclusion that resulted in very large expanses of forest becoming high risk at the same time, as stated in the project scoping letter. This subject would be discussed in the  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Vegetation section, in chapter 3 of the DEIS. 3 Wildland Urban Interface 5. Community protection,” give me a break. You are proposing to log 4 miles from the town of Lincoln and you actually think it will reduce the risk of fire damage to homes in and around the city. At the top of page 1 of your scoping document you actually say: “The project encompasses approximately 8,640 acres adjacent to the community of Lincoln.” How do you determine that something 4 miles away from a community is adjacent to the community? Although the town of Lincoln is 4 miles from the project area, there are subdivisions with private residences located adjacent to the forest boundary and identified in the Tri-County Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) (2005) as wildland urban interface. The Tri County CWPP identifies subdivisions as “Very High to High Risk” and stands close to the forest boundary are proposed for harvest treatments to reduce potential for crown fire spread into adjacent areas.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 3 Wording of the document 6. Stop using Meaningless Euphemisms to Describe your Project Goals. When you say you will treat the forest, you tell the public nothing! Other ambiguous, meaningless and deceptive terms used so often used by USFS line officers are: . Enhance According to Webster, enhance is a verb meaning “to raise to a higher degree; intensify; magnify.” . Mechanical treatment Why is the USFS so frightened of using the word logging? Logging applies to all commercial extraction of trees . . . including “thinning.” . Restoration Once again, sugar-coated words. Webster defines restoration as “a return of something to a former, original, normal, or unimpaired condition.” Clearly, USFS logging and road construction is the antithesis of restoration. . Rehabilitate Once again, sugar-coated words. Webster defines rehabilitate as “to restore to a condition of good health, ability to work, or the like.” Clearly, USFS logging and road construction is the antithesis of rehabilitation. Terms would be defined in a glossary as needed and ‘plain’ language would be used where appropriate.  Nonsignificant issue (1) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) I strongly suggest that you purge your NEPA document of all words shown above in bold type and tell the public what you really intend to do! 3 Wording of the document 7. How does one enhance a tree species? Enhance what? The USFS is so accustomed to using euphemistic words that are far removed from the issue at hand. What habitats do you want to enhance . . . the tree species habitat or the wildlife habitat that exists in aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine? The meaning of the term enhance according to Webster is: “to raise to a higher degree; intensify; magnify.” I suggest you read science attachment #1 again and tell me about how logging enhances anything other than a timber corporation’s bottom line. Enhancing a tree species would be taking actions to increase the presence of that species within the project area. Effects to tree species would be analyzed in the silviculture report and discussed in the Vegetation section in chapter 3 of the DEIS. See also response to letter 3, comment 1 pertaining to submitted literature.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 3 Purpose and Need 8. Your Proposed P&N Violates the CEQ Regulations for Implementing NEPA. You have identified 5 reasons for the Stonewall Deuce Fuels Reduction and Vegetation Management Project. You do not indicate which of the 5 is the driving issue for the sale. This means that 4 of your claimed reasons for proposing the project are not reasons for proposing the project, but claimed benefits of the project. Mixing up project benefits with the “underlying purpose and need” violates the CEQ regulations. In summary, the ‘underlying’ purpose for this proposal is to: have a desired mix of vegetation composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects (FP Goal 4 p. II/1; objective for WL and fish p. II/4); that retains forest stands that allow fire as a natural process (FP Goals 4 & 14 pp. II/1-2) without risk of catastrophic events; maintaining desired amounts of aspen, Western Larch, & PP (FP Goal 4 p. II/1) ; while providing forest products including timber (FP Goals 11, 12 & 16 pp. II1-2); and integrating with socioeconomic considerations (FP Goals 9, 1, 16 & 12 pp. II/1-2; Objective for visual and Roadless p. II/3). The purpose and need developed for the project was designed to address the difference  Nonsignificant issue (1) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) between the existing conditions observed in the Stone Dry Watershed Analysis completed in 2009, and the desired conditions identified in the Forest Plan, while striving towards the goals and objectives identified in the Forest Plan (pp. II/1-6; III/5-7; III/30-52). 3 The Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 9. On January 10, 2001, President Clinton signed E.O. 13186, which described the responsibilities of federal agencies to protect migratory birds. One of the requirements of E.O. 13186 is that ``Each Federal agency taking actions that have, or are likely to have, a measurable negative effect on migratory bird populations is directed to develop and implement a Memorandum of Understanding with the Fish and Wildlife Service that shall promote the conservation of migratory bird populations.'' Clearly your proposal to underburn and pile brush (in which many species of wild birds nest) will result in a take of migratory birds in your project area. Without an MOU from the USFWL approving your destruction of nesting habit, you will clearly violate this law. Consultation with the USFWS would be completed prior to a decision on this project. This project would follow the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with USFWS (FS Agreement # 08-MU-1113-2400-264). In particular the analysis and project design features would address item 3 from the MOU, noted here: “Within the NEPA process, evaluate the effects of agency actions on migratory birds, focusing first on species of management concern along with their priority habitats and key risk factors. To the extent practicable: a. Evaluate and balance long-term benefits of projects against any short- or long-term adverse effects when analyzing, disclosing, and mitigating the effects of actions. b. Pursue opportunities to restore or enhance the composition, structure, and juxtaposition of migratory bird habitats in the project area. c. Consider approaches, to the extent practicable, for identifying and minimizing take that is incidental to otherwise lawful activities, including such approaches as: 1. altering the season of activities to minimize disturbances during the breeding season; 2. retaining snags for nesting structures where snags are underrepresented; 3. retaining the integrity of breeding sites, especially those with long histories of use and; 4. giving due consideration to key wintering areas, migration routes, and stopovers.” A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 3 Lodgepole 10. Your Wishes to Eradicate Lodgepole Pine Clarification of the proposed actions.  Nonsignificant Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Pine Treatments from your District are Unwarranted At the bottom of page 2 you lament the fact that the insect levels in your LPP are infecting the Ponderosa Pine. Why do you not understand that insect attacks on mature LPP (80+ years) is part of the natural cycle of this tree species. Given that LPP has serotinous cones, insect attacks and subsequent fire is the natural mechanism for LPP regeneration. Stands of LPP contain key habitat for a variety of birds and mammals. LPP is a native species in your area. No reasonable management scheme will ever keep insects from invading LPP. I strongly suggest that you stop interfering with Mother Nature motivated by greedy human needs. The Forest Plan does not include direction to eradicate lodgepole pine. The Stonewall Vegetation Project scoping letter recognized that fire suppression-an unnatural undertaking-has led to a loss in open forest conditions containing ponderosa pine. The proposed action was designed to address the purpose and need to restore ponderosa pine habitats that have been lost and create conditions that allow for the establishment of fire as a natural process, and to develop a mix of vegetation composition and structure that is resilient to wildfire and insects. issue (2,3) 3 Wording in Document 11. Stop using Meaningless Euphemisms to Describe your Proposed Actions Same as letter 3, comment 6, but adds the word “activities” Terms would be defined in a glossary as needed and ‘plain’ language would be used where appropriate. See response to letter 3, comment 6 regarding language.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 3 Road Construction 12. The USFS has gone to great lengths to convince the public that the construction of temporary roads and obliterating system roads is ecosystem-benign. Of course this is a lie. See below for the reasons that temp roads have more impacts to the aquatic resources than system roads: 1) The earth must be handled twice when constructing and obliterating temp roads. 2) Temp roads are "designed" by a logger on a cat with no knowledge of hydrology and the logger is under pressure to work quickly. 3) Most temp roads are outsloped, thus, the water on the road drains off the road at random places. 4) Temp roads have no surfacing to slow the water velocity. High water velocity picks up Obliteration of National Forest System roads is not proposed. Effects of roads built then obliterated immediately following timber removal would be analyzed for all affected resources. Proper design features using best management practices would be applied minimizing soil displacement and sediment delivery concerns. See also response to letter 3, comment 1 regarding the literature considered.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) more sediment particles. 5) Temp roads have no ditch. Ditches adjacent to system roads control the water until the road designer calls for an appropriate outlet culvert location. 6) Sediment-laden water leaves the temp road at random locations…often in the streams. Please read “Temporary Roads are Like Low Fat Ice Cream” by George Wuerthner , 3-17-09. The link to this article is at: http://www.newwest.net/topic/article/temporary_roads_are_like_low_fat_ice_cream/C564/L564/ 3 Collaboration 13. Taking whatever actions the local collaborative group wants is not consistent with the requirement to “properly accommodate local participation.” The USFS specialists have the natural resource knowledge and expertise. If the lay members of a local collaborative group propose that the USFS take action that is either illegal, harms the environment or does not maximize the protection of public health or safety, the USFS should educate the public. Best science must drive the programs, projects, and activities to protect public health and safety. If a local collaborative group proposes that the USFS take action that is contrary to best science, the USFS should say no. See: http://ceq.hss.doe.gov/nepa/regs/Executive_Order_13352.htm During project development, the working group recommendations were reviewed by the Forest Service. The Forest Service modified the group’s recommendations and developed additional treatments that we incorporated into the project proposed actions to meet the purpose and need identified for the Stonewall project while following Forest Plan direction. Chapter 1 of the DEIS would explain the process for development of this project proposal. Relevant literature has been considered in the analysis. See response to letter 3, comment 1 regarding the literature considered.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 4 Support for the Project 1. I support all aspects of the proposed action Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 4 WUI 2. Maximize the salvage of infested LPP and fuel reduction treatments on acres located within the Wildland Urban Interface. During development of the proposed action, we reviewed all stands for appropriate treatments, and while not all WUI acres are proposed for treatment, they were evaluated. Some were not included to ensure consistency  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) with Forest Plan direction, or to minimize effects to resource areas while meeting Forest Plan direction. The purpose and need for this project includes:”Modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape.” and “Utilize economic value of trees with economic removal.” 4 Use HFRA to save time. Do not let timber deteriorate 3. Utilize the Healthy Forests Restoration Act to develop the NEP A on this project. This is supported by the Purpose and Need statement and the fact that much of the project is within the WUI. In salvaging high risk and infested LPP and thinning mixed and DF stands, there is very little difference in the on-the-ground treatments for "Restoration" or "Fuel Reduction" activity. 4. It is also very important that this proposal moves forward in a timely manner. The value of the timber that makes this project feasible is deteriorating and the longer the analysis takes, the less feasible it becomes. The HFRA requires analysis of the proposed action and the no alternative action. Not having to develop a range of alternatives will save valuable time. The Healthy Forests Restoration Act (HFRA) process was considered for this analysis. The Forest Service is aware of the need to move this project along in a timely manner. We are evaluating product value and an economic analysis is provided in chapter 3 of the DEIS.   Nonsignificant issue (1, 3) 4 Collaboration Utilize Stewardship Contracting as the primary method for accomplishing the identified projects. Stewardship contracting may be considered during implementation; however, this analysis does not specify implementation methods.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 4 Request to be kept informed Please keep me informed as the proposal is developed. Commenter would be maintained on the project mailing list.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 5 General Description of the Project 1. The Forest Service must complete a full environmental impact statement (EIS) for this Project because the scope of the Project will likely have a significant individual and cumulative impact on the environment. Following the list of necessary elements, Alliance has also included a general narrative discussion on possible impacts of the Project, The analysis for this project is an EIS. See response to letter 3, comment 1 regarding the literature considered. The literature review completed for this project would be available in the project record.  Nonsignificant issue (1) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) with accompanying citations to the relevant scientific literature. These references should be disclosed and discussed in the EIS for the Project. See Letter # 5 for list 5 Weeds 2. Please provide an alternative that eliminates units that have noxious weeds present on roads within units from fire management proposals. Please address the ecological, social and ascetic impact of current noxious weed infestations within the project area. Include an analysis of the impact of the actions proposed by this project on the long and short term spread of current and new noxious weed infestations. What treatment methods would be used to address growing noxious weed problems? What noxious weeds are currently and historically found within the project area? Please include a map of current noxious weed infestations which includes knapweed, Saint Johnswort, cheat grass, bull thistle, Canada thistle, hawkweed, hound’s-tongue, oxeye daisy and all other Category 1, Category 2 and Category 3 weeds classified as noxious in the MONTANA COUNTY NOXIOUS WEED LIST. 3. Are yellow and orange hawkweeds present within the project area? Please address the cumulative, direct and indirect effects of the proposed project on weed introduction, spread and persistence that includes how weed infestations have been and would be influenced by the following management actions: road construction including new permanent and temporary roads, and skid trails proposed within this project; opening and decommissioning of roads represented on forest service maps; ground disturbance and traffic on forest service template roads, mining access routes, and private roads; removal of trees through commercial and pre-The majority of the large prescribed fire units are in the roadless area where roads are lacking. An alternative that eliminated units with noxious weeds present on roads from fire management proposals was considered. Eliminating units with noxious weeds would eliminate fire management treatments in all units in the WUI accessed by existing roads. Not treating areas within the WUI would not enhance community protection. This alternative would not meet the purpose and need for the project of modifying fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. The no action alternative addresses eliminating units that have noxious weeds present on roads. Noxious weeds, including known occurrences and potential for spread would be analyzed in the noxious weed report and discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Preventive measures would be incorporated in the project design features including post treatment spraying of landings in year 1 after mechanical treatment, and monitoring at years 3 and 5, with retreatment if needed. The Forest has an active weed treatment program that will continue annual treatment of the known noxious weed infestations along roadways within the analysis area. Management requirements from the Forest Noxious Weed Treatment decision would be incorporated into any action alternative (USDA Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) commercial logging and understory thinning; and prescribed burns. What open, gated, and decommissioned Forest Service roads within the project area proposed as haul routes have existent noxious weed populations and what methods would be used to assure that noxious weeds are not spread into the proposed action units? 4. What commitment to a long-term, consistent strategy of application is being proposed for each weed infested area within the proposed action area? What long term monitoring of weed populations is proposed? What native plant restoration activities would be implemented in areas disturbed by the actions proposed in this project? Will disturbed areas including road corridors, skid trails, and burn units be planted or reseeded with native plant species? 5. Which units within the project area currently have no noxious weed populations within their boundaries? What minimum standards are in the Helena National Forest Plan to address noxious weed infestations? Please include an alternative in the DEIS that includes land management standards that will prevent new weed infestations by addressing the causes of weed infestation. The failure to include preventive standards violates NFMA because the Forest Service is not ensuring the protection of soils and native plant communities. Additionally, the omission of an EIS alternative that includes preventive measures would violate NEPA because the Forest Service would fail to consider a reasonable alternative. 29. Please disclose how the productivity of the land been affected in the project area and forestwide due to noxious weed infestations, and how that situation is expected to change in the coming years and decades. Forest Service 2006). Winter harvest, where used, could limit spread of weeds and reduce other impacts. See also response to letter 5, comment 6 for effects to rare or sensitive plant species. See the vegetation section in Chapter 3 of the DEIS regarding native forest species discussions. Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 5 Rare Plants 6. What threatened, endangered, rare and sensitive plant species and habitat are located within the proposed project area? What standards would be used to protect threatened, rare, sensitive and culturally important plant species and their habitats from the management actions proposed in this project? Describe the potential direct and indirect effect of the proposed management actions on rare plants and their habitat. Will prescribed burning occur in the spring and early summer; please give justifications for this decision using current scientific studies as reference. The botany Biological Evaluation (BE) will discuss the known information on rare and sensitive plant species habitat and analyze the effects to known sensitive plant species habitat within the project area. The botany BE would be incorporated by reference and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. If sensitive plant populations are located within the project area, appropriate mitigation (e.g., site avoidance) would be followed upon consultation with a Forest Service botanist. Prescribed burning effects would be analyzed and disclosed in the specialist’s report and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The majority of the burns would occur in the fall. We would avoid known locations of rare and sensitive plants if burns occur during spring and early summer.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 5 Whitebark Pine 7. What surveys have been conducted to determine presence and abundance of whitebark pine regeneration? If whitebark pine seedlings and saplings are present, what measures would be taken to protect them? Please include an alternative that excludes burning in the presence of whitebark pine regeneration (consider ‘Daylighting’ seedlings and saplings as an alternative restoration method). Will restoration efforts include planting whitebark pine? Will planted seedling be of rust-resistant stock? Is rust resistant stock available? Would enough seedlings be planted to replace whitebark pine lost to fire activities? Have white pine blister rust surveys been accomplished? What is the severity of white pine blister rust in proposed action areas? Whitebark pine in the project area is located within the roadless area. Survey information would be discussed and planting would be evaluated in the Silviculture Report and discussed in the vegetation section of Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The project design features would include hand slashing around whitebark pine seed trees to protect existing seed sources. This practice has been used and found effective in the Alice Creek project area to maintain mature whitebark pine seed sources (J.Kurtz, personal communication). An alternative that excludes burning in the presence of whitebark pine regeneration was considered. This alternative was dropped from detailed analysis since the locations of all whitebark pine regeneration are not known, and may occur in small, isolated, scattered spots. Therefore, avoiding all whitebark pine regeneration areas would not be feasible. This alternative would not address the purpose and need element to Improve the mix of vegetation  Nonsignificant issue (2,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) composition and structure across the landscape that is diverse, resilient, and sustainable to wildfire and insects. Health and resiliency of whitebark pine would be discussed in the Silviculture Report in the project record and briefed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The no action alternative also addresses no burning in the presence of whitebark pine regeneration. 5 Safety Map Fuels and Fire Risk 8. Since the project’s goals are to reduce the chances that fire will destroy private structures, and harm people, the current fuel/fire hazard situation on land of all ownerships within the WUI (at least the WUI that’s relevant to this area) must be displayed on a map. More importantly, the fuel/fire hazard situation post-project on land of all ownerships within the WUI must also be displayed on a map. Based on this mapping of current and projected conditions, please accurately disclose the threats to private structures and people under those scenarios, for all alternatives. It must be discernable why some areas are included for treatment and others are not. 9. The FS must have a detailed long-term program for maintaining the allegedly safer conditions, including how areas would be treated in the future following proposed treatments, or how areas not needing treatment now would be treated as the need arises. The public at large and private landowners must know what the scale of the long-term efforts must be, including the amount of funding necessary, and the likelihood based on realistic funding scenarios for such a program to be adequately and timely funded. The FS must assess the fuel and fire risk situation across land ownership boundaries to Historic fire information was considered. Potential effects to private land and structures would be considered in cumulative analysis for crown fire potential. Developing a detailed long-term program for maintaining the safer conditions, including how areas would be treated in the future following proposed treatments, or how areas not needing treatment now would be treated as the need arises is outside the scope of our analysis. The long-term program at the landscape scale is provided in the Forest Plan, SW crown, Blackfoot landscape assessment, CWPP or other broad-scale analyses. See also response to letter 3, comment 3 regarding analysis that would be included in the fire/fuels report and in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.    Nonsignificant issue (1,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) understand, and disclose to the public, the likely fire scenarios across the area’s landscape. Only then can the context of your proposal be adequately weighed on its merits and evaluated on its merits. 5 Thinning and Fire spread 10. Please consider that thinning can result in faster fire spread than in the unthinned stand. Graham, et al., 1999a. 11. Since the scientific literature suggests that your thinning activities will actually increase the rate of fire spread, you need to reconcile such findings with the contradictory assumptions expressed in your scoping letter. Slash from thinning may be more susceptible to faster fire spread; however, this activity created fuels would be treated reducing this concern to levels of little risk. See response to letter 3, comment 3 regarding analysis of fire/fuels. Fuels discussion would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS regarding effects of the proposed actions, including treatment of activity created fuels. See response to Letter 3, comment 1 pertaining to literature review.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 5  Old Growth associated wildlife species 12. The FS must disclose its transparent, well thought-out long-term strategy for old-growth associated wildlife species viability in a properly-defined cumulative effects analysis area. Old growth management indicator species include pileated woodpecker, northern goshawk, and hairy woodpecker. Hairy woodpeckers are also a snag-associated species. Effects to old-growth associated species, including long-term habitat availability and anticipated effects to local viability would be analyzed in the wildlife report and biological assessment and discussed in the wildlife section of Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Both temporal and spatial analysis boundaries, would be clearly defined for each resource area in their methodology sections and cumulative effects would be disclosed in the specialist’s reports and discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 5 Old Growth associated wildlife species Flammulated Owl 18. Please demonstrate that this project will leave enough snags to follow the Forest Plan requirements and the requirements of sensitive old growth species such as flammulated owls and goshawks. Loggers are required to follow OSHA safety standards. Will these standards require snags to be cut down? After snags are cut down for safety for OSHA requirements will there still be enough Snag retention and recruitment would be considered in the analysis and discussed in the wildlife report, biological assessment and biological evaluation and in the wildlife section of Chapter 3 in the DEIS. While snags that pose a safety risk would be removed as suggested, a number of project design features are in place to ensure that adequate snags (both size and amount) are retained to A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects Significant issue #1 Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) snags left for old growth sensitive species? Specifically how will the Stonewall Project affect Flammulated owls, cavity-nesters usually associated with mature stands of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir? 19. What surveys has the HNF specifically designed to detect flammulated owls? meet the needs of wildlife, including old growth dependent species. In addition, not all acres are being treated. All completed surveys and data collected are addressed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Coordinated flammulated owl surveys were conducted to protocol across various portions of the Forest in 2005, 2008, and 2009 as part of the Northern Region Landbird Monitoring Program. would be discussed in the DEIS. 5 Cumulative Effects-Past Management Actions 13. Even though ecological restoration is not the project’s priority, the NEPA document must at least identify all the existing ecological liabilities caused by past management actions. This includes poorly located or poorly maintained roads, high-risk fuel situations caused by earlier vegetation manipulation projects, wildlife security problems by open motorized roads and trails plus those that are closed but violated—and include all those impacts in the analyses. Cumulative effects analyses considered effects from past present foreseeable future actions within and adjacent to the project area. Baseline/existing conditions discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS and in the Wildlife Report reflect the outcomes of past actions, including effects of roads on elk security. A listing of the known past, present, and foreseeable future projects that may contribute effects when considered with this project would be included in the DEIS. See response to letter 66, comments 15, 16 and 17 regarding snags.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 5 Roads in WUI 14. Any desire to keep a road in the project area WUI must be in harmony with the alleged priority goals (again, to reduce the chances that fire will destroy private structures and harm people), not driven by timber production goals. The analysis must show how all roads will in fact be in harmony with the priority goals. This project does not include changing National Forest System roads. The Forest is currently analyzing two travel management planning processes; Blackfoot Winter Travel and Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter). Motorized vehicle use and route designations for the permanent Helena National Forest System roads would be addressed in this ongoing analysis and documented in the final decisions issued for the travel management plans. Travel management is outside the scope of this analysis but where appropriate would be addressed in cumulative effects.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 5 Fuels Reduction 15. Proposed activities could artificialize the forest ecosystem. Lodgepole pine is particularly subject to blowdown, once The project design features would include retaining adequate snags and down woody debris to meet Forest Plan direction.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) thinned. And any forest condition that is maintained through mechanical manipulation is not maintaining ecosystem function The proposed management activities would not be integrated well with the processes that naturally shaped the ecosystem and resulted in a range of natural structural conditions. Thus, [there is a] need for standards guiding both the delineation of zones where artificializing fuel reduction actions may take place, and that also set snag and down woody debris retention amounts. Effects to fuels and the related analysis would be discussed in the relative specialist’s reports and summarized Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Proposed activities were designed to allow natural ecosystems to function while providing resource protection. The Tri County Community Wildfire Protection Plan defines WUI boundary as area within 4 miles from communities that possesses a population density exceeding 250 people per square mile. 5 Fire Policy 16. Since disruption of fire cycles is identified, the HNF needs to take a hard look at its fire policies. Continued mismanagement of national forest lands and FS refusal to fully implement the Fire Policy puts wildland firefighters at risk if and when they are dispatched to wildfires. This is a programmatic issue, one that the current Forest Plan does not adequately consider. Please see Ament (1997) as comments on this proposal, in terms of fire policy and Forest Planning. This is a programmatic Forest-level issue addressed by the annually updated Forest Plan Fire Management Plan. Forest fire policy is outside the scope of this analysis. The literature review includes a review of Ament (1997).  Nonsignificant issue (1) 5 Monitoring 17. For every project proposal, it is important that the results of past monitoring be incorporated into planning. All Interdisciplinary Team Members should be familiar with the results of all past monitoring pertinent to the project area, and any deficiencies of monitoring that have been previously committed to. For that reason, we expect that the following be included in the NEPA documents or project files: • A list of all past projects (completed or ongoing) implemented in the proposed project area watersheds. • The results of all monitoring done in the project area as committed to in the NEPA documents of those past projects. • The results of all monitoring done in the Existing monitoring information is being compiled and would be considered with the existing condition for various resources. Project related monitoring is identified and would be included in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Ongoing forest-level monitoring would continue. The DEIS will include a list of the known past, present, and foreseeable future projects that may contribute effects when considered with this project. The direction in the Forestwide Noxious Weed EIS (USDA Forest Service 2006)would be incorporated Monitoring for weed treatments would be disclosed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS, and in the  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) proposed project area as a part of the Forest Plan monitoring and evaluation effort. • A description of any monitoring, specified in those past project NEPA documents or the Forest Plan for proposed project area, which has yet to be gathered and/or reported. Please disclose the names of all other past projects (implemented during the life of the Forest Plan) whose analysis area(s) encompass the areas to be “treated” under this proposal. Please disclose if the FS has performed all of the monitoring and mitigation required or recommended in any NEPA documents, and the results of the monitoring. 31. Please disclose the results monitoring of weed treatments on the HNF that have been projected to significantly reduce noxious weed populations over time, or prevent spread. This is an ongoing issue of land productivity. specialist’s weed report. 5 Viable populations 20. The FS should firmly establish that the species that exist, or historically are believed to have been present in the analysis area are still part of viable populations. Since Forest Plan monitoring efforts have failed in this regard, it must be a priority for project analyses. Identification of viable populations is something that must be done at a specific geographic scale. The analysis must cover a large enough area to include a cumulative effects analysis area that would include truly viable populations. Analysis must identify viable populations of MIS, TES, at-risk, focal, and demand species of which the individuals in the analysis area are members in order to sustain viable populations. The wildlife report would include analysis of species most at risk including: threatened, endangered, sensitive, management indicator species, changes in related habitat distribution and use from the specific impacts from the proposed activities, and how the project area contributes to species viability when considered with other past, present and foreseeable actions. Overall, viable populations are evaluated at the Forest or Regional levels, and are outside the scope of this analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (1, 3) 5 Old-growth 21. Please disclose how stands to be treated compare to Forest Plan or Regional old-growth criteria. In order to disclose such information, please provide all the details, in plain language, of these areas’ forest Effects to old growth would be analyzed in the specialist’s reports and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various Significant issue #1 Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) characteristics (the various tree components’ species, age and diameter of the various tree components, canopy closure, snag density by size class, amounts of down logs, understory composition, etc.). wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. 5 ESA, TES, MIS 22. Please examine how this project could affect grizzly bears, lynx and other species listed under the Endangered Species Act. Are you complying with lynx critical habitat requirements? Please examine how this project will affect all MIS and sensitive species. ESA compliance, including Section 7 consultation with the USFWS would be completed prior to the decision. Anticipated effects on federally listed species would be discussed in detail in the project Biological Assessment and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The wildlife report will analyze effects to MIS and the Biological Evaluation will evaluate effects to sensitive species. These reports would be incorporated by reference and a summary of the analyses would be included in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 5 Roadless Area boundaries and Wilderness designation 24. Please utilize the NEPA process to clarify any roadless boundary issues 25. Please examine if these unroaded areas adjacent to roadless areas have wilderness qualities. Inventory and evaluation of roadless areas takes place at the Forest Plan level. Unroaded areas adjacent to IRAs that overlap with proposed treatment areas will be evaluated for potential impacts to their roadless and wilderness characteristics.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 5 fisheries, water quality, soil, bull trout 23. We request the FS design a restoration/access management plan for project area streams that will achieve recovery goals. 26. We request a careful analysis of the impacts to fisheries and water quality, including considerations of sedimentation, increases in peak flow, channel stability, risk of rain-on-snow events, and increases in stream water temperature. Please disclose the locations of seeps, springs, bogs and other sensitive wet areas, and the effects on these areas of the project activities. Where livestock are permitted to graze, we ask that c23: Designing a restoration/access management plan is beyond the scope of this analysis. See response to letter 5 comment 14 regarding travel management. c26, 27, 28, 30: An intricate part of this proposal is the caring for the transportation system needed to implement this project. Proper maintenance and mitigation would be applied. Effects on fish, water and soils would be analyzed, incorporated by reference and summarized in Chapter 3 in the DEIS. Past actions would be reviewed during the evaluation of the existing conditions and cumulative effects analyses. The proper  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) you assess the present condition and continue to monitor the impacts of grazing activities upon vegetation diversity, soil compaction, stream bank stability and subsequent sedimentation. This watershed has been proposed as bull trout critical habitat. Will you meet the requirements of bull trout critical habitat? 27. Please disclose in the NEPA document the results of up-to-date monitoring of fish habitat and watershed conditions and how this project will affect the fish in the project area. 28. It is extremely important the FS disclose the environmental baseline for watersheds. Therefore, proper disclosure of baseline conditions would mean estimates of stream stability, pool frequency conditions, and water temperature range—essentially the values of Riparian Management Objectives along with such parameters as sediment levels. 30. Please provide estimates of current detrimental disturbance in all previously established activity areas in the watersheds affected by the proposal. Please disclose the link between current and cumulative soil disturbance in project area watersheds to the current and cumulative impacts on water quantity and quality. Please disclose if there are any WQLS streams or TMDL streams in the project area. Please disclose measures of, or provide scientifically sound estimates of, detrimental soil disturbance or soil productivity losses (erosion, compaction, displacement, noxious weed spread) attributable to offroad vehicle use. 32. Please disclose how the proposed “treatments” would be consistent with Graham, et al., 1994 recommendations for fine and coarse woody debris, a necessary measures and indicators would be evaluated that may be impacted from this proposal. The methodology and assumptions sections in the specialist’s reports will evaluate and display what would be analyzed.                     c32: Project design features would incorporate meeting Forest Plan standards for down woody material; Chapter 2 of the DEIS will list the design features developed for this project; Chapter 3 of the DEIS and the soils specialist’s report will evaluate and display the effects to soil productivity. Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) consideration for sustaining long-term soil productivity. 5 Carbon Storage and Climate Change 33. Published scientific reports indicate that climate change would be exacerbated by logging due to the loss of carbon storage. Additionally, published scientific reports indicate that climate change will lead to increased wildfire severity (including drier and warmer conditions that may render obsolete the proposed effects of the Project). The former indicates that the Stonewall Vegetation Project may have a significant adverse effect on the environment, and the latter undermines the central underlying purpose of the Project. Therefore, the Forest Service must candidly disclose, consider, and fully discuss the published scientific papers discussing climate change in these two contexts. At least the Forest Service should discuss the attached following studies: • Depro, Brooks M., Brian C. Murray, Ralph J. Alig, and Alyssa Shanks. 2008. Public land, timber harvests, and climate mitigation: quantifying carbon sequestration potential on U.S. public timberlands. Forest Ecology and Management 255: 1122-1134. • Harmon, Mark E. 2001. Carbon sequestration in forests: addressing the scale question. Journal of Forestry 99:4: 24-29. • Harmon, Mark E, William K. Ferrell, and Jerry F. Franklin. 1990. Effects of carbon storage of conversion of old-growth forest to young forests. Science 247: 4943: 699-702 • Harmon, Mark E, and Barbara Marks. 2002. Effects of silvicultural practices on carbon stores in Douglas-fir – western hemlock forests in the Pacific Northwest, USA: results from a simulation model. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 32: 863-877. • Homann, Peter S., Mark Harmon, Suzanne Remillard, and Erica A.H. Smithwick. 2005. Effects of the proposed action and alternatives to atmospheric carbon storage and release would be discussed in the relevant specialist’s reports with information to be summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  The effects of a changing climate to current and future conditions of the Helena National Forest are considered and addressed through project objectives and design. See EIS Chapter 1 sections titled “Purpose and Need for Action” and “Proposed Action;” also, “Silviculture Report—Stonewall Desired Condition” (Amell 2012) in the project record.  See also, response to letter 3 comment 1 regarding the review of submitted literature.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) What the soil reveals: potential total ecosystem C stores of the Pacific Northwest region, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 220: 270-283. • McKenzie, Donald, Ze’ev Gedalof, David L. Peterson, and Philip Mote. 2004. Climatic change, wildfire, and conservation. Conservation Biology 18:4: 890 -902. 5 Costs and Benefits 34. Please evaluate all of the costs and benefits of this project. Please include a detailed list of all the costs to the agency and the public. An incremental economic analysis would be completed and detailed listing of cost factors considered would be in the report. This analysis would be incorporated by reference and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The specialist reports would be available upon request and filed in the project record. A summary of economic analysis, including financial efficiency would be included in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 5 Literature Review 35. It is our intention that you include in the record and review all of the literature and other incorporated documents we’ve cited herein. Please contact us if you have problems locating copies of any of them. See response to letter 3 comment 1 regarding the review of submitted literature.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 6 Noxious Weeds 1. Noxious Weed management plan-per harvest or work activities and post management plan See response to letter 5 comments 2,3,4,5 and 29 regarding noxious weeds.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 7 Noxious Weeds 1. Weed management when road is obliterated See response to letter 5 comments 2,3,4,5 and 29 regarding noxious weeds.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 7 Noxious Weeds 2. Weed management where all the landings are See response to letter 5 comments 2,3,4,5 and 29 regarding noxious weeds.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 8  1. I would like to be kept informed of any clubs, groups, and organizations etc. that oppose this project. Table 1 under this section includes a listing of the individuals, clubs, groups, organizations and agencies that responded to scoping. This table lists the contents of the comments received.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 9 Timing of the Project 1. When would this start and is there a proposed completion date for the gulch area? Implementation of the project would occur after the decision.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 9  2. The area on the east side of the Lincoln The area noted is included in the proposed  Nonsignificant Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Gulch Road going north toward the cemetery is in dire need of “cleaning up” underbrush, deadfalls, and beetle killed trees. The area starts at the Forest Line (cattle guard) on Lincoln Gulch Roads and proceeds towards the cemetery. action (unit 12) for a regeneration harvest with fuels treatments following activities. The Lincoln Gulch Road is included in the Hazard Tree removal decision (August 23, 2010) issue (3) 11 Support for the project 1. …I support the effort the Forest Service is (?) to (?) and effectively improve the health and vitality of the forest Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 14 Support for the Project 1. Overall I feel that the proposed action is sound and should be carried out Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 14 Wildlife, cavity nesters 2. The final plan should recognize that not all dead trees should be harvested. A sufficient number of “wildlife” trees should be left standing for cavity nesting species Forest plan snag requirements would be met on treated areas and additional snag habitat would be provided throughout the project area in untreated areas. Snags would be discussed in the wildlife report and the wildlife section of Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 14 Roadless 3. Post-treatment action should guarantee that motorized vehicle use does not increase in roadless areas No harvest is identified in roadless areas. Stand density may be reduced through prescribed fire in the roadless areas. A project design feature would be included to obliterate the appearance of fire control lines adjacent to or that intersect existing trails, if warranted, to reduce the potential for unauthorized motorized use. The Forest is completing a travel management planning process for winter and non-winter travel. Motorized vehicle use would be addressed in this ongoing analysis. Unauthorized motorized vehicle use in roadless areas is a law enforcement issue and outside the scope of this analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 15 Support for the Project 1. It is good to move forward with this Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 15 Treatments 2. The scale of the project should be enlarged (i.e., treat more acres) Chapter 2 of the DEIS will include a discussions of the alternatives considered in detail and alternatives considered but eliminated from detailed analysis. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Nonsignificant issue (3) 16 Streams and Watersheds 1. When the proposed action is implemented, special care needs to be taken to protect streams/watersheds. Project design features and BMPs would be incorporated to provide protection of streams and watersheds.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 16 Support for the Project 2. Good job, well presented, hope it soon gets implemented Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 17 Support for the Project 1. We need more projects like this one Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 19 Support for the Project 1. Good job putting this together Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 21 Support for the Project 1. Just wish there wasn’t so much red tape and it could start immediately Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 21 Jobs 2. Will there be jobs available? Various portions of the project may be implemented through various methods (e.g., stewardship contract, timber sale, in-house staff). An analysis would be completed to address EO 12898 and the accompanying Presidential Memo regarding “Environmental Justice", which may include possible jobs on minorities, etc. This information would be discussed in Chapter 3.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 22 Support for the Project 1. We strongly support the proposed actions. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 22 Prescribed fire 2. Our only concern is the use of fire. We are not opposed to that but we feel the use of fire is going to require a major educational effort before it is acceptable to many of the residents. Information sharing regarding use of prescribed fire and development of burn plans is ongoing and would continue on the district.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 26 Motorized Recreation Opportunities 1. Adequate recreational opportunity for all visitors is the supreme issue that must be addressed by this action. 2. Clearly, the public wants and needs adequate recreational opportunity and this should be the over-arching theme of this evaluation and decision. 3. Reasonable alternatives to motorized closures must be pursued. The continual loss of motorized recreational opportunities is our primary concern. Because of the significant cumulative effect of motorized closures at this point in time, we feel strongly that there can be “no net loss” of motorized recreational opportunities with the Stonewall Fuel Control Project. We would ask that this project address the attached checklist of issues and address the goals and needs identified. 4. We ask that management for sharing of these lands for multiple-use be selected as the preferred alternative. Sharing would include a 50/50 sharing and equal opportunity of non-motorized to motorized trails. 5. It seems that both the BLM and Forest Service are using forest planning and travel management planning as an opportunity to close as many motorized recreational opportunities as fast as possible. We are asking that this project establish a baseline evaluation and address this significant impact 6. …we strongly recommend and support the development of a Pro-Recreation Alternative. would include the following characteristics…:  1. Dispersed camping within 300 feet of all existing routes.  2. Use of seasonal closures, where required, to protect the environment and wildlife with the intention of keeping routes open for the summer recreation season.  3. All of the existing routes are needed as The Forest is completing two travel management planning processes, ‘Blackfoot – North Divide Winter Travel Planning’ and ‘Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter)’. Motorized vehicle use and route designations for the permanent Forest System roads would be addressed in those ongoing analysis and documented in the final decisions issued for the travel management plans. Travel management is outside the scope of this analysis and does not address the purpose and need for this project.(Items 3, 4, 5 & 6). Effects of this project on recreation would be addressed in the Recreation Report and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. (items 1-2) Recreation resources would be addressed in the analysis and project design features would be included to minimize potential impacts to recreation within the project area (item 6). The attachment provides information pertaining to motorized vehicle use trends and discussion of allocations between motorized and non-motorized uses. This information is applicable to the travel management planning process, but since no changes to the forest transportation system or its use, is proposed for this project, it is outside the scope of this analysis but similar concerns are being addressed in both of the Blackfoot Travel Plans. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Nonsignificant issue (1,2,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) OHV routes due to the cumulative effects of all other closures.  4. Additional OHV routes are needed to address the growing popularity of OHV recreation and the greater needs of the public for access and motorized recreation… Attachment: “Information and Issues that Support a Pro Motorized Recreation Alternative” January 24, 2010. 7. Overall, we are extremely concerned about the unequal allocation of trail resources and we do not see anything that justifies the current imbalance with only 42% motorized trails. The facts presented in our comments clearly supports a motorized trail allocation of 50% or greater. 27 Motorized Recreation Opportunities 1. Our first concern is that no existing motorized roads and trails should be closed as part of the proposed action. 2. Our second concern is that this area is ideal for motorized, multiple-use recreation. To adequately address this issue, we request that an alternative be considered that would provide new OHV routes in the area beyond those currently existing. See response to letter 26, comments 1 to 7. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS.. Nonsignificant issue (1) 28 Camping 1. I hope this includes some consideration for camping sites A project design feature would be included to prioritize treatments adjacent to the Pine Grove campground and trailheads within the project area to avoid high use time periods and limit the time these areas may be closed to the public. Project design features would be included to coordinate project implementation and haul routes with recreation staff to minimize impacts to popular dispersed recreation areas and high use time periods (i.e.: fall hunting season), and to ensure that the public is aware of the scheduled projects. Effects of this project on recreation would be analyzed in the recreation report, incorporated  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) by reference, and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. 28 Support for the Project 2. I really appreciate and support your efforts Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 29 Support for the Project 1. We like the proposal. We are private landowners in Lincoln Springs Subdivision, and are interested in fuel reduction in the area. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 31 Archaeological Resources 1. As an archaeologist I am strongly concerned about the possibility of the disturbance/destruction of archaeological resources while completing this project. From what I can discern from studying the map on the website at least part of the area in which the primary townsite of old Lincoln is situated will not have actions performed there. However that area is highly covered with thick brush and blow downs. In order to be able to properly document and preserve historic remains in this area these need to be removed; but with as little actual ground disturbance as possible. 3. In addition to the protection of the Old Lincoln townsite those conducting this operation need to be aware of other undocumented historical remains throughout the entire project area; but especially around the old cemetery area and between Moon Lane and the Lincoln Springs Subdivision. A high chance of encountering cultural remains also exists on the west side of Lone Point before Moon Lane. 4. An archaeologist should regularly inspect work when the ground is disturbed in order to minimize destruction of resources. Effects to cultural resources would be analyzed and appropriate protection measure (e.g. avoidance) would be followed. The Forest archaeologist would visit known sites, including the Historic Lincoln Townsite, and identify appropriate project design features for inclusion in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Project design features would include protection of existing and newly discovered heritage sites, along with appropriate monitoring and would be listed in Chapter 2 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 31 Support for the Project 2. Overall the project appears to be well planned and is extremely overdue. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 32 Support for the Project 1. I appreciate the Lincoln District moving forward on any management proposal that Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) includes timber harvest – dead or alive. 32 General Project Design 2. I would like to voice my concern that the NEPA process for this project seemed to go by the wayside. I saw no announced dates or comments about NEPA. The notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement for the Stonewall Vegetation Project was published in the Federal Register on January 13, 2010. Scoping documents for this project were mailed to known interested and affected parties on January 15, 2010. The scoping documents were also available on the forest website. A press release was issued January 16, 2010 that announced a public meeting on February 3, 2010 and noted the deadline for comments was February 16, 2010. The Stonewall Vegetation Project has been listed on the Forest’s schedule of proposed actions since April 2010. Public involvement efforts would be disclosed and discussed in Chapter 1 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 32 Multiple Use 3. Represent multiple use in an adequate solution for the project The purpose and need for this project was developed to address fuels and restoration concerns and address the gap between the existing conditions and the desired conditions of the vegetation in the project area. Specialists for various resources reviewed the Forest Plan goals and objectives and developed actions to address the purpose and need for this project. Effects to the various resources would be disclosed in Chapter 3 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (2,3) 32 Roads 4. The roads established for the project should remain open for recreation, fire suppression, etc. Changes to the permanent forest transportation system are not proposed with this project. See response to letter 5, comment 14.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 33 Ground Disturbance 1. Heavy equipment operations should be conducted at a time that minimizes ground disturbance – frozen and/or snow. 2. Seed disturbances (roads, skid roads, burn piles with a cheatgrass and noxious weed free NATIVE GRASS/FORB mix. No fertilizer (native plants won’t need it) Winter operations are an option, and may reduce impacts to soils and related resources. These concerns would be addressed in the Soils Specialist’s Report and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Seeding would be done with approved seed mixes as noted in the Forest Plan.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 33 Economics 3. All sales should be conducted with a “no net loss” to the taxpayer. An incremental economic analysis would be completed and results disclosed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 33 Prescribed Burning Support 4. Conduct as much control/prescribed burning as possible, no mimic natural processes. Thank you for your support of prescribed burning.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 33 Motorized use 5. Consider how you are going to limit off-road and off-trail O.R.V. use once the forest is “opened up.” Effects of ORV use would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS and in the specialist’s Recreation Report. The Forest is completing a travel management planning process for winter and non-winter travel. Motorized vehicle use would be addressed in those ongoing analysis. Unauthorized off-road motorized vehicle use is a law enforcement issue and an ongoing concern for the Forest.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 34 Mountain Pine Beetle 1. It’s too bad about the Mountain Pine Beetle. The Western larch is a beautiful tree. Its number should be increased. Any regeneration activities planned would consider appropriate species mix, including western larch to move toward the desired conditions.  Nonsignificant issue (2,3) 34 Prescribed Burning Support 2. I like burning slash piles and prescribed burning. Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 35 Mountain Pine Beetle 1. What are the time periods, how long to do these projects, could they continue as the beetle-kill continues on? Project activities would be anticipated to be completed within a ten year time period. Other areas affected by beetle-kill would be analyzed separately.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 36 Roadless 1. You can’t mine it, log it, farm it, ride on it, so yes, burn it. Comment noted. Support for fire.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 37 Support for the Project 1. I support the actions proposed in the Stonewall Vegetation Project Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 38 Motorized Recreation Opportunities 1. Our first concern is that no existing motorized roads and trails should be closed as part of the proposed action. 2. Our second concern is that this area is ideal for motorized, multiple-use recreation. To adequately address this issue, we request that an alternative be considered that would See response to letter 26, comments 1 to 7. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the Nonsignificant issue (1,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) provide new OHV routes in the area beyond those currently existing. DEIS. 39 Motorized Recreation Opportunities 1. Our first concern is that no existing motorized roads and trails should be closed as part of the proposed action. 2. Our second concern is that this area is ideal for motorized, multiple-use recreation. To adequately address this issue, we request that an alternative be considered that would provide new OHV routes in the area beyond those currently existing. See response to letter 26, comments 1 to 7. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 40 Motorized Recreation Opportunities 1. Our first concern is that no existing motorized road s and trails should be closed as part of the proposed action. 2. Our second concern is that this area is ideal for motorized, multiple-use recreation. To adequately address this issue, we request that an alternative be considered that would provide new OHV routes in the area beyond those currently existing. See response to letter 26, comments 1 to 7. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 41 Firewood 1. Would it be open for firewood? Areas would be closed to firewood gathering during harvest implementation. Consistent with the forest plan, slash piles would be made available to the public prior to burning.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 43 Pine Beetle Restore diversified species 1. The proposed thinning and restoration makes perfect sense. Let us get the trees infested with the pine beetle out, to put in diversity only makes sense. Let’s get in there, thin out the diseased trees, plan for some viable species, and help our forests to once again regain their beauty for all to enjoy. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 45 Support for the Project 1. I agree with the proposal. Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 45 Forest Health 2. As much wood as possible should be removed for the health of the forest. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 47 Support for the Project 1. Project sounds like a good plan Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 48 Forest Health 1. I am not opposed to vegetation Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) management in the project area but I want it to be driven by good resource management and within the direction of the Helena National forest Land use Plan and not fire hysteria. issue (4) 48 Visuals 2. A landscape analyses should be completed to show the changes that would occur from the proposed actions. 3. A feathering of Timber harvest along the existing straight line harvested areas would benefit the existing visual condition. Property lines adjoining private in holdings, state and BLM lands should be considered for this type of timber harvest also. Design features would be incorporated to reduce the appearance of lines to meet the visual quality objectives for units adjoining private in holdings, state and BLM lands would be displayed in Chapter 2 in the DEIS. Effects to the visual resources would be disclosed in Chapter 3 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 48 Cultural Resources 4. Lincoln Historical town site and cemetery: These two historical sites are eligible for nomination to the registrar of historical sites; this process should be completed to insure that adequate management, monitoring and protection occur. 5. Immediate restrictions should be implemented to closes these two area to personal fire wood gathering. 6. Other cultural resources that need protection are lower and upper stonewall ditches, and Lincoln ditch from Reservoir Lake to Lincoln Gulch. This project area is rich with early mining history and a cultural inventory is needed. Project design features would be incorporated to provide appropriate protection for cultural resources. Heritage surveys and anticipated effects to cultural resources would be discussed in Chapter 3 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 48 Grazing 7. An updated allotment plan would be need to reflect the changes to the grazing patterns associated with the proposed timber harvest. Adaptive management practices may be incorporated as needed to address grazing patterns affected by the project, which may include measures such as herding or adjusting season of use. No changes to livestock grazing are proposed. The allotment management plan is outside the scope of this analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 48 Prescribed Burning 8. The roadless areas within the project area were created by the Rare 2 process identifying possible additions to the Slashing is proposed in identified prescribed burn units to help achieve desired results (e.g. to help carry the fire across the unit) where Alternative considered but eliminated from Nonsignificant issue (2,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Roadless Areas wilderness system. Management should reflect this quality. Prescribed fire in these areas should be under a natural prescribed fire plan and no mechanical fuel treatment done in these areas. On June 21, 2010 commenter J. Burns was contacted by J. Kurtz of the Forest Service, resulting in two points of clarification concerning “natural prescribed fire” and “no mechanical fuel treatment done in these areas”. Natural prescribed fire is in reference to the fact that J. Burns would like to see the roadless area within the Stone Dry project area be treated similar to the wilderness, turned into a FMU-3 so the Forest Service can allow natural ignition to take place and managed for resource benefit. Mechanical fuel treatment is in reference to not only mechanized equipment but also hand slashing in road less areas. J. Burns referenced the hand slashing work being done in Alice Creek and does not like what he sees. Also J. Burns does not want to see hand slashing with chainsaw around whitebark for whitebark restoration “the beetles will kill all of them anyway” adequate fuels may not currently exist on the ground. Hand slashing would also allow areas around individual mature whitebark pine trees to be cleared to encourage seedling establishment. Concentrations of whitebark pine regeneration may be protected through clearing of slash to reduce potential for fire caused mortality. The proposed hand slashing of small diameter trees within roadless areas will be evaluated for potential impacts to roadless and wilderness characteristics. See response to letter 5, comment 7 regarding alternatives considered. detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. 48 Thinning in past timber harvest areas 9. These areas are T-l lands to be managed for timber production. Pre commercial thinning was part of the silvicultural objectives for these areas, but was not done. With the timber maturity of these stands any thinning now should be commercial and the wood products removed used and not burned as slash. If no market exists the thinning should be postponed until a market for these types of products exist. Meeting the stated purpose and need for the project, as well as stand characteristics such as tree species and size, may be used to determine whether the proposed treatments involve commercial thinning, pre-commercial thinning, or a combination of the two treatments. These assessments would be in the project record.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 48 Cumulative Effects 10. The effect of additional timber harvest that has occurred and will occur on state and private lands bordering this project area should be considered in this analyzes. The Cumulative effects would be analyzed with the available information on past, present and reasonably foreseeable projects.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Lincoln ranger district is also proposing a hazard tree removal along system forest roads, if this project occurs would this timber harvest be in addition to what is proposed in this project? The decision was signed on August 23, 2010 for the “Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction- Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project.” This project is in addition to this proposal and would be considered in the cumulative effects analyses. 48 Recreation 11. A recreation activity that has increase in this area is personnel huckleberry picking how will the proposed actions effect huckleberry production, both for people and wildlife? Recreation opportunities may be enhanced in the burn and harvest areas with a potential increase in huckleberry regeneration. The anticipated vegetative response to the proposed activities would be discussed under soft mast (e.g. berries) in the wildlife report. Short-term loss and long-term enhancement would be evaluated in detail in the wildlife specialist report and summarized in Chapter 3 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 48 Forest Health 12. Timber harvest will open new areas for snowmobiling. How will this be addressed in winter travel Plan? Past timber harvest areas have become unofficial play areas for snowmobiling this activity has caused some major damage to the leader growth of new plantations. See response to letter 26, comments 1 to 7.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 48 Wildlife 13. Timing of all these activities would be very important not to interrupt and displace wildlife. If all this occurs at the same time there would be major displacement of wildlife. Critical season, calving, winter ranges, nesting, security during big game hunting, both archery and rifle must be considered. Project design features would be incorporated to minimize impacts to elk calving and winter range, and ensure, that un-disturbed elk security and hiding cover is available. Project design features would be incorporated, as necessary, to restrict activities within breeding habitat for species with viability concerns (threatened, endangered and sensitive), as well as big game. Forest Plan compliance would be for these concerns would be evaluated. See response to letter 66, comments 6 and 7 regarding big game. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 48 Economics Low timber market 14. The cost effectiveness of this of this proposed project should be analyzed. 15. With the local timber market very low, will additional timber products bring the market See response to letter 5 comment 34 regarding economic analysis for this project.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) even lower? 48 Economics Logging Systems and New Roads 16. Five miles of temporary road systems just cannot be justified. Helicopter logging would be cheaper. See response to letter 5 comment 34 regarding economic analysis for this project.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 48 Economics  17. This project will need ongoing weed control, planting, thinning, monitoring, road maintenance, ECT. The president in his state of the union address said that federal spending would be frozen for three years. How will this affect the needed maintenances of this proposed action? The President’s comments regarding Federal budgets pertain to the overall Federal Budget. Individual forests prioritize implementation of site-specific projects that include the road work, weed control, etc as part of a potential purchaser’s contract. The Helena National Forest Plan and management decisions would continue to guide ongoing weed control, planting, thinning, monitoring, road maintenance activities across the Forest. See also the response to letter 5 comment 34 regarding economic analysis for this project.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 49 Haul Route Maintenance If the roads in Lincoln SP Subdivision are used to facilitate equipment in and out of the area, will they be maintained after the job is finished? or during the process as needed Haul routes are identified along state, county, or NFS roads. Forest Service use of roads not under FS jurisdiction would require an agreement before use. Road maintenance would be performed in accordance with the terms of these applicable agreements.  Nonsignificant issue (2) 53 Purpose and Need 1. We encourage you, therefore, to consider expanding the project purpose and need to include enhancement of watershed health, fish habitat and water quality. The decision maker will review the purpose and need to determine if changes are warranted for this project. Project design features and BMPs would be incorporated and evaluated for effectiveness regarding potential effects to soils, water quality and fisheries. Results would be discussed in Chapter 3 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 53 303(d) listed waters 2. It is important that all 303(d) listed waters within the project area be identified. It would appear that activities proposed with the Stonewall Vegetation Project have potential to affect sediment/siltation in the Blackfoot River watershed. The watershed report will discuss potential effects to 303(d) listed waters as well as evaluate the effectiveness of project design features and BMPs designed to reduce potential effects to watershed resources.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 TMDL 3. We recommend that the Helena NF coordinate with MDEQ TMDL program staff to The watershed report will analyze potential effects to water quality and would be  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) assure consistency of proposed Stonewall Vegetation management actions with TMDLs and Water Quality Plans prepared by MDEQ summarized in Chapter 3 in the DEIS. 53 Roads 4. The NOI states that the proposed action may include five miles of roads. We encourage minimization of new road construction as much as possible, particularly permanent new roads, and location of any needed new roads away from streams and riparian areas. No new permanent roads are proposed. The new roads proposed in this project would be obliterated following timber harvest.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Logging Systems 5. We also encourage use of timber harvest methods that minimize ground disturbance (e.g., skyline, helicopter, and logging during winter on snow or frozen ground)… Units proposed for treatment would be evaluated for accessibility for removal method and discussed in the DEIS. Logging during winter on snow or frozen ground may occur. Effects to soils and watershed would be discussed in Chapter 3 in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Restoration 6. …inclusion of watershed rehabilitation activities such as road obliteration, road BMP upgrades road drainage improvements, revegetation, stream and bank stabilization, and other watershed restoration activities as much as possible. Project design features would include applicable BMPs to reduce impacts to water quality. Effects to watershed resources would be discussed in Chapter 3 in the DEIS with further detailed analysis available in the watershed and fisheries reports filed in the project record.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Vegetation Management 7. EPA generally favor understory thinning from below, slashing and prescribed fire treatments for managing vegetation to reduce fuels and fire intensity, as well as address forest insect, disease and other forest health issues, with retention of large, healthy, fire resistant trees, particularly retention of declining tree species (e.g., Ponderosa pine, whitebark pine, aspen), and retention of adequate snags and woody debris to maintain wildlife habitat and soil productivity. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 53 Fuels Reduction in the WUI 8. We are supportive of efforts to reduce hazardous fuels and fire risks in Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) areas near homes and structures where there is high fire risk, and to reduce wildfire intensity. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) 53 Maps 9. A good watershed map showing streams, lakes, wetlands and other surface waters in the project area in relation to proposed actions should be included in the DEIS to allow clear understanding of water quality impacts. The proposed action maps included watershed features. The project design features would include applicable BMPs to reduce impacts to water quality. Effects to watershed resources would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Adaptive Management 10. We particularly support the need for monitoring and evaluation and incorporation of principles of adaptive management in the alternatives, and highly support strategies that maintain and/or restore watershed condition and water quality to fully support beneficial uses. Monitoring expectations would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Collaboration 11. If there are local groups focusing on watershed/ecosystem recovery, we encourage the Forest Service to consider including a watershed or ecosystem restoration alternative for detailed evaluation, or at least to include watershed/ecosystem restoration elements in the reasonable alternatives. The Stone Dry watershed assessment was considered when developing the proposed action for the project. The purpose and need includes a restoration element. The proposed action addresses restoration of vegetative composition and structural diversity elements. Effects to vegetation and watershed resources would be analyzed in the silviculture and watershed specialist reports and would be summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Connected Actions 12. Also, if there are any proposed nearby actions or adjacent developments that are closely related to the proposed action it would be appropriate to analyze and discuss those related developments as a connected action (40 CFR 1508.25). See response to letter 5 comment 13 regarding consideration of cumulative effects.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Mitigation 13. Mitigation measures should be discussed in sufficient detail, rather than merely listed, in order to ensure that potential detrimental environmental effects and measures to mitigate those effects have been fairly evaluated. The project design features would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS and the effects considered in the various resource discussions in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Effectiveness of design and mitigation would be evaluated.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 53 Monitoring 14. Monitoring plans are also needed for measuring the effectiveness of the mitigation measures (quantitatively-if possible, and/or a qualitatively), and determining the need for Monitoring would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS and anticipated results a discussed in Chapter 3.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) modifying mitigation. 53 Cumulative Effects 15. NEPA requires that cumulative impacts be addressed as a summary of the individual impacts of this and all other past, present, and "reasonably foreseeable" future projects, including activities on private adjacent land irrespective of what agency/entity has decision-making authority or analysis responsibility. See response to letter 5 comment 13 regarding consideration of cumulative effects.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 54 Fuels Reduction in the WUI 1. The trees above Lincoln Springs on Lone Point Road are also dead and need logging to prevent burning homes. These would be included to the extent possible.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 55 Haul Route 1. I am all for this project; but wonder if we will see haul trucks in Lincoln Gulch using our roads. My concern would be dust, speed of trucks, and general concern for our kids. Thank you for your support of the project. Project design features include safety signing of roads when trucks are hauling and dust abatement measures, as needed, for air quality and public safety.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 57 Prescribed Burning Safety 1. Concerned about the close proximity to private property of at least one of the prescribed burn areas. Quite close to private residences. A prescribed fire burn plan would be prepared for all burn units prior to burning and would identify the range of conditions appropriate for implementing the burn. Risk management is a foundation for all prescribed fire activities. Risk and uncertainties relating to prescribed fire activities are analyzed, communicated and managed as they relate to conducting or not conducting the activity. A complexity analysis is done for each prescribed fire plan. Identified risk are analyzed and then mitigated. If risks factors are identified with a “high” rating, they would be documented and discussed in the Complexity Rating Rationale of the fire plan. Prescribed fire prescriptions would be defined showing a range of conditions during which a prescribed fire may be ignited. The plan prescription will describe a range of low to high limits for the environmental parameters (weather, topography, fuels, fire behavior (flame length, rate of spread, spotting)) are required to meet the RX fire plan objectives  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) while also meeting smoke and control objectives. Additional elements included in prescribed fire plans: (list is not all inclusive) contingency resources are identified, expected weather and fire behavior, ignition plan for the burn unit as well as a plan for holding the fire once ignited. 58 Motorized Recreation Opportunities 1. Our first concern is that no existing motorized roads and trails should be closed as part of the proposed action. 2. Our second concern is that this area is ideal for motorized, multiple-use recreation. To adequately address this issue, we request that an alternative be considered that would provide new OHV routes in the area beyond those currently existing. See response to letter 26, comments 1 to 7.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 59 Support for the project 1. The sooner this gets taken care of the safer the valley and town of Lincoln would be Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 62 Noxious Weeds 1. I would like to make sure that with the entire Stonewall Vegetation Project a weed control plan would be in place for the entire area after the project. See response to letter 5 comments 2 through 5 and 29 regarding noxious weeds.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 63 Firewood 1. Firewood access? The project design features include forest-wide standard for firewood (Forest Plan p. II/24).  Nonsignificant issue (2) 63 Recreation Facilities 2. Money left over to improve roads and trails and establish campgrounds Allocation of’ left over’ funds to improve facilities is outside the scope of this analysis. Some of these suggestions are already incorporated into the design of this proposal e.g. road improvements for haul.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 64 Project Design 1. No trespassing on private property. Respect fences for livestock containment. No damage to, or repair if damaged Project design features would include measures to protect existing livestock management fencing, or repair if damaged during operations.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 66 Forest Plan Amendment 1. It seems like extensive Forest Plan amendments would be required to implement the project, amendments that were not identified in the scoping notice. The Forest Plan direction was considered when developing the proposed action. Design features would be incorporated to meet or move towards Forest Plan desired conditions. Upon review of updated information it was determined a site-specific forest plan  Nonsignificant issue (2,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) amendment is needed to address noncompliance with elk habitat standards. 66 Lynx Habitat 2. There is no discussion as to why this project will restore habitat for the lynx, so the purpose of the project is quite confusing. The agency needs to define what the current problem is with lynx habitat, and why logging and burning will improve and/or restore its value to the lynx. 27. This project will result in extensive destruction of lynx habitat, from burning to commercial harvest to pre commercial thinning. Please complete formal consultation with the USFWS. 28. The Forest Plan Amendment for lynx prohibits thinning of structurally diverse lynx habitat, as well as young plantations that provide hare habitat. Is the Forest Service planning on completing Forest Plan amendments to allow this project? The proposed action includes a mix of treatments designed to: reduce the risk of wildfire, restore Forest System Land that has been affected by large-scale insect-caused mortality, and improve forest sustainability by increasing species diversity and promoting fire tolerant species/communities. Potential impacts to lynx would be identified and evaluated in the BA. All activities would be consistent with the 2007 Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction (USDA Forest Service 2007), which ensures that the conservation and recovery of lynx in the Northern Rockies ecosystem is maintained, that all activities comply with applicable laws and policy and that standards and guidelines are in place that reduce impacts, while maintaining lynx habitat. Further, Section 7 consultation with the USFWS would be completed prior to any decision. Effects to lynx habitat would be analyzed in the biological assessment and would be disclosed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 66 Wildlife: Road Density and Forest Plan Direction specifically regarding Grizzly Bear Habitat. Elk is mentioned. 3. In particular, what are the goals for open and total road densities during project implementation, in order to avoid displacement of any bears using this habitat? 4. Please include a discussion in the draft NEPA document regarding how the Forest Plan direction for the grizzly bear, which originated in 1986, or over 20 years ago, has been evaluated as per effectiveness and relevance. It seems like some updating may be needed for management of this threatened species. 5. Please include a description of open road densities DURING project implementation, and define how this will affect habitat effectiveness levels of wildlife, from elk to the Potential effects to grizzly bear and other threatened, endangered and sensitive species were considered early during project design. Effects of roads on grizzly bears, including definitions of and an assessment of total and open road densities and effects to bears and their habitat, including whitebark pine, would be fully evaluated in the Biological Assessment and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Open and total road density during implementation and post implementation would be analyzed. New roads would be obliterated immediately following timber harvest and all roads that are currently closed would remain closed to general traffic during project implementation. Alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue 1 Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) grizzly bear. 38. Please define what condition new roads will have to be in order not to count towards the total motorized access route density for grizzly bear habitat 6. Please map all current hiding cover and thermal cover for both the current and proposed levels, and define what percentage of the landscape these currently and will comprise in the future. 7. Please evaluate and map elk security cover as per the Hillis et al. (1991) criteria, which includes both cover and motorized routes, and discuss how this project will affect elk and deer vulnerability. The amount and location of and effects to elk hiding, thermal and security cover would be analyzed and discussed under the wildlife section in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Upon review of updated information it was determined a site-specific forest plan amendment is needed to address noncompliance with elk habitat standards. Roads are managed in a manner to maintain big game capability and hunting opportunity. Elk security per the Hillis et al. criteria would be analyzed and discussed under the wildlife section in Chapter 3 of the DEIS 66 Old Growth 8. Please provide an inventory for old growth habitat as per Green et al. (1992), and define how the Forest Plan direction would be met. 9. Please define how the old growth plan for this landscape will ensure viability of associated species, including the goshawk, pine marten, and various bird species of conservation concern as per the Montana Natural Heritage Program. Old growth would be discussed in the vegetation and wildlife specialist reports and would be summarized in the respective sections in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The silviculture and wildlife reports will clarify and describe how and what information would be used under their respective methodology sections. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 66 Migratory Songbirds 10. Please define how this project will incorporate the Chiefs directive on conservation of migratory songbirds. Effects to migratory birds would be analyzed in the wildlife specialist report and would be summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 66 Restoration: 11. It is not clear why the agency has Support for the purpose and need, including  Nonsignificant Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Fire and Wildlife determined that fire has been excluded from this landscape, and that logging and burning will constitute "restoration." Please provide the current science that both supports and refutes this contention, as it is clearly a controversial assumption upon which the entire project is based. 12. Please refer to the recent publication by Baker, 2009, regarding fire ecology of the Northern Rocky Mountains, in your discussion on the restoration needs of your project. 18. What data did the working group use to determine that wildlife habitat problems exist that would be corrected with logging and burning? 19. It seems like the restoration efforts do not specifically address wildlife habitat. Why is this? that of restoration would be discussed and displayed in project specialist reports and other associated documents. The Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) analysis provides reference and desired conditions for vegetation in terms of fire return intervals and composition. The Forest Plan standards are the basis of wildlife desired habitat needs as compared to the habitat existing condition. Methodology and assumptions used in this analysis and used in the development of the proposal would be clarified in the wildlife methodology section in the specialist’s report and would be summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. issue (3) 66 Management Indicator Species 13. Please define the conservation strategies that would be implemented for Helena Forest management indicator species, including the goshawk, pine marten, and pileated and hairy woodpeckers. Effects to these species, including conservation strategies and project design features would be discussed in detail in the Biological Evaluation (BE) (goshawk, pine marten, etc.) and would be summarized in the wildlife section of Chapter 3 in the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 66 Wildlife Surveys 14. Please define the level of wildlife inventories that would be completed for this project, as well as their reliability in locating occupied breeding habitat for MIS, sensitive species, and species of special concern. The wildlife analysis process, including inventories and monitoring would be discussed in the wildlife report, BA and BE, and summarized in the wildlife section of Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 66 Snag Management 15. Please define the specific snag management strategy for each treatment type, including post-logging snags immediately after logging, and how long-term Stand and landscape level changes to dead wood, including snag retention and recruitment of future snags and applicable snag management protocols would be discussed in  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) recruitment of snags would be maintained 16. Please define what the management strategy would be for snags, whether it is the Helena Forest Plan or the Northern Region Snag Management Protocol. 17. Please define why snag habitat needs to be restored in this landscape, and how this would be accomplished. the wildlife report and summarized in the wildlife section of Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Project design features would be incorporated to ensure activities are consistent with Forest Plan direction related to snags and downed woody debris. 66 WUI 20. Please map the wildland-urban interface area, and include the occupied structures that lie within this. 33. Please discuss Jack Cohen's work regarding the use of small fuels buffers to protect structures, and how this science would be applied to the current project. The Wildland Urban Interface was mapped during development of the Tri-County Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) and is in the project file. Structures are located on private lands, whose management is outside the scope of this project. There are subdivisions with private residences located adjacent to the forest boundary and identified in the “Tri-County Community Wildfire Protection Plan” (CWPP) as wildland urban interface. The stands in close proximity to the forest boundary are proposed harvest treatments. Subdivisions adjacent to the project are categorized as “Very High to High Risk” as identified in the Tri County CWPP. Treatments adjacent to private land are designed to remove dead material to reduce fuel loading on National Forest System lands. The fire/fuels analysis will include a map and discussion of wildland-urban interface. See response to letter 3 comment 3 regarding the fire/fuels analysis. The Forestwide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction Project is being implemented to remove dead trees that pose a hazard along Forest System Roads to provide safer access routes within the project area. A literature review of Jack Cohen’s work would be completed and considered during analysis for this project.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) 66 Forest Health 21. What specific information is available to The Stone Dry watershed analysis (USDA  Nonsignificant Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) demonstrate that the current watershed conditions are "unhealthy?" 22. Please define how forest health is being measured. What are the specific criteria used to define health, and what is the rating system used. Is a forest rated as either "healthy" or "unhealthy," or is there a sliding scale of health? Please identify the health level of each unit that is planned for treatment. Forest Service 2009) reviewed the existing conditions and the desired conditions identified in the Forest Plan. Existing condition of the vegetation and effects from proposed actions would be discussed in Chapters 1 and 3 of the DEIS. The silviculturist would analyze and discuss the anticipated effects of insect activity in relation to natural endemic levels of insect activity. issue (3) 66 Roadless Areas 23. There is no map of the inventoried roadless area boundaries. This should be clearly defined. 24. If fire has to be restored to roadless lands, it must be demonstrated that fire has been eliminated. Please provide the current best science that demonstrates that the lack of fire in the roadless lands has resulted in a disturbed ecosystem, as define what particular portions of the ecosystem, including wildlife such as the lynx, have been harmed as a result. The proposed action map would be edited to depict the inventoried roadless boundaries. Past fires and effects to fire/fuels and effects to wildlife would be discussed under silviculture, fuels, and wildlife section in Chapter 3 of the DEIS as well as additional detailed discussions in the respective specialist reports filed in the project record.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 66 Aspen 25. What are the indicator species that are going to be used to define the need for aspen treatments? If no wildlife species are going to be used to justify needs for treatment of aspen, what criteria are these treatments being based? 26. Some current science has concluded that aspen are in a natural cycle of conifer encroachment from the last fire cycle, and that a decline in aspen is natural. What information in the project area is being used to suggest that aspen conditions are unnatural at this time, and that treatment is needed for restoration? Effects to vegetation, including aspen management, and effects to wildlife, including management indicator species would be discussed in the respective specialist reports (silviculture, wildlife) and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 66 Timber Harvest and Past Harvest 29. Please identify all clearcuts, and what their size would be. 30. Please map and define the areas of past harvest. A listing of silvicultural prescriptions and a map of areas of known past harvest recorded in the forest database would be developed and provided in the DEIS. The eight groups of  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) treatments would be described in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Exact locations of small clearcuts (under 40 acres in size) would be determined based on actual ground conditions (e.g., mortality present, topography) and would follow treatment prescriptions. 66 Wildlife regarding bark beetle 31. Please discuss the significant values of bark beetle infestations and spruce budworm infestations to wildlife. 32. Please discuss the differences between habitat conditions for wildlife if the beetle-infested forests are left undisturbed, versus if they are clearcut, for both the short and long term. Effects to wildlife species are discussed In Chapter 3 of the DEIS and further explored in the wildlife report and subsequent BE & BA. Untreated portions of the project area would provide undisturbed habitat for species associated with bark beetle-killed trees (e.g., hairy woodpeckers). A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 66 Roads 34.Please provide a complete inventory of ALL roads in the analysis area, from nonsystem roads, to system roads, to motorized trails, to proposed new temporary roads; include information on how these roads are individually identified (a number), the length of the road/trail in mileage, its current management, whether the road would be opened for the proposed project, whether any roads would be used for public firewood harvest, and the specific time when temporary roads would be closed after project completion. 35. Please define the long-term need for the temporary roads that would be constructed for this project. 36. Please identify what the difference would be between new temporary roads constructed for this project, versus old logging roads that are still in use or would be used for this project. Why won't new roads also be needed for future management? 37. Please address the fragmentation The existing road information and roads needed for the proposal would be discussed in Chapters 1 and 3 in the DEIS. Existing routes would be used wherever possible to minimize additional impacts. New roads that would be obliterated following timber harvest were identified by forest specialists where needed to support the actions proposed with this project. The new roads that would be obliterated immediately following timber harvest are not anticipated to be needed for management actions after this project. No change to the permanent forest transportation system is proposed with this project. Effects from new roads that would be obliterated following timber harvest would be considered in the resource analyses in their individual reports and summarized Chapter 3 of the DEIS, including fragmentation impacts on wildlife species.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) impacts of any new roads. 67 Support for the Project 1. I believe this to be a great idea Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 67 Prescribed Burning Safety 2. I do have a concern about controlled burns…I would appreciate see more firefighters present at the time of burn as assurance of a containable situation should sudden winds or other agents cause spread in a dangerous way. 3. Ensure that all structures are insured to full replacement if anything should go wrong. Burn plans would be prepared for each proposed unit and would be designed to be consistent with the Forest Plan. Insuring structures for full replacement is outside the scope of this analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (1,2) 68 Support for the Project 1. The LWG and FS have done a great job in addressing all of the issues and concerns. The EIS should be comprehensive and easily implemented as a result. Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4) 68 Willow in Riparian 2. Willows were not indicated by name as seral species. If they are, and would be replanted where burned or in any [ripped or riparian] areas, may I suggest the use of a [stinger or auger?] mounted on the front of a backhoe. This would be quick, successful and inexpensive and allow planting of rootless willow slips up to 6-feet-long. The effects of the proposed treatments on willow would be discussed in the silviculture and botany specialist reports. The project would follow Forest Plan guidelines for riparian protection. At this time, no treatments are proposed in riparian areas with willow, and no planting of “upland” willow is proposed.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 69 Prescribed Burning Safety 1. Ms Kamps, my name is Greg Brittain. I own the cabin and 40 acres just off Sucker Creek Road that is in sector 6 on your map. I am just below Doc Shields place. I am currently serving overseas and am unable to get to Lincoln until summer. Will precautions be taken to ensure that these burns do not spread beyond their intended areas? Thanks a lot!! Mr. Brittain was contacted to clarify that precautions would take place to keep the prescribed fire where proposed. Additional information was provided and Mr. Brittain is on the mailing list to receive more project information.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 70 Prescribed Burning Safety 1. Could be dangerous to those living in the Lincoln Gulch area if there are not enough people at the prescribed burns with enough fire suppression equipment. See response to letter 57, comment 1 pertaining to burn plans.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 70 Economics 2. I don’t see how you are going to get much from large commercial harvest sales. …open the sales to small loggers in 10-20-acre An incremental economic analysis would be completed and would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (1,3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) sales. Large companies can bid more than one sale. …this would allow all local loggers to bid. Most of the timber slated for removal is not economically or commercially valuable, especially to big logging operators. Designating contract type is outside the scope of this analysis and combinations of “Sale” packages would be evaluated if an action decision is made.  71 Project Design 1. First, we respectfully request that the Stonewall Vegetation Project be designed and implemented consistent with the MFRC Principles as well as all existing environmental laws and regulations including the Roadless Area Conservation Rule. Second, we ask that this project be designed consistent with the requirements of the National Forest Management Act, the Forest Landscape Restoration Act and the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) Field Guide to ensure maximum eligibility for forest restoration funding. This project has been designed to comply with the Forest Plan, applicable laws, regulation and policy. Funding of implementation is outside the scope of the environmental analysis, but is considered in the economic analysis discussed in Chapter 3 and other laws and regulations sections of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (2,3) 71 Project Design 2. For each stand that is proposed for treatment, either by USFS or LRC, please describe the agency’s perspective on current stand condition, the stand’s specific restoration need(s), how the proposed treatment meets these needs, the ecological basis for each treatment, the desired restoration outcome(s) and what monitoring measure(s) you will employ to determine whether and to what extent the restoration needs have been met. Information for each proposed treatment unit has been collected. A series of formal stand exam plots has been established to be used in characterizing the current condition and would be used to estimate expected changes due to treatments using the Forest Vegetation Simulator, a forest modeling program.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Monitoring 3. We would also like to see both implementation and effectiveness monitoring with a defensible statistical design including repeated sampling of plots or transects before and after treatment applications. This type of monitoring is laid out in the MFRC principles (principles 2 and 4). Monitoring would be discussed in chapter 2 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Collaboration 4. We strongly encourage you to explore the possibility of a monitoring partnership between the Lincoln Ranger District and the Partnerships for monitoring would be considered as opportunities arise for the forest. Developing these partnerships is  Nonsignificant issue (1) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) University of Montana’s College of Forestry and Conservation. outside the scope of this analysis. 71 Restoration 5. To ensure maximum consistency with the Montana Forest Restoration Principles, please explain how each of the proposed silvicultural treatments qualify as “restoration” with respect to the MFRC principles The effects of silvicultural treatments and how they would be accomplishing the purpose and need for the project, which includes restoration objectives would be discussed in the silviculture specialist report and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. This discussion would include MFRC principles.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Silviculture 6. Regarding the regeneration harvests of Project 1, it does not appear that these treatments are consistent with either the MFRC principles or the requirements of CFLRP. Please describe the specific goals of regeneration treatments described in Groups 3 and 4 and their relevance to the Montana Forest Restoration Principles. Assuming these treatments are designed to enhance stand replacement, please explain what the expected or desired species composition of the next stand would be, how this is consistent with the Montana Forest Restoration Principles and how the next stands would be managed. The effects of regeneration treatments and how they would be accomplishing the purpose and need for the project, which includes restoration objectives would be discussed in the silviculture specialist report and would be summarized in chapter 3 of the DEIS. This discussion would include MFRC principles.   Nonsignificant issue (3) 71. Silviculture Mountain Pine Beetle Adaptive Management 7. …we would like to know whether it is possible to leave large patches (1 to 5 acres) of uncut forests within the regeneration harvests. Through rigorous monitoring efforts, these patches could be used to monitor how stands regenerate following MPB mortality compared to regeneration harvests. While there is much area with MPB mortality in the surrounding areas, a robust design could be used as part of understanding species responses to treatments. We believe that this type of study is consistent with the ‘adaptive management’ principle adopted by MFRC and with language in the CFLRP Field Guide. Effects to vegetation, including proposed reforestation planting, would be analyzed in the silviculture specialists report and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Silviculture Reforestation 8. At sites where trees would be planted, what species of trees would be planted, at Effects to vegetation, including proposed reforestation planting, would be analyzed in  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) what density, and from what population or nursery will the seedlings originate? Please explain why the chosen mix of seedlings is used and how the chosen mix will facilitate meeting future stand conditions that fit our restoration principles. the silviculture specialists report and discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. 71 Roads 9. Please explain how, when and to what standard the temporary roads would be decommissioned and restored, and how this would be monitored. See response to letter 3 comment 12 regarding new roads that would be obliterated immediately following timber harvest.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Noxious Weeds 10. Please explain how invasive plant species would be managed should they invade the temporary roads or treatment areas following implementation, and how invasive species would be monitored. See response to letter 5 comments 2,3,4,5 and 29 regarding noxious weeds.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Prescribed Burning Slashing 11. Please explain and clarify the use of “slashing” with prescribed burning activities, and explain what slashing prior to prescribed burning achieves. In prescribed burn units, slashing (cutting of small diameter material and spreading it on the ground), is identified in areas to help achieve desired results where adequate fuels may not currently exist on the ground.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Prescribed Burning Severity 12. Please use and reference appropriate fire models to analyze treatments, and then clearly state how treatments would change fire behavior across the Stonewall Vegetation Project area. Utilize a fire severity description for each habitat to be treated in these proposals that describe how the treatments will mimic the natural fire impacts for low, mixed and lethal fire regimes. See response to letter 3 comment 3 regarding fire/fuels analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Prescribed Burning and Silviculture Fire Intensity 13. Identify stands or treatment areas that can be brought back into the naturally projected fire intensity levels either by using silvicultural treatments or prescribed fire. The effects of stand treatments on proposed treatment units and how those effects relate to achieving the stated purpose and need, which includes “creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape” would be discussed in the silviculture and fuels specialists’ and would be summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Prescribed Burning 14. Please outline the steps you will take to ensure that prescribed burning does not Project design features identify measures to be taken to ensure conifer mortality is within  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Mortality of large trees increase mortality of large trees in the project area. For example, if duff is thick and roots are shallow, even low severity fire can kill large trees and you might consider timing burning to ensure that only the top of the duff is burned, slash pull back or even raking the duff from away from the bole root collar. an acceptable range. Individual trees may be protected by clearing brush and slash around the base of selected trees. 71 Restoration 15. Given that many of the large trees are missing, take into account the need to restore the large Ponderosa pine population. Part of purpose and need is to “enhance & restore aspen, western larch, and ponderosa pine species and habitats.” The silviculture specialist report will discuss forest type and stand conditions and other project records will identify stands that have lost their large ponderosa pine component due to recent bark beetle mortality and how proposed treatments are anticipated to push the stands toward restoring that component.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Prescribed Burning “Prescribed Mixed Severity Fire” 16. Regarding “Prescribed Mixed Severity Fire” we request the development of clear objectives for achieving a mixed severity fire. We would like you to describe what response you expect in terms of post-fire stand structure and landscape structure. Treatment objectives would be discussed in the Silviculture and fuels specialist and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The objectives of the mixed severity units are to create openings between 10-75 acres resulting in the breakup of continuous vegetation in higher elevations, promote age class diversity and enhance white bark pine habitat by creating openings suitable for regeneration.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 71 Stone Dry 17. …regarding the Stone Dry portion of the project as described in your recent scoping notice, we believe that the activities you envision for this area could be consistent with the Montana Forest Restoration Principles, especially Principles 5 and 6 which are included here for your reference: 5) Reestablish fire as a natural process on the landscape 6) Consider social constraints and seek public support for reintroducing fire on the landscape Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 72 Native Fish 1. …it is unclear if the project would Effects to fisheries would be discussed in the  Nonsignificant Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Habitat  adversely influence cutthroat trout (and bull trout) habitat; however, the project appears to have this potential given the scale and nature of the project. As the project moves forward, it would be important to ensure that special riparian protection measures are appropriate to protect riparian values associated with native fish habitat. This would include maintaining appropriate riparian buffers as part of the larger project, to offset potential effects from possible upland disturbance. There may also be opportunities to correct historical problems--related to streams--within the footprint of the project (e.g., replacing undersized culverts). If so, perhaps this project could provide a mechanism to correct any such problem. fisheries report and in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Project design features would include INFISH direction to provide appropriate resource protection. INFISH direction would be met. issue (3) 73 Support for the Project 1. The Tri-County Fire Safe Working Group supports the Stonewall Vegetation Project because it will reduce the risk of a catastrophic wildfire in the Lincoln area. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 74 Big Game 1. How will big game winter range be affected? Effects to big game winter range would be analyzed in the wildlife report and summarized in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. A potential alternative 3 was developed to reduce potential impacts to various wildlife habitat elements. This alternative and anticipated effects would be discussed in the DEIS. Significant issue #1 74 Grazing 2. How will livestock grazing be managed? There are no changes proposed to the existing livestock management. Effects to livestock grazing would be discussed in chapter 3 of the DEIS with more detailed discussion in the range specialist report.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 74 Harvest 3. How many green trees would be removed? Effects to vegetation would be discussed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. Providing an estimate  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) of green trees to be removed is not anticipated to be specifically identified, particularly with the ongoing insect mortality. 74 Economics 4. What will this cost the taxpayers? The results of an incremental economic analysis would be disclosed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 74 Noxious Weeds 5. Do you have a plan to deal with weeds? Noxious weed treatments are ongoing across the Forest. Noxious weed treatments would continue with this project. Project design features would be incorporated to reduce potential for spread of noxious weeds.  Nonsignificant issue (2,3) 74 Visuals 6. What are the visual impacts? Effects to visual resources would be analyzed and VQO forest plan compliance would be disclosed in chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 74 Private lands 7. What are the private landowners doing to make their property more firesafe? Management of private lands is beyond the scope of this project. However, any identified private land activities would be accounted for in cumulative effects analysis in the affected resource(s). Private landowners are working in cooperation with Federal and State agencies in managing lands to move toward the goals identified the Community Wildfire Protect ion Plan and the goals for the Southwest Crown of the Continent areas.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 75 General Project Design 1. I have nothing to add to the proposal. I agree with the practices being discussed to use on this project, as long as they are used wisely and not to the extreme-the most minimum effective way to get the job done, leaving as much authentic beauty around Lincoln. Heavy on conservation and restoration. Thank you for your support.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 75 Timber Harvest 2. I'm worried about how much timber is cut out and where. The last time they cut around us it created a severe wind tunnel, blowing down dozens of my trees … Proposed treatments would be discussed in Chapters 1 and 2 in the DEIS. Proposed action treatments were developed t following Forest Plan and regional guides to ensure treatments are appropriate for the stand types and conditions present. The project design features  Nonsignificant issue (1, 3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) may include feathering along private lands to blend with the vegetation to avoid creating abrupt visual lines. Thinning of any kind would increase air movement through forest canopies. In units where trees are proposed to be “thinned” the increase wind movement would be relatively moderate due to the remaining tree canopies. The greatest increases would be in regeneration units, however even in the regeneration units trees would remain to provide shelter and seed, moderating winds. Also, regeneration units would be patchy, with patches of heavy mortality being regenerated and patches of healthy trees of a desirable species being retained and thinned as needed. Any modifications of treatments to prevent wind impacts on concerned landowners can be discussed, as long as the locations where the concerns are known. The effects of those medications on achieving the purpose and need could then be discussed. 75 Prescribed Burning Safety 3. The wind problem also concerns me in the burning process of this project; it is very gusty around us and unpredictable. How well will the burning be managed is a concern. A prescribed fire burn plan would be prepared for all burn units prior to burning and would identify the range of conditions appropriate for implementing the burn. Risk management is a foundation for all prescribed fire activities. Risk and uncertainties relating to prescribed fire activities are analyzed, communicated and managed as they relate to conducting or not conducting the activity. A complexity analysis is done for each prescribed fire plan. Identified risk are analyzed and then mitigated. If risks factors are identified with a “high” rating, they would be documented and discussed in the Complexity Rating Rationale of the fire plan. Prescribed fire prescriptions would be defined showing a range of conditions during which a prescribed fire may be ignited. The plan prescription will describe a range of low to high  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) limits for the environmental parameters (weather, topography, fuels, fire behavior (flame length, rate of spread, spotting)) are required to meet the prescribed fire plan objectives while also meeting smoke and control objectives. Additional elements included in prescribed fire plans: (list is not all inclusive) contingency resources are identified, expected weather and fire behavior, ignition plan for the burn unit as well as a plan for holding the fire once ignited. 75 Prescribed Burning Air Quality 4. The extent of the burning, when and where and how long could cause heavy smoke creating breathing problems for the nearby residence. See response to letter 1 comment 3 pertaining to air quality.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 75 Restoration 5. Conservation and restoration need to play a big part in this project. The steep hillsides need great consideration and the streams and springs. We rely on Stonewall Creek for irrigation and a spring for a source of water to the cabins. These sources would have to be protected from damage or change. Project design features and applicable best management practices would be listed in the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 76 General Design of the Project 1. More details on what you are going to do The proposed actions and alternatives, including project design features, would be discussed in chapters 1 and 2 of the DEIS. The applicable BMPs would be included in the DEIS,  Nonsignificant issue (3) 77 Identify the Project Area 1. Based on the maps provided in the scoping package, it is difficult to determine if this project lies near the CDNST or any of the project activities would be visible from the CDNST in the area. CDTA requests that the CDNST proximity to or location within the project area be identified. The project vicinity map has been revised to include the CDNST for reference. There are no activities proposed from this project within a 5 mile radius of the CDNST (CDNST Plan 2009)  Nonsignificant issue (1) 77 Visuals 2. … activities should only take place within the CDNST corridor in a manner that is consistent with Trail values expressed in the CDNST Comprehensive Plan and when they are consistent with the Scenery Management System Objectives for the CDNST. Therefore, There are no activities proposed from this project within a 5 mile radius of the CDNST. (CDNST Plan 2009) VQO compliance is addressed using VMS and summarized in chapter 3.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) CDTA recommends the use of the Scenery Management System and the consultation of the CDNST Comprehensive Plan direction (2009) for assessing impacts of the Stonewall Vegetative Management Project on the CDNST. A crosswalk between the VMS and SMS would be included in the visual resource report that would be available in the project record. 77 Visuals 3. Specifically, CDT A requests that if the Trail lies within the project area, that careful attention be paid to the foreground zone (or Trail Corridor) and activities that may be seen from the Trail have the potential to negatively impact the Trail Users experience. We suggest the use of small group selections/thinning activities, and/or feathering of vegetation to soften the edges of any management activities that remove vegetation from the area. We would also like to discourage the any commercial harvesting activities within the CDNST corridor. For activities that occur beyond the Trail corridor, but are visible from the Trail. We request that careful attention be paid to minimize impacts to the visual aesthetic of the area. Again we suggest the use of feathering, small group selections/thinning, and careful use of fire in these areas to address management concerns. There are no activities proposed from this project within a 5 mile radius of the CDNST. Forest plan compliance would be determined using VMS per forest plan direction. VQO forest plan compliance of the project area from the CDNST would be addressed in the visual resource report and summarized in chapter 3 of the DEIS.  Nonsignificant issue (3) 78 Timber Harvest 1. We believe the mature timber should be logged. Also, the beetle infested timber needs to be salvaged rather than left to waste and catch fire causing more problems. Thank you for your support of the proposal.  Nonsignificant issue (4) 78 Roadless 2. We would like to see more roadless areas. See response to letter 5 comments 24 and 25 regarding roadless.  Nonsignificant issue (1)  78 Roads 3. We support closing more roads on public land in an effort to control damage to both public and private deeded lands. See response to letter 5 comment 14 regarding the ongoing travel management analysis.  Nonsignificant issue (1) 79 Prescribed Burning 1. Air quality for the Lincoln community from prescribed burning. See response to letter 1 comment 3 regarding air quality impacts.  Nonsignificant issue (3) Letter # Topic Comment Response Alternative Issue # Or Category(Ies) Air Quality 79 Loss of value from wood products 2. Loss of value from burning wood products. 3. Would request that no control burning take place. Chip only, lop and scatter limbs where equipment depressions are left and terraced for rain runoff and quicker nutrient base for remaining trees. Trees that are not sold should be stored on ranger district property for proposals to use for pellet startup company, firewood sales or siding production. The no action alternative would include no controlled burning. The forest plan identifies prescribed burning as an appropriate tool for vegetation and fuels management (pages 11/33 – 34), and burn proposals would be completed following the Forest Plan Fire Management Plan direction in place at the time of implementation. Many of the proposed prescribed fire units are located in the Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) where timber management is currently uneconomical or environmentally infeasible. Timber harvest is not proposed in the IRAs (management area M1). Forest Plan standard Firewood 2. Logging areas would be open to public firewood gathering after the sale is closed and prior to burning logging debris and closing roads, if wood is available and other resource values, such as wildlife snags, down logs, and soils, can be protected. An alternative was considered that would not use prescribed fire in management areas T1 through T5. This alternative would not address the purpose and need to modify fire behavior to enhance community protection while creating conditions that allow the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape. Due to not addressing this purpose and need this alternative was eliminated from detailed analysis. This would be disclosed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Alternative considered but eliminated from detailed analysis, this would be discussed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS. Nonsignificant issue (2),3  80 Support for the Project 1. Do what is needed Thank you for your support  Nonsignificant issue (4)   Appendix B – Proposed Treatment Descriptions and Silviculture SummaryTreatment Type and Prescription Descriptions Improvement Cut, Underburn - An improvement cut is an intermediate harvest that removes the less desirable trees of any species in a stand of poles or larger trees, primarily to improve the composition and quality. These treatments would generally be ‘from below’ to favor retaining larger trees over smaller trees, however, thinning regimes would favor retaining smaller trees of a more desirable species over larger trees of a less desirable species, and would favor keeping smaller, healthier trees over larger, damaged or diseased trees. The species preference for retention would be aspen, western larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir in descending order. Trees would be thinned to an average spacing of 20 to 40 feet (109 to 27 TPA), but spacing could vary widely. Thinning would be by hand and/or machine. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns (e.g., snag and downed large woody debris requirements) would be removed for utilization. Following thinning, the units would be underburned, which are “Prescribed burns of low intensity covering a majority of the burn unit consuming surface fuels, but not the overstory canopy.” Improvement Cut, Jackpot burn – The improvement cut would be as described previously. The thinning would be followed by a jackpot burn, which is “prescribed burning of fuels in scattered concentrations” and in addition does not cover a majority of the unit. Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles – These treatments involve cutting small trees of little to no merchantable value to decrease stocking and reduce fuels. Trees would be thinned by hand or by machine. Post-thinning average tree spacing would range from 12 to 20 feet (109 to 303 TPA). Thinning debris in several units would be piled by hand and the handpiles would be burned to reduce fuels. See the fuels report for handpile and burning specifications. Precommercial Thin – These treatments involve cutting small trees of little to no merchantable value to decrease stocking and reduce fuels. Trees would be thinned by hand or by machine. Post-thinning average tree spacing would range from 12 to 20 feet (109 to 303 TPA). Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn – These treatments involve removing all trees except for those needed for shelter and seed production. Leave trees would be grouped, and would be aspen, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, or subalpine fir, in descending order of preference. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns may be removed for utilization. Following cutting and removal, the units would be burned to prepare sites for natural regeneration. Expected natural regeneration species are Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine. Areas may be planted with ponderosa pine and western larch to achieve the desired species composition. The leave trees would be retained following regeneration. Low Severity Fire, Openings less than 5 acres – These treatments would involve cutting of small trees (slashing) to create fuel beds in areas less than 5 acres in size, and underburning to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. Desired natural regeneration species are Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, and lodgepole pine depending upon the unit. Low Severity Fire, Openings less than 10 acres – These treatments would involve cutting of small trees (slashing) to create fuel beds in areas less than 10 acres in size, and underburning to reduce fuels, cause additional mortality of undesirable trees, and prepare sites for natural regeneration. Desired natural regeneration species are Douglas-fir, whitebark pine, and lodgepole pine. Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles – These treatments involve removing all trees except for those needed for seed production. Seed trees are expected to be Douglas-fir. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Undesirable, damaged, or diseased small trees would be cut (slashed), handpiled and burned. Leave trees would be retained following regeneration. Regeneration is expected to be Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine. Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn – The shelterwood treatment would be as described previously. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Following cutting and removal, concentrations of fuels involving less than a majority of the unit area would be burned. Expected regeneration would be some combination of Douglas-fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and aspen. Some combination of ponderosa pine, western larch, and Douglas-fir may be planted. Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn - These treatments involve removing all trees except for those needed for seed production. Seed trees are expected to be mainly Douglas-fir with ponderosa pine, Engelmann spruce, and aspen depending on unit. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Following cutting and removal, units would be jackpot burned. In some units, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir may be planted. Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn - These treatments involve removing all trees except for those needed for seed production. Seed trees are expected to be Douglas-fir. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Following cutting and removal, units would be broadcast burned. Ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir may be planted. Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn - These treatments involve removing all trees except for those needed for shelter or seed production. Leave trees would be relatively uniformly spaced and would be Douglas-fir, western larch, ponderosa pine, and aspen at about 30-40 BA. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Following removal, the area would be prescribe burned for site preparation. Expected regeneration would be Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine. Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Slashing, Handpile/Burn – The shelterwood treatment would be as described previously for group shelterwoods with reserves. Leave trees are expected to be Douglas-fir. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Following cutting and removal, undesirable small trees would be cut, handpiled and burned. Expected regeneration would be Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine. Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves - The shelterwood treatment would be as described previously for group shelterwoods with reserves. Expected natural regeneration would be Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine. Ponderosa pine may be planted. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. These units do include some area of ponderosa pine plantation that would be thinned. Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn – These treatments involve removing all trees except for scattered Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Natural regeneration of Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine is expected. Ponderosa pine may be planted. Following cutting and removal, units would be jackpot burned. Clearcut with Reserves, Site Preparation Burn – These treatments involve removing all trees except for scattered clumps of Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine and western larch. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Natural regeneration of Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine is expected. Ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and western larch may be planted. Following cutting and removal, units would be prescribed burned to prepare sites for regeneration. Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn - These treatments involve removing all trees except scattered clumps or individual Douglas-fir for structure. All dead and live cut trees considered merchantable, except as needed to meet other resource concerns, may be removed for utilization. Following cutting, the area would be broadcast burned for fuels reduction and site preparation. Natural regeneration of lodgepole pine is expected. Douglas-fir and western larch may be planted. Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles – These treatments involve removing trees to improve stand health by stopping or reducing the actual or anticipated spread of insects and disease. In these units, all dead and dying trees considered merchantable would be cut and removed except as needed to meet other resource concerns. No additional live trees would be cut. Small, undesirable, damaged, or diseased trees would be cut, handpiled and burned. Following treatment, trees would average 10- to 15-foot spacing (194 to 436 TPA). Mixed Severity Fire, Openings – These treatments would be burned with a mixed-severity fire, creating various sizes of openings depending upon forest type and site factors. Patches of trees may be cut in the units to facilitate burning as well as to enhance regeneration of whitebark pine and other species. Proposed Treatments by Group and Unit Table B- 1. Alternative 2 proposed treatments by group and unit Group Unit Treatment Type Prescription Acres 1 6 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 14 1 7 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 17 1 8 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 62 1 15 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 15 1 23 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 29 1 24 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 5 1 26 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 65 1 28 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 22 1 30 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 14 1 31 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 16 1 32 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 45 1 33 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn 17 1 44 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 97 1 45 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 38 1 46 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn 251 1 47 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn 220 1 54 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn 20 1 55 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 29 2 3 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 37 2 14 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 11 Group Unit Treatment Type Prescription Acres 2 16 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 3 2 18 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 21 2 21 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 6 2 48 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 141 2 49 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 49 2 50 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 49 2 51 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 193 2 59 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 16 2 60 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 25 2 61 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 34 2 62 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 37 2 63 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 17 2 64 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 30 2 65 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 25 2 66 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 26 2 67 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 20 2 68 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 15 2 69 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 31 2 70 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 39 2 71 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 40 2 72 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 85 2 73 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 33 2 75 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 148 3 1 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 96 3 2 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 Acres 146 3 9 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 18 3 11 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 23 3 12 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 80 3 13 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 41 3 20 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 32 3 22 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 30 3 25 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 29 3 29 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Slashing, Handpile/Burn 25 3 34 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 12 3 39 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 42 3 40 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 11 3 41 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 12 3 42 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 65 3 43 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 104 3 53 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 17 Group Unit Treatment Type Prescription Acres 3 57 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves 93 3 58 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves 15 4 10 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 18 4 17 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 38 4 19 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 15 4 27 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 31 4 35 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 24 4 36 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 20 4 37 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 8 4 38 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 7 4 52 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 22 4 56 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 17 4 74 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 23 5 4 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 7 5 5 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 18 6 76 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 123 6 78 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 38 6 85 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 143 7 80 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <20 acres 326 7 86 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <10 acres 47 7 87 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 36 8 77 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 736 8 79 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 337 8 81 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 629 8 82 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 776 8 83 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 457 8 84 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 831 8 88 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 892 Table B- 2. Alternative 3 proposed treatments by group and unit Group Unit Treatment Type Prescription Acres 1 15 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 15 1 23 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 29 1 24 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 5 1 28 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 22 1 46b Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles 27 1 47b Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles 9 1 47c Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles 31 1 6 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 14 Group Unit Treatment Type Prescription Acres 1 7 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 17 1 8 Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Underburn 62 2 14 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 11 2 16 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 3 2 3 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpiling, Burn Piles 37 2 48 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Underburn 141 2 50 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 49 2 51 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Underburn or Slash Treatment along PVT 193 2 59 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 16 2 61a Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Handpile Underburn 9 2 62 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 37 2 63 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 17 2 66 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 26 2 67 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 20 2 68 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 15 2 69 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 31 2 70 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 39 2 71 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 40 2 72 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 85 2 73 Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin 33 2 75b Intermediate Harvest Precommercial Thin, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles 20 3 1 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 96 3 11 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn 23 3 12 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn 80 3 13 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 41 3 22a Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 22 3 25 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 29 3 34 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 12 3 39 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 26 3 40 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 11 3 41 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Underburn 12 3 42 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 65 3 43 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Underburn 104 3 53 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 17 3 57 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 93 3 58 Regeneration Harvest Shelterwood (Group) with Reserves, Jackpot Burn 15 3 9 Regeneration Harvest Seedtree with Reserves, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 18 4 10 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Underburn 18 Group Unit Treatment Type Prescription Acres 4 27 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 31 4 35 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 24 4 36 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 20 4 37 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 8 4 38 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 7 4 52 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Broadcast Burn 22 4 74 Regeneration Harvest Clearcut with Reserves, Site Prep Burn 23 5 4 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 7 5 5 Intermediate Harvest Sanitation, Slashing, Handpiling, Burn Piles 18 6 2 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 146 6 78 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 38 6 85 Prescribed Fire Low Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 143 7 87 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <5 acres 36 8 79 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 337 8 82 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 776 8 83 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <75 acres 457 8 84 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 831 8 88 Prescribed Fire Mixed Severity Fire, Openings <30 acres 865 9 17a Prescribed Fire Underburn 38 9 19a Prescribed Fire Underburn 15 9 20a Prescribed Fire Underburn 24 9 29a Prescribed Fire Underburn 25 9 30a Prescribed Fire Underburn 14 9 31a Prescribed Fire Underburn 16 9 32a Prescribed Fire Underburn 45 9 44a Prescribed Fire Underburn 97 9 45a Prescribed Fire Underburn 38 9 80a Prescribed Fire Jackpot Burn 326 10 46a Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles 223 10 47a Intermediate Harvest Improvement Cut, Jackpot Burn, Handpiling, Burn Piles 180  Table B- 3. Treatment unit management area acreages Unit MA Acres Unit MA Acres Unit MA Acres 1  T4 96 37  T3 8 63  T3 17 2  T4 146 38  T3 7 64  T3 30 3  T4 37 39  T3 42 65  T3 25 4  T4 7 40  T3 11 66  T3 26 5  T4 18 41  T3 11 67  T3 20 Unit MA Acres Unit MA Acres Unit MA Acres 6  T4 14 42  T2 39 68  T3 15 7  T4 17 42  T3 26 69  T3 31 8  T4 62 43  T2 104 70  T3 39 9  T4 18 44  T1 93 71  T3 40 10  T1 1 44  T3 4 72  T2 85 10  T3 5 45  T1 26 73  T4 33 10  T4 12 45  T3 12 74  T3 23 11  T1 22 46  T2 248 75  T2 148 12  T1 80 46  T3 3 76  T3 99 13  T1 7 47  M1 2 76  W1 24 13  T3 34 47  T2 218 77  T1 90 14  T1 10 48  M1 56 77  T3 619 15  T1 15 48  T2 85 78  T1 38 16  T1 3 49  M1 13 79  M1 267 17  T1 38 49  T2 37 79  T1 59 18  T1 21 50  M1 48 79  T3 7 19  T1 15 51  M1 19 79  W1 3 20  T1 32 51  T1 173 80  M1 318 21  T1 6 52  T3 22 80  W1 8 22  T3 30 53  T3 17 81  M1 583 23  T3 29 54  T3 20 81  T1 6 24  T3 5 55  T3 29 81  W1 40 25  T3 29 56  T3 17 82  M1 13 26  T3 65 57  T1 92 82  W1 763 27  T3 31 58  M1 6 83  M1 201 28  T3 17 58  T1 9 83  W1 256 28  T4 5 59  T3 16 84  M1 795 29  T4 25 60  T1 1 84  T1 28 30  T4 14 60  T3 22 84  T2 7 31  T4 16 60  T4 2 85  M1 143 32  T4 45 61  T3 21 86  M1 47 33  T3 17 61  T4 12 87  M1 25 34  T3 12 62  T3 21 87  T1 12 35  T3 24 62  T4 16 88  M1 740 36  T3 20    88  W1 124  Fuels Treatments The MRFC discusses Forest Types and Fire Regimes and is quoted below: The following briefly describes major forest ecotypes in Montana and ascribes to each an approximate historical fire regime and a very general picture of historical stand structure. Because there is overlap between each ecotype and no black and white distinctions in historical fire regimes or stand structures, these elements should be considered in the planning and design of restoration projects. Restoration by Forest Type Low-to-mid elevation ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, and western larch forests typify the low- and mixed-severity fire regime with average fire return intervals of 5 to 30 years. · Pure ponderosa pine experienced frequent, low-severity fires and primarily exhibited an open stand structure across the landscape. · Mixed ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir/western Larch (in all combinations) forests exhibited less frequent fire, more variable stand structures across the landscape, and variable fire intensity and severity. · Historically, these low elevation forests were subject to the greatest amount of timber management and fire suppression activities and thus are likely the furthest from their natural range of variability. · These forest types are the most likely and appropriate candidates for restoration activities to re-establish natural fire return intervals, but especially in the case of mid-elevation mixed-fire severity forests, restoration activities should be taken on a case-by-case basis. Mid-elevation lodgepole pine, Douglas-fir, and subalpine fir forests exhibit dense stand structures and historically experienced mixed and stand replacing fire regimes. · Mixed fire regimes may be more widespread than stand replacement regimes in the Inland Northwest and have fire intervals averaging between 30 and 100 years. Stand replacement regimes have average natural return intervals of about 100 – 200 years. · Mixed severity forest types were likely historically dominant and may not require any specific management activity to allow them to maintain function within their historic range of variability, but again they would have to be considered on a case by case basis. High-elevation subalpine fir, lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce forests historically experienced fire on a 200- to 300- year fire return interval where subalpine forests of whitebark pine historically experienced fire on a mean fire return interval of 50 – 300 years. These forest ecotypes are likely the closest to their natural range of variability and likely require minimal restoration efforts. The treatment groups include both timber management and fuels management treatments. Treatment descriptions for the fuels management treatments are as follows: Low-Severity Fire- is applied to meet fuel reduction objectives and reintroduce fire to the landscape. Low severity fire would topkill some of the understory vegetation, effects to soils would be minimal. Some over story canopy openings of less than 5 acres may be created with this treatment. Small diameter trees may be cut in areas to create a continuous fuel bed to carry the fire (included in treatment groups 6 and 9). Mixed Severity Fire- is applied to meet fuel reduction objectives and reintroduce fire to the landscape. Mixed severity fire would exhibit a wide range of effects on the vegetation. Some areas would result in low severity fire effects; other areas would exhibit moderate fire severity with some over story mortality but not complete replacement; and yet other areas would result in higher severity fire resulting in complete over story mortality. Overstory canopy openings of various sizes would be created with this treatment. Small diameter trees may be cut in areas to create a continuous fuel bed to carry the fire (included in treatment group 8). Hand pile/pile burning—fuels would be piled by hand and piles would be burned when burning conditions are favorable (included in treatment groups 2, 3, 5, 9, and 10). Jackpot Burning—burning of concentrations of fuels within the unit. These concentrations occur from harvest operations, insect and disease activity or natural forest succession. This does not include burning of hand and machine piles included in treatment groups 1, 3, 4, 9, and 10). Machine pile/pile burning—natural and residual activity generated fuels are piled using equipment to reduce fuel accumulations and preparesites for planting (where necessary). Piles are generally burned during the fall/winter when burning conditions are favorable and risk of escape is low. Sufficient down woody material is retained onsite to meet objectives for soil nutrient and habitat needs included in treatment groups 2, 3, and 5). Prescribed Under Burning- consists of controlled burning with flame lengths generally 3 feet or less and would be utilized as a stand-alone treatment or following thinning. Under burning would be used to reduce natural and activity fuels and shrubs and prepare sites for planning. Cutting and piling of ladder fuels may occur to reduce potential fire behavior and scorch to residual trees (included in treatment groups 1, 3, 4, and 9). Site Prep Burn – Following harvest activity designated units would be under burned prior to tree planting (included in treatment groups 3 and 4. Slashing—Cutting of small diameter conifers (less than 6 inches in diameter) using chainsaws. The treatment is conducted prior to burning to ensure there are sufficient surface fuels to carry the fire (included in treatment groups 3, 6, 7, and 8). Silviculture Summary Compliance with Forest Plan and Other Relevant Laws, Regulations, Policies and Plans Alternative 1 Compliance of alternative 1 (no action) with Forest Plan forestwide standards pertinent to this discussion is displayed in Table B- 4. Note that forestwide standard statements refer to appendices in the Forest Plan and not of this document. Table B- 4. Alternative 1 compliance with Forest Plan forestwide standards FORESTWIDE STANDARDS COMPLIANCE Timber 1. Silvicultural examinations and prescriptions will be required before any timber manipulation or silvicultural treatment takes place. Exceptions include cutting of trees that block vision along roads, cutting hazard trees, clearing right-of-way, clearing for mineral No timber manipulation or silvicultural treatment other than ongoing activities would take place under this alternative. FORESTWIDE STANDARDS COMPLIANCE development, minor and incidental amounts of free use, and cutting personal firewood. Final determination of what silvicultural system will be used for a particular project will be made by a certified silviculturist after an on-the-ground site analysis. This site-specific analysis will determine the appropriate even or uneven age silvicultural system that best meets the goals and objectives of the management area. Standards for applying all silvicultural systems, as well as supporting research references are in the Northern Region guide (June 10, 1983). In addition, broad guidelines are found in Appendix H and M. Even aged management methods will be used only where it is determined to be appropriate to meet objectives. Clearcutting will be used only where it is the optimum method. 2. Tree improvement will be conducted in accordance with the current Regional and Forest level tree improvement plans. No tree improvement activities would be conducted under this alternative. 4. Timber stand openings created by even-aged silvicultural systems will normally be 40 acres or less. Creation of larger openings will require a 60-day public review and Regional Forester approval. Exceptions are listed in the Northern Regional Guide. No timber stand openings would be created by even-aged silvicultural systems under this alternative. Protection Insect and Disease 1. Silvicultural systems will be the primary tool for preventative pest management. Use silvicultural systems to: (1) improve species diversity, growth, and vigor for stands and (2) increase the size diversity and class diversity between stands. No silvicultural systems would be proposed under this alternative. 2. During ongoing infestations, control insects and disease through silvicultural and biological practices. Chemical controls will be limited to high value areas or used on a broader scale only when all other measures have failed and other resource values can be protected. Emphasize cooperative control measures between Federal, State, and private landowners. No activities would be proposed under this alternative. 3. Biological practices will be considered in controlling insect and disease infestations. No activities would be proposed under this alternative. 4. If possible, harvest stands which are a high risk for mountain pine beetle attack before harvesting moderate or low risk stands. No activities would be proposed under this alternative. Wildfire 2. Locate timber sales, or cutting units within a sale, to break-up contiguous natural fuel. No timber sales would be proposed under this alternative. Wildlife/Snags Larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, spruce, and subalpine fir, in that priority, are the preferred species for snags and replacement trees (live trees left to replace existing snags). Tree mortality and potential snag tree species would continue as is under this alternative.  Compliance of alternative 1 (no action) with Forest Plan management area standards pertinent to this discussion are displayed in Table B- 5. Table B- 5. Alternative 1 compliance with management area standards MANAGEMENT AREA STANDARDS COMPLIANCE M-1 Timber - Timber harvest, such as salvage and firewood removal, may occur where access exists. Slash created by any management practice will be disposed of in a manner consistent with the management area goals. Forested lands are classified as unsuitable for timber management. No timber harvest is proposed. Protection - Salvage of dead, dying, or high-hazard trees is permitted to prevent disease and insect population build-up. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Prescribed fire with unplanned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources, when within pre-established prescribed fire criteria. These criteria are stated in the Fire Management Direction in Appendix R. -Evaluate areas periodically for significant insect and disease problems. Endemic levels will be accepted as normal. If epidemic levels develop and control is necessary, the control method should minimize impacts on watershed and other resource values. No actions are taken to prevent disease and insect population build-up.  No prescribed fire is proposed for the enhancement and maintenance of resources.  No areas are evaluated for insect and disease problems. T-1 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest practices include clearcut, group selection, and shelterwood harvest, depending on habitat group, physical site conditions, and silvicultural objectives. Precommercial thinning and intermediate harvest may occur where needed as determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning. (Appendices H and M of the Forest Plan provide broad guidelines for various habitat groups.) - As a minimum, a cutover area will not be considered an opening when: (1) a new forest stand is established and certified as stocked, and (2) vegetative conditions reach the point where harvest of additional timber can occur and the combined area can still meet watershed management objectives. - Prescribed burning or other techniques may be used for slash disposal, site preparation, silvicultural, and livestock objectives. In habitat groups where fire is not a useful treatment tool, lopping and scattering, yarding unmerchantable material (YUM), or other methods will be used to reduce fuel accumulations and prepare sites for regeneration. - Project level planning will provide for stand regeneration within five years of final harvest. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. No timber harvest activities are proposed. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at No forest protection measures are proposed. MANAGEMENT AREA STANDARDS COMPLIANCE times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. T-2 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest methods and volumes will be adjusted as necessary to meet big game winter range needs. Even- or uneven-aged silvicultural systems may be used. (Appendix M provides guidance for vegetative management practices by habitat groups.) - Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested. - Schedule sale activities outside winter periods (December 1 to May 15). - No more than 25 percent of the timber-perimeter around natural or artificial parks should be nonthermal cover at one time. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. No timber harvest activities are proposed. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. No forest protection measures are proposed. T-3 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest methods and volumes may be modified as necessary to achieve the management area goals. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include salvage or sanitation harvest and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. Appendix M provides guidance for various vegetative management practices by habitat group. - Stocking control may be maintained through precommercial and commercial thinnings. The timing and planning of thinning operations will be coordinated with a wildlife biologist. - Vegetative diversity will be encouraged. - Openings created by timber harvest will be reforested to the extent necessary to meet the hiding cover requirements of big game before harvesting adjacent areas. No timber harvest activities are proposed. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management No forest protection measures are proposed. MANAGEMENT AREA STANDARDS COMPLIANCE area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. T-4 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Even-aged stands may be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. - Timber harvest practices include clearcutting, group selection, and shelterwood harvest, depending on habitat group, physical site conditions, and visual quality objectives. Precommercial thinnings and intermediate harvest will occur where needed as determined by silvicultural objectives, project planning, and visual quality objective. (Appendices H and M provide broad guidelines for various habitat groups.) - Openings created by timber harvest will be reforested to the point where harvest of adjacent timber can occur and the combined area can still meet the VQOs of the area. - Use timber harvest to rehabilitate existing harvest units, to improve the VQO. - Prescribed burning will be used to accomplish slash disposal, site preparation, and silvicultural objectives. In habitat groups where fire is not a useful treatment tool, loping and scattering, YUM yarding, or other methods will be used to reduce fuel accumulations and prepare sites for regeneration provided the area goals are met. No timber harvest activities are proposed. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions will be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. No forest protection measures are proposed. W-1 Timber - Timber will be harvested only if it can be used as a tool to maintain or enhance wildlife habitat values. Productive forest land is classified as unsuitable for timber management No timber harvest activities are proposed. Protection - Areas will be evaluated periodically for significant insect and disease problems. Endemic levels will be accepted as normal. If epidemic levels develop and control is necessary, the control method should minimize impacts on big game and other wildlife values. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions will be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Prescribed fire with unplanned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources, when within pre-established prescribed fire criteria. These criteria are detailed in the Fire Management Direction in Forest Plan Appendix R. - Prescribed fire may be used as a tool to reduce natural fuels and improve quantity and quality of wildlife forage. No forest protection measures are proposed. Table B- 6 below displays this alternatives compliance with Forest Service management direction for regeneration harvest. Table B- 6. Alternative 1 compliance with other Forest Service management direction Management Direction Compliance Suitability for timber production. No timber harvest, other than salvage sales or sales to protect other multiple-use values, shall occur on lands not suited for timber production (16 USC 1604 (k)). No timber harvests are proposed. Prior to regeneration harvest, stands of trees must have generally reached CMAI of growth (FSH 1909.12, ch. 60; 16 U.S.C. 1604 (m)(1); FSM 1921.12f). No regeneration harvest is proposed. The size of harvest openings created by even-aged silviculture in the Northern Region will be normally 40 acres or less with some exceptions. Creation of large openings will require 60-day public review and Regional Forester approval, with several exceptions including: “Where natural catastrophic events such as fire, windstorms, or insect and disease attacks have occurred” (FSM 1900-2006-2; FSM R1 Supplement 2400-2001-2). No regeneration harvest is proposed. Clearcutting and Even-aged Management 916 USC 1604(g)(3)(F)): Insure that clearcutting ... and other cuts designed to regenerate an even-aged stand of timber will be used as a cutting method on National Forest System lands only where for clearcutting, it is determined to be the optimum method ... to meet the objectives and requirements of the relevant land management plan.” “Clearcutting will be used only where it is the optimum method” (Helena Forest Plan, USDA Forest Service 1986). No regeneration harvest is proposed. Alternative 2 Compliance of alternative 2 with Forest Plan Forest-wide standards pertinent to this discussion are displayed in Table B- 7. Note that the forestwide standard statements refer to appendices in the Forest Plan and not in this document. Table B- 7. Alternative 2 compliance with Forest Plan forestwide standards Forestwide Standards Compliance Timber 1. Silvicultural examinations and prescriptions will be required before any timber manipulation or silvicultural treatment takes place. Exceptions include cutting of trees that block vision along roads, cutting hazard trees, clearing right-of-way, clearing for mineral development, minor and incidental amounts of free use, and cutting personal firewood. Final determination of what silvicultural system will be used for a particular project will be made by a certified silviculturist after an on-the-ground site analysis. This site-specific analysis will determine the appropriate even or uneven-age silvicultural system that best meets the goals and objectives of the management area. Standards for applying all silvicultural systems, as well as supporting research references are in the Northern Region guide (June 10, 1983). In addition, broad guidelines are found in Appendix H and M. Even-aged management methods will be used only where it is determined to be appropriate to meet objectives. Clearcutting will be used only where it is the optimum method. Silvicultural exams and prescriptions would have been done and approved by a certified silviculturist. Site-specific analysis has been done to determine the optimum method of treatment. Clearcutting is being used where it is the optimum method. See project records. 2. Tree improvement will be conducted in accordance with the current Regional and Tree improvement would be conducted following the applicable Regional and Forestwide Standards Compliance Forest level tree improvement plans. Forest direction. 4. Timber stand openings created by even-aged silvicultural systems will normally be 40 acres or less. Creation of larger openings will require a 60-day public review and Regional Forester approval. Exceptions are listed in the Northern Regional Guide. Proposed regeneration harvest units exceed 40 acres in seven units (appendix L). All of the units have been severely impacted by recent mountain pine beetle mortality and can be excepted from 60-day review and Regional Forester approval. The Stonewall Vegetation Project EIS process serves to notify the public and document the need for the unit size. Protection Insect and Disease 1. Silvicultural systems will be the primary tool for preventative pest management. Use silvicultural systems to: (1) improve species diversity, growth, and vigor for stands and (2) increase the size diversity and class diversity between stands. Silvicultural systems are proposed in this alternative to meet the project purpose and need which includes species diversity, growth, and vigor for stands and size diversity and class diversity between stands. 2. During ongoing infestations, control insects and disease through silvicultural and biological practices. Chemical controls will be limited to high value areas or used on a broader scale only when all other measures have failed and other resource values can be protected. Emphasize cooperative control measures between Federal, State, and private landowners. Silvicultural practices are proposed to address recent past, ongoing, and future insect and disease concerns. No insect and disease chemical controls are proposed. 3. Biological practices will be considered in controlling insect and disease infestations. No biological practices are being considered beyond vegetation management. 4. If possible, harvest stands which are a high risk for mountain pine beetle attack before harvesting moderate or low risk stands. Proposed timber harvests addressed recently impacted and high risk stands as well as those where treatment was considered necessary to meet the purpose and need for the project. Wildfire 2. Locate timber sales, or cutting units within a sale, to break-up contiguous natural fuel. Cutting units were located to reduce current and potential fuels created as a result of the MPB epidemic and modify fuels to meet the purpose and need to modify fire behavior for community protection and to allow for the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape Wildlife/Snags Larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, spruce, and subalpine fir, in that priority, are the preferred species for snags and replacement trees (live trees left to replace existing snags). Treatment design includes artificial and natural regeneration of ponderosa pine and western larch as well as retaining these species over several others in thinning operations. Larch and ponderosa pine would increase due to the treatments. Compliance of alternative 2 with Forest Plan Management Area standards pertinent to this discussion are displayed in Table B- 8. Table B- 8. Alternative 2 compliance with management area standards Management Area Standards Compliance M-1 Timber - Timber harvest, such as salvage and firewood removal, may occur where access exists. Slash created by any management practice will be disposed of in a manner consistent with the management area goals. Forested lands are classified as unsuitable for timber management. Six acres of Unit 58 is proposed for a regeneration harvest due to high mortality. Slash would be treated through jackpot burning. Protection - Salvage of dead, dying, or high-hazard trees is permitted to prevent disease and insect population build-up. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Prescribed fire with unplanned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources, when within pre-established prescribed fire criteria. These criteria are stated in the Fire Management Direction in Appendix R. -Evaluate areas periodically for significant insect and disease problems. Endemic levels will be accepted as normal. If epidemic levels develop and control is necessary, the control method should minimize impacts on watershed and other resource values. The proposed regeneration harvest and jackpot burning is consistent with the removal of dead, dying or high-hazard trees and prescribed burning. T-1 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest practices include clearcut, group selection, and shelterwood harvest, depending on habitat group, physical site conditions, and silvicultural objectives. Precommercial thinning and intermediate harvest may occur where needed as determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning. (Appendices H and M of the Forest Plan provide broad guidelines for various habitat groups.) - As a minimum, a cutover area will not be considered an opening when: (1) a new forest stand is established and certified as stocked, and (2) vegetative conditions reach the point where harvest of additional timber can occur and the combined area can still meet watershed management objectives. - Prescribed burning or other techniques may be used for slash disposal, site preparation, silvicultural, and livestock objectives. In habitat groups where fire is not a useful treatment tool, lopping and scattering, yarding unmerchantable material (YUM), or other methods will be used to reduce fuel accumulations and prepare sites for regeneration. - Project level planning will provide for stand regeneration within five years of final harvest. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. Proposed treatments are consistent with timber harvest practices, are determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning to meet the purpose and need. Prescribed burning is proposed where necessary for fuels reduction and site preparation. See table 25 below for regeneration and CMAI consistency. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. The project purpose and need and proposed treatments address creating a landscape that is diverse, resilient and sustainable to Management Area Standards Compliance wildfire and insects. T-2 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest methods and volumes will be adjusted as necessary to meet big game winter range needs. Even- or uneven-aged silvicultural systems may be used. (Appendix M provides guidance for vegetative management practices by habitat groups.) - Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested. - Schedule sale activities outside winter periods (December 1 to May 15). - No more than 25 percent of the timber-perimeter around natural or artificial parks should be nonthermal cover at one time. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. Treatments would be adjusted to meet wildlife needs see wildlife design criteria (appendix P), and wildlife report. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. -- Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. See T-1 above. T-3 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest methods and volumes may be modified as necessary to achieve the management area goals. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include salvage or sanitation harvest and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H of the Forest Plan. Forest Plan Appendix M provides guidance for various vegetative management practices by habitat group. - Stocking control may be maintained through precommercial and commercial thinnings. The timing and planning of thinning operations will be coordinated with a wildlife biologist. - Vegetative diversity will be encouraged. - Openings created by timber harvest will be reforested to the extent necessary to meet the hiding cover requirements of big game before harvesting adjacent areas. Proposed treatments are modified to meet wildlife needs. See the see wildlife design criteria (appendix P), and wildlife report. The project purpose and need and proposed treatments address increasing vegetative diversity. See below for CMAI consistency. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal See T-1 above. Management Area Standards Compliance activities will meet visual quality objectives. T-4 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Even-aged stands may be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Forest Plan Appendix H. - Timber harvest practices include clearcutting, group selection, and shelterwood harvest, depending on habitat group, physical site conditions, and visual quality objectives. Precommercial thinnings and intermediate harvest will occur where needed as determined by silvicultural objectives, project planning, and visual quality objective. (Forest Plan Appendices H and M provide broad guidelines for various habitat groups.) - Openings created by timber harvest will be reforested to the point where harvest of adjacent timber can occur and the combined area can still meet the VQOs of the area. - Use timber harvest to rehabilitate existing harvest units, to improve the VQO. - Prescribed burning will be used to accomplish slash disposal, site preparation, and silvicultural objectives. In habitat groups where fire is not a useful treatment tool, loping and scattering, YUM yarding, or other methods will be used to reduce fuel accumulations and prepare sites for regeneration provided the area goals are met. Proposed treatments are consistent with timber harvest practices, are determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning to meet the purpose and need. Prescribed burning is proposed where necessary for fuels reduction and site preparation. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions will be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. See T-1 above. W-1 Timber - Timber will be harvested only if it can be used as a tool to maintain or enhance wildlife habitat values. Productive forest land is classified as unsuitable for timber management No timber harvest is proposed in W-1. Protection - Areas will be evaluated periodically for significant insect and disease problems. Endemic levels will be accepted as normal. If epidemic levels develop and control is necessary, the control method should minimize impacts on big game and other wildlife values. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions will be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Prescribed fire with unplanned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources, when within pre-established prescribed fire criteria. These criteria are detailed in the Fire Management Direction in Forest Plan Appendix R. - Prescribed fire may be used as a tool to reduce natural fuels and improve quantity and quality of wildlife forage. Prescribed fire is proposed to meet purpose and need to increase species and structural diversity and landscape resilience to wildfire and insects. See wildlife design criteria in table 9, chapter 2 for additional information. Table B- 9 that follows displays compliance with Forest Service management direction for regeneration harvest for alternative 2. Table B- 9. Alternative 2 compliance with Forest Service regeneration harvest direction Management Direction Compliance Suitability for timber production. No timber harvest, other than salvage sales or sales to protect other multiple-use values, shall occur on lands not suited for timber production (16 USC 1604 (k)). All timber harvest would take place in land classified as suitable for timber harvest under the Helena Forest Plan (MA T-1, T-2, T-3, T-4) with the exception of six acres in Unit 58 which is in MA M-1 (appendix J). All proposed treatments involving timber harvest are designed to meet the project purpose and need (stated above) and are not designed for timber production other than salvage. Timber harvest may occur in M-1 where access exists. Prior to regeneration harvest, stands of trees must have generally reached CMAI of growth (FSH 1909.12, ch. 60; 16 U.S.C. 1604 (m)(1); FSM 1921.12f).  Average CMAI for forests in the area ranges from 100 to 120 years (USDA Forest Service 1986 appendix H). Trees in most of the suitable units are of an age where they probably had reached CMAI (appendix K) however, the question of culmination of mean annual increment of growth in these units has been rendered moot by the severe levels of mortality. The units are not proposed for treatment for timber production purposes, but to restore the forests, modify fire behavior, and capture economic value of timber and so the CMAI growth requirement would not apply as stated above. The size of harvest openings created by even-aged silviculture in the Northern Region will be normally 40 acres or less with some exceptions. Creation of large openings will require 60-day public review and Regional Forester approval, with several exceptions including: “Where natural catastrophic events such as fire, windstorms, or insect and disease attacks have occurred” (FSM 1900-2006-2; FSM R1 Supplement 2400-2001-2). Proposed regeneration harvest units exceed 40 acres in seven units (appendix L). All of the units have been severely impacted by recent mountain pine beetle mortality and are exempt from 60-day review and Regional Forester approval as described in FSM 1900-2006-2. FSM R1 Supplement 2400-2001-2. The Stonewall Vegetation Project EIS 45-day comment period serves to notify the public and is sufficient in documenting the need for the unit size. Clearcutting and Even-aged Management 916 USC 1604(g)(3)(F)): Insure that clearcutting ... and other cuts designed to regenerate an even-aged stand of timber will be used as a cutting method on National Forest System lands only where for clearcutting, it is determined to be the optimum method ... to meet the objectives and requirements of the relevant land management plan.” “Clearcutting will be used only where it is the optimum method” (Helena Forest Plan, USDA Forest Service 1986). Proposed regeneration treatments utilize clearcutting with reserve trees in 11 units with severe mortality and few remaining live trees. Clearcutting has been determined to be the optimal method for regenerating these units to the desired seral species in order to meet the project purpose and need as documented in project records. There is assurance that the lands can be adequately restocked within five years after final regeneration harvest (16 USC 1604(g)(3)(E)(ii); FSM 1921.12g). Each regeneration harvest treatment area has been field reviewed by a certified silviculturist and treatment designed to ensure that the stands can be adequately stocked following final harvest. Restocking would be through natural and artificial methods to levels established for each unit. As displayed in appendix G table 35, 3,842 acres regeneration harvest are recorded to have taken place in the project area. Examination of these past regeneration harvest units shows that regeneration success in the project area is very good. Stocking criteria would be established for each unit based upon site conditions, treatment objectives, and Forest Plan direction and would be documented in silvicultural prescriptions developed for the project. Regeneration treatments would be monitored (FSM 2472.4) to access treatment success and schedule additional corrective work if Management Direction Compliance the units are not adequately proceeding toward desired stocking guidelines. Compliance of alternative 3 with Forest Plan Forestwide standards pertinent to this discussion is displayed in Table B- 10. Table B- 10. Alternative 3 compliance with Forest Plan forestwide standards Forestwide Standards Compliance Timber 1. Silvicultural examinations and prescriptions will be required before any timber manipulation or silvicultural treatment takes place. Exceptions include cutting of trees that block vision along roads, cutting hazard trees, clearing right-of-way, clearing for mineral development, minor and incidental amounts of free use, and cutting personal firewood. Final determination of what silvicultural system will be used for a particular project will be made by a certified silviculturist after an on-the-ground site analysis. This site-specific analysis will determine the appropriate even or uneven-age silvicultural system that best meets the goals and objectives of the management area. Standards for applying all silvicultural systems, as well as supporting research references are in the Northern Region guide (June 10, 1983). In addition, broad guidelines are found in Appendix H and M. Even-aged management methods will be used only where it is determined to be appropriate to meet objectives. Clearcutting will be used only where it is the optimum method. Silvicultural exams and prescriptions would have been done and approved by a certified silviculturist. Site-specific analysis has been done to determine the optimum method of treatment. Clearcutting is being used where it is the optimum method. See project records. 2. Tree improvement will be conducted in accordance with the current Regional and Forest level tree improvement plans. Tree improvement would be conducted following the applicable Regional and Forest direction. 4. Timber stand openings created by even-aged silvicultural systems will normally be 40 acres or less. Creation of larger openings will require a 60-day public review and Regional Forester approval. Exceptions are listed in the Northern Regional Guide. Proposed regeneration harvest units exceed 40 acres in six units (appendix M). All of the units have been severely impacted by recent mountain pine beetle mortality and can be excepted from 60-day review and Regional Forester approval. The Stonewall Vegetation Project EIS process serves to notify the public and document the need for the unit size. Protection Insect and Disease 1. Silvicultural systems will be the primary tool for preventative pest management. Use silvicultural systems to: (1) improve species diversity, growth, and vigor for stands and (2) increase the size diversity and class diversity between stands. Silvicultural systems are proposed in this alternative to meet the project purpose and need which includes species diversity, growth, and vigor for stands and size diversity and class diversity between stands. 2. During ongoing infestations, control insects and disease through silvicultural and biological practices. Chemical controls will be limited to high value areas or used on a broader scale Silvicultural practices are proposed to address recent past, ongoing, and future insect and disease concerns. No insect and disease chemical controls Forestwide Standards Compliance only when all other measures have failed and other resource values can be protected. Emphasize cooperative control measures between Federal, State, and private landowners. are proposed. 3. Biological practices will be considered in controlling insect and disease infestations. No biological practices are being considered beyond vegetation management. 4. If possible, harvest stands which are a high risk for mountain pine beetle attack before harvesting moderate or low risk stands. Proposed timber harvests addressed recently impacted and high risk stands as well as those where treatment was considered necessary to meet the purpose and need for the project. Wildfire 2. Locate timber sales, or cutting units within a sale, to break-up contiguous natural fuel. Cutting units were located to reduce current and potential fuels created as a result of the MPB epidemic and modify fuels to meet the purpose and need to modify fire behavior for community protection and to allow for the reestablishment of fire as a natural process on the landscape Wildlife/Snags Larch, ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, spruce, and subalpine fir, in that priority, are the preferred species for snags and replacement trees (live trees left to replace existing snags). Treatment design includes artificial and natural regeneration of ponderosa pine and western larch as well as retaining these species over several others in thinning operations. Larch and ponderosa pine would increase due to the treatments. Compliance of alternative 3 with Forest Plan management area standards pertinent to this discussion are displayed in Table B- 11. Table B- 11. Alternative 3 compliance with management area standards Management Area Standards Compliance M-1 Timber - Timber harvest, such as salvage and firewood removal, may occur where access exists. Slash created by any management practice will be disposed of in a manner consistent with the management area goals. Forested lands are classified as unsuitable for timber management. Six acres of Unit 58 is proposed for a regeneration harvest due to high mortality. Slash would be treated through jackpot burning. Protection - Salvage of dead, dying, or high-hazard trees is permitted to prevent disease and insect population build-up. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Prescribed fire with unplanned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources, when within pre-established prescribed fire criteria. These criteria are stated in the Fire Management Direction in Appendix R. -Evaluate areas periodically for significant insect and disease problems. Endemic levels will be accepted as normal. If epidemic levels develop and control is necessary, the control method should minimize impacts on The proposed regeneration harvest and jackpot burning is consistent with the removal of dead, dying or high-hazard trees and prescribed burning. Management Area Standards Compliance watershed and other resource values. T-1 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest practices include clearcut, group selection, and shelterwood harvest, depending on habitat group, physical site conditions, and silvicultural objectives. Precommercial thinning and intermediate harvest may occur where needed as determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning. (Appendices H and M of the Forest Plan provide broad guidelines for various habitat groups.) - As a minimum, a cutover area will not be considered an opening when: (1) a new forest stand is established and certified as stocked, and (2) vegetative conditions reach the point where harvest of additional timber can occur and the combined area can still meet watershed management objectives. - Prescribed burning or other techniques may be used for slash disposal, site preparation, silvicultural, and livestock objectives. In habitat groups where fire is not a useful treatment tool, lopping and scattering, yarding unmerchantable material (YUM), or other methods will be used to reduce fuel accumulations and prepare sites for regeneration. - Project level planning will provide for stand regeneration within five years of final harvest. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H. Proposed treatments are consistent with timber harvest practices, are determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning to meet the purpose and need. Prescribed burning is proposed where necessary for fuels reduction and site preparation. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. The project purpose and need and proposed treatments address creating a landscape that is diverse, resilient and sustainable to wildfire and insects. T-2 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest methods and volumes will be adjusted as necessary to meet big game winter range needs. Even- or uneven-aged silvicultural systems may be used. (Appendix M provides guidance for vegetative management practices by habitat groups.) - Openings created by timber harvest should meet hiding cover requirements of big game before adjacent areas can be harvested. - Schedule sale activities outside winter periods (December 1 to May 15). - No more than 25 percent of the timber-perimeter around natural or artificial parks should be nonthermal cover at one time. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Forest Plan Appendix H. Treatments would be adjusted to meet wildlife needs see wildlife design criteria in table 9, chapter 2. Management Area Standards Compliance Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. -- Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. See T-1 above. T-3 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Timber harvest methods and volumes may be modified as necessary to achieve the management area goals. - Even-aged stands will be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include salvage or sanitation harvest and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Appendix H of the Forest Plan. Forest Plan Appendix M provides guidance for various vegetative management practices by habitat group. - Stocking control may be maintained through precommercial and commercial thinnings. The timing and planning of thinning operations will be coordinated with a wildlife biologist. - Vegetative diversity will be encouraged. - Openings created by timber harvest will be reforested to the extent necessary to meet the hiding cover requirements of big game before harvesting adjacent areas. Proposed treatments are modified to meet wildlife needs. See the see wildlife design criteria in table 9, chapter 2. The project purpose and need and proposed treatments address increasing vegetative diversity. See below for CMAI consistency. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. See T-1 above. T-4 Timber - This management area is suitable for timber management activities. - Even-aged stands may be scheduled for final regeneration harvest when they generally have reached the culmination of mean annual increment (CMAI) of growth. Exceptions include thinning or other stand improvement measures, salvage or sanitation harvest, and management for experimental or research purposes and to meet other resource objectives. CMAI for primary species on the Helena National Forest is shown in Forest Plan Appendix H. - Timber harvest practices include clearcutting, group selection, and shelterwood harvest, depending on habitat group, physical site conditions, and visual quality objectives. Precommercial thinnings and intermediate harvest will occur where needed as determined by silvicultural objectives, project planning, and visual quality objective. (Forest Plan Appendices H and M provide broad guidelines for various habitat groups.) - Openings created by timber harvest will be reforested to the point where harvest of adjacent timber can occur and the combined area can still meet the VQOs of the area. - Use timber harvest to rehabilitate existing harvest units, to improve the Proposed treatments are consistent with timber harvest practices, are determined by silvicultural objectives and project planning to meet the purpose and need. Prescribed burning is proposed where necessary for fuels reduction and site preparation. Management Area Standards Compliance VQO. - Prescribed burning will be used to accomplish slash disposal, site preparation, and silvicultural objectives. In habitat groups where fire is not a useful treatment tool, loping and scattering, YUM yarding, or other methods will be used to reduce fuel accumulations and prepare sites for regeneration provided the area goals are met. Protection - Insect and disease control should emphasize reduction and prevention through timber harvest and timber stand improvement. The use of other approved integrated pest management techniques may be necessary at times. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions will be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Fuel reduction methods for activity created fuels include burning, removing residue, or rearranging, such as dozer trampling. Disposal activities will meet visual quality objectives. See T-1 above. W-1 Timber - Timber will be harvested only if it can be used as a tool to maintain or enhance wildlife habitat values. Productive forest land is classified as unsuitable for timber management No timber harvest is proposed in W-1. Protection - Areas will be evaluated periodically for significant insect and disease problems. Endemic levels will be accepted as normal. If epidemic levels develop and control is necessary, the control method should minimize impacts on big game and other wildlife values. - Prescribed fire with planned ignitions will be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources. - Prescribed fire with unplanned ignitions may be used in this management area, for the enhancement and maintenance of resources, when within pre-established prescribed fire criteria. These criteria are detailed in the Fire Management Direction in Forest Plan Appendix R. - Prescribed fire may be used as a tool to reduce natural fuels and improve quantity and quality of wildlife forage. Prescribed fire is proposed to meet purpose and need to increase species and structural diversity and landscape resilience to wildfire and insects. See wildlife design criteria in table 9, chapter 2 for additional information. Table B- 12 below displays compliance with Forest Service management direction for regeneration harvest for alternative 3. Table B- 12. Alternative 3 compliance with Forest Service regeneration harvest direction Management Direction Compliance Suitability for timber production. No timber harvest, other than salvage sales or sales to protect other multiple-use values, shall occur on lands not suited for timber production (16 USC 1604 (k)). All timber harvest would take place in land classified as suitable for timber harvest under the Helena Forest Plan (MA T-1, T-2, T-3, T-4) with the exception of six acres in Unit 58 which is in MA M-1 (appendix J). All proposed treatments involving timber harvest are designed to meet the project purpose and need (stated above) and are not designed for timber production other than salvage. Timber harvest may occur in M-1 where access exists. Prior to regeneration harvest, stands of trees must have generally reached CMAI of growth (FSH 1909.12, ch. 60; 16 U.S.C. 1604 (m)(1); FSM 1921.12f).  Average CMAI for forests in the area ranges from 100 to 120 years (USDA Forest Service 1986 appendix H). Trees in most of the suitable units are of an age where they probably had reached CMAI (appendix K) however, the question of culmination of mean annual increment of growth in these units has been rendered moot by the severe levels of mortality. The units are not proposed for treatment for timber production purposes, but to restore the forests, modify fire Management Direction Compliance behavior, and capture economic value of timber and so the CMAI growth requirement would not apply as stated above. The size of harvest openings created by even-aged silviculture in the Northern Region will normally be 40 acres or less with some exceptions. Creation of large openings will require 60-day public review and Regional Forester approval, with several exceptions including: “Where natural catastrophic events such as fire, windstorms, or insect and disease attacks have occurred” (FSM 1900-2006-2; FSM R1 Supplement 2400-2001-2). Proposed regeneration harvest units exceed 40 acres in seven units. All of the units have been severely impacted by recent mountain pine beetle mortality and are exempt from 60-day review and Regional Forester approval as described in FSM 1900-2006-2. FSM R1 Supplement 2400-2001-2. The Stonewall Vegetation Project EIS 45-day comment period serves to notify the public and is suffice in documenting the need for the unit size. Clearcutting and Even-aged Management 916 USC 1604(g)(3)(F)): Insure that clearcutting ... and other cuts designed to regenerate an even-aged stand of timber will be used as a cutting method on National Forest System lands only where for clearcutting, it is determined to be the optimum method ... to meet the objectives and requirements of the relevant land management plan.” “Clearcutting will be used only where it is the optimum method” (Helena Forest Plan, USDA Forest Service 1986). Proposed regeneration treatments utilize clearcutting with reserve trees in 8 units with severe mortality and few remaining live trees. Clearcutting has been determined to be the optimal method for regenerating these units to the desired seral species in order to meet the project purpose and need as documented in project records. There is assurance that the lands can be adequately restocked within five years after final regeneration harvest (16 USC 1604(g)(3)(E)(ii); FSM 1921.12g). Each regeneration harvest treatment area has been field reviewed by a certified silviculturist and treatment designed to ensure that the stands can be adequately stocked following final harvest. Restocking would be through natural and artificial methods to levels established for each unit. As displayed, 3,842 acres of regeneration harvest is recorded to have taken place in the project area. Examination of these past regeneration harvest units shows that regeneration success in the project area is very good. Stocking criteria would be established for each unit based upon site conditions, treatment objectives, and Forest Plan direction and would be documented in silvicultural prescriptions developed for the project. Regeneration treatments would be monitored (FSM 2472.4) to access treatment success and schedule additional corrective work if the units are not adequately proceeding toward desired stocking guidelines Data Sources The following are short discussions of data sources used for this analysis. Aerial Insect and Disease Detection Survey (ADS) Aerial Insect and Disease Detection Survey (ADS) data for Region 1 is collected annually by the USDA Forest Service Region 1 and 4 Forest Health Protection Aviation Program (USDA Forest Service 2011). The purpose of the ADS program is to: Detect new outbreaks or identify previously undetected outbreaks of forest pests · Monitor existing outbreaks · Provide timely information for management planning · Provide information for forest health assessments and project plans. The surveys are conducted primarily using fixed-wing aircraft that fly patterns over survey areas beginning in the first part of July and continue through the end of September and often into October. During the flights, personnel sketches the observed insect and disease damage and mortality spatial locations and estimates the degree of the damage (trees per acre affected), the insect or disease causing the damage or mortality, and the tree species being affected. The ADS is conducted according to well-established and documented survey standards (USDA Forest Service 1999). The results of the survey are digitized into GIS layers following established procedures (USDA Forest Service 2005). The GIS layers produced from the surveys are used in this analysis. Because the ADS data relies on ocularly estimated insect and disease damaging agent, degree of damage or mortality, and spatial location, the information is useful for detecting, describing and analyzing insect and disease damage and establishing trends on a landscape over time. However, due to limitations in the ocular estimation process, care should be taken in applying the ADS at a stand, or smaller, degree of resolution. Northern Region Vegetation Map (R1 VMap) Region 1, Northern Region Vegetation Map (R1 VMap) data is derived from satellite imagery, and provides consistent and continuous data at several levels of accuracy and utility as part of the R1 Multi-level Vegetation Classification, Mapping, Inventory, and Analysis System (R1-CMIA, Berglund et al. 2009). The R1-CMIA data collection program meets the requirements of the Existing Vegetation Classification and Mapping Technical Guide, which describes agency data needs, vegetation classification standards, and mapping standards (Brohman and Bryant 2005). Levels of accuracy in the VMap data include: (1) broad-level data used for forest, multi-forest, and regional-level assessments, (2) mid-level data which is intended to support forest and district integrated vegetation treatment plans, and (3) base-level data which is meant to be used for stand-level analysis purposes (Berglund et al. 2009). The VMap data used in the Stone-Dry EWAS (Milburn et al. 2006) and the Stonewall project is mid-level data that has been edited in 2010 and 2011 to reflect changes in vegetation attributes due to (1) recent wildfires, (2) site- and stand-specific data, and (3) the recent bark beetle epidemic (USDA Forest Service 2011). Attributes in the VMap data used in this analysis includes tree dominance type, tree canopy cover class, tree size class. National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) The National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) acquires aerial imagery during the agricultural growing seasons in the continental U.S. NAIP imagery used in the Stonewall Vegetation Project was acquired in 2009, and is 1-meter resolution available in color or infrared. Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) is an interagency, standardized tool for determining the degree of departure from reference condition vegetation, fuels and disturbance regimes (FRCC 2005). Helena NF personnel classified vegetation and analyzed FRCC for the Stone Dry EWAS (Milburn et al. 2006, 2009). VMap data served as the spatial database for the FRCC analysis. The spatial data and FRCC analysis was updated for the Stonewall project analysis (Olsen 2010). For the Stonewall Vegetation Project, we used attributes from the updated FRCC analysis spatial data for biophysical setting. Stand Data and Silvicultural Diagnoses Individual stand attributes and detailed silvicultural diagnoses were done in the field in 2008, and updated in 2009 for proposed treatment units. Information collected for each includes: tree species composition, tree stocking levels, understory species compositions and coverage, insect activity, disease presence, vigor, mortality, past harvest, snag availability, and other pertinent information. Personnel measured and recorded selected stand attributes in informal plots (non-statistical). The Forest silviculturist performed most diagnoses in person, although several were done by another certified silviculturist and a forester, under the direction of the Forest silviculturist. Diagnoses represent the most current on-the-ground assessment of all proposed units. Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) and FIA Intensification Plots The Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) Program of the USDA Forest Service serves as the Nation's continuous forest census (USDA Forest Service 2011b). The program has established a set of permanent plots on a national grid that can be measured to characterize changes in forest attributes over time. Forest Inventory and Analysis plots are used at the Forest and landscape scales to set the context for forest conditions and effects, and assessments of insect hazard. Forest Inventory and Analysis plots are maintained at the National level on a periodic remeasurement schedule. In Region 1, FIA plots have been used to estimate the amount of old growth forest and snag density (Czaplewski 2004). The R1 Summary Database, using the NRIS Access Tool, was used to summarize Forest and landscape FIA and grid intensification data. This database is continually updated and was used to derive estimates of snags, old growth habitat types, and insect hazard ratings and forest structure characteristics. The use and limitations of this database is documented (USDA Forest Service 2008). Models and Assumptions Forest Vegetative Simulator The Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) was developed in the early 1970’s as the “Prognosis” model (Stage 1973). Since that time, FVS has undergone continual and continuing research and development efforts to expand FVS’s range and capabilities, validate, update, and modify FVS’s predictions, and increase the FVS program’s usefulness and usability. Over the last three decades, the USDA Forest Service has invested a substantial amount annually on research and development of FVS, and are continuing to do so within the Forest Service and through partnerships with educational institutions, other government agencies, and other countries (USDA 2011c). Currently, the FVS is used almost exclusively by the USDA Forest Service, and is used heavily by other US government agencies such as the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Indian Affairs, National Park Service, Natural Resource Conservation Service, Army Corps of Engineers, Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of Defense, and Department of Energy. At least five state forestry agencies utilize FVS and it is heavily used in the private forestry sector. Most major university forestry programs in the US teach the use of FVS. International use of FVS includes use in the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Ontario, Alberta and Nova Scotia. FVS is also being used, or variants are being developed for use in Russia, China, Austria, South Korea, Japan, Costa Rica, Portugal, Indonesia, and the United Kingdom as well as other European countries. Over the last several decades, the Forest Vegetation Simulator has become the most used forest vegetation modeling program in the United States and the world. The Forest Vegetation Simulator is the product of hundreds of contributors over the past three decades (Dixon 2010). It is not a single growth and yield “model” but consists of a number in integrated models including those for predicting large-tree height and diameter increment, small-tree height and diameter increment, tree mortality, crown change, tree regeneration establishment, shrub development, shrub and tree vertical canopy distribution, mountain pine beetle risk, Douglas-fir tussock moth hazard and impacts, economic analysis, western spruce budworm hazard and impacts, western root disease impacts, dwarf mistletoe impacts, white pine blister rust impacts, and fire effects. The Forest Vegetation Simulator has expanded its range of applicability from its original Northwest US roots through the creation of “geographic variants” that utilize research from various geographic regions of the US to tailor equations such as those for tree growth, mortality and volume to those regions. There are currently over 20 variants representing forests within the US. In developing some the variants, the Forest Vegetation Simulator has evolved from a growth and yield model into a framework supporting regional models such as TWIGS (Miner et al. 1988) and GENGYM (Edminster et al.1991) further incorporating the extensive research undertaken in developing these models into FVS. Since FVS uses stand exam data, geographical variant equations for growth are further calibrated using the stand data. This calibration process, coupled with the use of site variables such as slope, aspect, elevation, habitat type, plant association or ecoclass code, location (nearest National Forest, and in some cases Ranger District), site index, and stand density index maximums or basal area maximums, and tree measurements such as species, diameter-at-breast-height, total tree height, tree height to a dead or broken top, diameter increment, age, crown ratio, and damages or diseases, enables FVS to make very accurate individual tree and stand-level growth and yield predictions. Dixon (2010) describes FVS as “a semi-distant-independent individual tree growth and yield model”. He considers it semi-distant-independent because certain parts of FVS localize competition and site variables to a plot (or point) basis within a stand where other parts do not. Because FVS uses stand exam data, it keeps track of the plot on which trees are located enabling the user to simulate group selection or differentially treat a stand based on density within a stand. One must realize when one is modeling treatment simulations based upon plots that although the plots may be modeled independently in FVS, the FVS outputs will still be showing the average of all trees on all plots. Portions of the FVS that do not model on a plot basis are the VSS classification module and the Fire and Fuels Extension. Fire Fuels Extension Fire behavior and effects are modeled in FVS through the Fire and Fuels Extension (FFE) which simulates fuel dynamics and potential fire behavior over time in the context of stand development and management (Reinhardt and Crookston 2003). The Fire and Fuels Extension models changes to surface and crown fuels over time due to treatments. Surface fuels attributes include tons-per-acre of fuels by fuels size class. Crown fuels attributes modeled include crown bulk density (CBD) and canopy base height (CBH). The FFE uses existing fire fuel models for fire behavior and effects and adds new submodels for snag and fuel dynamics. The FFE uses Rothermel’s (1972) fire behavior model as implemented by Albini (1976) in FIREMOD and subsequently by Andrews (1986) in Behave to predict fire intensity, approaches developed by Van Wagner (1973, 1977) and Scott and Reinhardt (2001) to predict the onset of crowning, and methods from FOFEM (Reinhardt et al. 1997) for predicting tree mortality, fuel consumption and smoke production. Limitations of the Models “It should be noted a model is a simplification or approximation of reality and hence will not reflect all of reality” (Stratton 2006). The use of models such as FVS depends upon sample data, validity of the model itself and assumptions made by the modeler. All three affect the results. The use of FVS in this analysis is to generally characterize and display existing conditions and the nature and magnitude of treatment effects to inform decisions to be made. The modeling results are not to be taken as reality. Historic Stand Conditions Historic stand structures and species compositions were shaped by a number of factors including climate/weather, site conditions, and the historic fire regime. These factors determined whether any one fire, whether naturally or artificially ignited, would burn any particular forested patch and how severe the fire would be when it burned the patch. Dryer sites such as south-facing slopes tended to burn more frequently which resulted in lower downed woody fuel loads, a higher occurrence of herbaceous understory vegetation, and forests dominated by trees that are relatively resistant to fire, such as ponderosa pine and larger Douglas-fir (Wright and Bailey 1982, Agee 1993, Arno 2000, Beaty and Taylor 2001, Beaty and Taylor 2007). Moister sites tended to burn less frequently in what can be called “mixed-severity” fire regimes which may consist of a combination of understory and stand-replacement fires such as the seral ponderosa pine-western larch forests in western Montana that were burned with stand-replacement fires at long intervals (150+ years) with nonlethal fires at short intervals (20 to 30 years average (Arno 2000) or mixed-severity fire regimes could consist of fires that tended to burn with a fine-grained pattern, killing a large portion of the fire-susceptible species but sparing many of the fire-resistant trees (Arno 2000). The coolest and moistest sites tended to burn with stand-replacing fire regimes. A number of studies have displayed stand structures and species compositions in terms of diameter distribution charts. Available studies include: · In western Montana, Arno et al. (1995) found that most old growth ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir plots sampled had burned with frequent (13 to 50 year intervals) non-lethal underburns prior to 1900. They attributed the fire regime to having maintained open, nearly all-aged stands (Arno et al. 1995). Tree species composition and diameter distribution charts for these plots show mixed-species stands dominated by ponderosa pine with western larch and Douglas-fir as a co-dominant in lesser and varying presence, and lodgepole as a minor species with stand diameter distributions being very flat except for the smaller size classes which displayed increased tree numbers due to fire exclusion. They did find one plot containing even-aged ponderosa pine and western larch which they related to a pre-1900 fire history characterized by patchy stand-replacing events at intervals of 150 or more years. Tree species composition and diameter distribution chart for this plot shows a mixed-species stand dominated by ponderosa pine with western larch and Douglas-fir as co-dominants, and lodgepole as a minor species with a diameter distributions having a prominent “peak” at 16-18 inches d.b.h., characteristic of an even-aged stand. Arno et al. (1995) in their western Montana study found that in recent years, all stands had developed an understory of Douglas-fir which they related to fire exclusion. · Holden et al. (2007) in studying tree density, diameter-class distribution, and stocking levels among areas that had burned under two different fire frequencies since 1972 in New Mexico stands found that more frequent burns resulted in more open stands with fewer small trees. They display tree diameter distributions that are almost flat compared to the unburned control stand diameter distributions in which TPA increases greatly with decreasing tree diameter. · Fulé and Covington (1997) studied fires regimes and forest structures in the Sierra Madre occidental and displayed diameter distributions showing almost flat distributions for burned sites as opposed to increasing numbers of small trees and increases in fire-susceptible species at unburned sites. · Minnich et al. (2000) displays diameter distributions for six forest types in the Sierra San Pedro Martir under un-managed fire regimes, showing flat diameter distributions for all forest types and dominance by fire-resistant species. · Minnich et al. (1995) studied forest stem densities from data collected on plots in 1932 and 1992 and displayed diameter distributions for the historic measurements to be relatively flat and from the 1992 measurements to have substantial numbers of small trees, which he attributed to forest densification due to fire exclusion. They also displayed increases in understory shade tolerant and fire-susceptible trees over time. As the studies above indicate, for any combination of fire-resistant and fire-susceptible tree species, frequent fire regimes will result in stands that tend to be uneven-aged, multi-story with open understories and slightly sloping to flat diameter distributions. Bark Beetles and Fires Work in a variety of forest systems has generally shown that measures of fire intensity and severity are positively associated with tree susceptibility to bark beetle attack (Ryan and Amman 1996, Bradley and Tueller 2001, Sullivan et al. 2003, McHugh et al 2003, Wallin et al. 2003, Six and Skov 2009). Factors most mentioned in these studies include: crown scorch volume, cambial damage (bole char), root damage, stocking level, and tree size. Fire damage to trees is determined by characteristics of the fire and of the trees. The height of crown scorch is determined by fire-line intensity, wind speed, and air temperature (Van Wagner 1973) as well as tree characteristics such as needle size, bud mass, and crown volume. Tree bole cambial and root damage by fires is related to the intensity and duration of heat on tree bases and roots and tree bark thickness and root depth (Ryan and Reinhardt 1988). Tree characteristics tend to be linked, with shallow-rooted conifers tending to have thin bark and conversely deeper-rooted trees tending to have thicker bark. Younger trees tend to have both thinner bark, and lower crowns. Young Douglas-fir tend to have relatively thin bark and small thin needles with compact crowns that are heated quickly and so are less fire-tolerant than small ponderosa pine with their thicker, platy bark, thicker, linger needles and open crown structures. Larger Douglas-fir are relatively fire resistant with thick bark. In this discussion, we will address the effects of burning by wildfires and controlled prescribed burns on Douglas-fir beetle (DFB) and mountain pine beetle (MPB) mortality. Mountain Pine Beetle Elkin and Reid (2004) studied attack and reproductive success of MPB in fire-damaged lodgepole pines and found that beetle attack preference or reproductive success was not affected by fire damage. They suggested that fire damage only affects mountain pine beetle reproduction and population growth in areas where attack densities are low otherwise fire damage will have negligible effects on beetle attack and reproductive success. In western Montana, Six and Skov (2009) studied the response of bark beetles and their natural enemies to prescribed burning-only, thinning-only, and thinning-and-prescribed-burning treatments in mixed-conifer forests in western Montana. They observed no increase in MPB due to the treatments. They attributed that to mountain pine beetles preference for relatively vigorous trees and its ability to maintain outbreaks in such, reflected in avoidance of burned trees Douglas-fir Beetle The link between fire damage and Douglas-fir beetle attack has been identified for many years, and there are a number of studies concerning DFB increases following wildfires but the number concerning DFB increases following low-intensity and severity prescribed burns is limited. Furniss (1965) examined the susceptibility of fire-injured Douglas-fir to bark beetle attack in Southern Idaho following the Poverty Flat Fire (920 acres). The Poverty Flat Fire burned as a relatively intense fire during dry weather on steep slopes. He found that 70 percent of the trees in his plots had been attacked by the Douglas-fir beetle one year after the fire. Even small or lightly burned trees were being attacked and the incidence of attack increased with the size of tree and severity of crown and cambium fire injury. He mentioned that due to the nature of the burn the number attractive, fire-damaged trees were plentiful. Ryan and Amman (1996) found that the relationship between bark beetle attack and tree damage in areas affected by the 1988 Yellowstone Fire indicated that stress resulting from fire injury led to increased bark beetle activity. They observed that bark beetle populations appeared to have increased in fire-injured trees and then infested uninjured trees. The 1988 Yellowstone fire was a fall wildfire that burned under relatively severe fire conditions, the result being a large fire and an abundance of fire-injured trees. They also suggested that droughty conditions prior to the fire had resulted in relatively stressed trees and high Douglas-fir populations prior to the fire which contributed to the post-fire population increases. Cunningham et al. (2005) studied Douglas-fir beetle attack on a range of fire-injured Douglas-fir and found that one year after the fire event the DFB selected and attacked large-diameter Douglas-fir with 60-80 percent bole char and 60-80 percent crown volume scorch. The following year beetle preference shifted to smaller trees with lighter fire injury because most of the larger trees had already been colonized the previous year. In the third year host selection shifted to green trees along the burn perimeter but beetle populations did not reach outbreak levels. The burn was an August wildfire. Hood and Bentz (2007) found in their study of post-fire Douglas-fir beetle attacks and tree mortality that beetles attacked trees with greater crown scorch, but that beetle attack and mortality was also related to cambium damage and stand stocking. They noted that trees within their Yellowstone data set that died within 4 years after the Yellowstone wildfire had greater crown scorch (52 percent versus 22 percent) and cambium damage (2.9 versus 2.2 tree base quadrants damaged) than live trees. Hood and Bentz (2007) also included in their study data from a prescribed fire in Western Montana. In that data they found that dead trees had greater crown scorch (68 percent versus 15 percent) and cambium injury (2.9 versus 0.5 quadrants damaged). They also noted that only 2 percent of the trees in the prescribed burn were attacked by Douglas-fir beetles. In western Montana, Six and Skov (2009) studied the response of bark beetles and their natural enemies to prescribed-burning-only, thinning-only, and thinning-and-prescribed-burning treatments in mixed-conifer forests. They describe their burns as being in late spring with relative humidities of 20-48 percent and flame lengths of 0.2 to 1.2 m (0.7-3.9 feet) in the burn-only treatment and 0.2 to 2.7 m (0.7-8.9 feet) in the thin-and-burn treatment. Their fires were relatively patchy with some areas burning fairly hot resulting in considerable mortality of small diameter trees, while other areas remained relatively untouched. The thin-and-burn treatments were less patchy in nature than the burn-only treatment. They observed that Douglas-fir beetle activity increased following the treatments but decreased the following year. During the four years studied, they recorded that 20 percent of the trees attacked in the thin-and-burn treatment were attacked successfully and 6 percent of the attacked trees in the burn-only treatment were attacked successfully. They observed that mean crown scorch height, percent circumference charred, ground charring, and d.b.h. were higher in the attacked trees than in the un-attacked trees. They concluded that the increase in Douglas-fir beetle was short lived, and occurred on fire-weakened trees with the beetle unable to successfully move to residual green trees. They stated a mean crown scorch height of 11.59 m in the thin-and-burn treatment and a mean flame length of 7.98 in the burn-only treatment. In Oregon, Youngblood et al. (2009) studied delayed mortality in ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir following thinning, thinning and burning and burning only treatments. They found that bark beetle mortality was low overall with only 0.03 percent across all species, but was higher in the treatments involving prescribed burning. Summary Of the two bark beetles we are concerned with and addressing in this report, we can conclude that prescribed burning in the project area would not increase MPB, would likely increase DFB to a small degree for a short time, and would decrease the potential for wildfires in the future to cause an increase in DFB. Mountain pine beetle risk is now low in the project due to the recent outbreak, and damage by fires does not appear to substantially increase MPB activity. Douglas-fir beetle can increase following fires, with the beetles initially targeting the largest, moderately to highly damaged Douglas-fir, and when they are depleted would turn toward smaller diameter trees, trees with light damage, and eventually green trees. The impacts from DFB following wildfires can be substantial. The impacts from DFB following prescribed burning would be much lower because of the substantially lower tree crown, bole, and root damage caused by the prescribed burn. Thinning Effects on Bark Beetle Risk Bark beetles are characterized by foresters as primary and secondary. Aggressive bark beetles thought of as primary killers of trees are those that attack and kill apparently healthy trees. These primary killers include Douglas-fir beetle (Dendroctonus pseudotsugae), mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae), western pine beetle (Dendroctonus brevicomis), pinyon engraver (Ips confusus), roundheaded pine beetle (Dendroctonus adjunctus), spruce beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis), and fir engraver (Scolytus ventralis). Secondary bark beetles infest severely stressed, dying, or freshly dead trees as well as stressed tree tops and branches. Pine engraver (Ips pini), red turpentine beetle (Dendroctonus valens) and striped ambrosia beetle (Trypodendron lineatum) are mostly considered secondary bark beetles. Depending upon stand conditions and beetle population levels, some bark beetles that typically act in a secondary role can act as a primary killer of trees. Pine engraver, for example, normally reproduces in logging slash, wind-blown trees, broken limbs, and severely stressed trees like other secondary bark beetles, but when populations increase due to an abundance of host material, it frequently invades and kills small live trees or the tops of larger trees. Bark beetle risk concerns in the project area involve primary bark beetles, not secondary, and the following discussion addresses only those listed above as primary bark beetles. Researchers began to recognize the importance of tree stocking control to reduce bark beetle activity in about 1941 (Eaton 1941). In 1953, Clements recognized the relationship between stand density and mountain pine beetle activity in sugar pine in 1953 (Clements 1953 in Oliver 1995). Since then, Sartwell and Stevens (1975) worked to further establish the links between tree stocking levels and bark beetle activity. Based upon the works of Sartwell and others, Oliver (1995) investigated the relationship between the stand density index (SDI) threshold of self-thinning mortality due to competition and SDI thresholds for mortality due to bark beetles. Oliver (1995) concluded that stand density for ponderosa pine stands was limited by Dendroctonus bark beetles to lower levels than the level of self-thinning. He found that there appears to be a “limiting stand density index” of 365, and stands approaching that limiting SDI usually suffered large losses from bark beetle epidemics that equal or exceed periodic growth for the stands experiencing the bark beetle mortality. He suggests that endemic levels of bark beetle mortality could start in stands when they reached an SDI of 230. The 230 SDI level could be considered a “zone of imminent bark beetle mortality.” Within the last several decades, a number of studies examined the relationships between tree thinning to reduce bark beetle activity and risk. Many of the studies observed decreased bark beetle activity with decreased tree stocking levels. These studies include: (1) observations of low bark beetle activity within thinned stands during long term stocking studies (Cochran and Barrett 1995, Cochran and Barrett 1999a, Cochran and Barrett 1999b, Cochran and Dahms 2000), (2) control studies measuring bark beetle mortality within pine stands thinned to various stocking levels and un-thinned areas (Amman 1988a, Amman 1988b, Amman et al. 1988a, Amman et al. 1988b, Cole and McGregor 1985, Cole et al. 1983, Fiedler and Morgan 2002, Fiddler et al. 1995, McGregor et al. 1987, Mitchell et al. 1983, Safranyik et al. 2004, Schmid and Mata 2005, Whitehead and Russo 2005) and (3) control studies measuring bark beetle activity as a function of the number of beetles trapped in stands thinned to various stocking levels as well as unthinned stands (Bartos and Booth 1994, Sanchez-Martinez and Wagner 2001, Schmitz et al. 1981, Zausen et al. 2005). Of the mortality studies, only Mitchell et al. (1983) did not demonstrate a difference in mortality between lightly thinned stands and unthinned controls, but they did observe that the heavily thinned stands had no mortality. Only one trapping study, Sanchez-Martinez and Wagner (2001), did not observe fewer trapped beetles in thinned stands compared to unthinned. Sanchez-Martinez and Wagner’s (2001) measurements found no significant difference between bark beetles trapped in thinned and unthinned ponderosa pine stands on the Coconino plateau in Arizona. However, their data was collected during low levels of bark beetle activity (endemic) in the area and they observed that the average tree size within the unthinned stands was very small, (22.2 cm) making the trees undesirable habitat for the most aggressive bark beetles found in the area--western pine beetle and mountain pine beetle. Given the results all studies mentioned above, we conclude that available research provides overwhelming evidence for the utility of thinning to reduce tree stocking and therefore the level of bark beetle mortality and the risk of epidemic levels of mortality. Restoration Whitebark Pine Restoration Whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) is a subalpine conifer that is relatively slow growing, intolerant of shade, and tolerant of poor soils, steep slopes, windy exposures, and cold environments (Arno and Hoff 1990). Whitebark pine cones are indehiscent, that is, they do not open sufficiently to release the seeds when ripe but they may be shed from the tree and decay on the ground, releasing the seeds (Arno and Hoff 1990, Owens et al. 2008). Seeds are large and wingless. The combination of indehiscent cones and large wingless seeds limits unaided dispersal of seeds. The major mechanisms for dispersing whitebark pine seed depends primarily upon the seed-harvesting and caching behavior of Clark’s nutcracker (Nucifraga columbiana) (Tomback 1982, Hutchins and Lanner 1982), although a number of other birds and small mammals take the seeds for eating and for storage as winter food. Wildlife species that eat whitebark pine seeds include woodpeckers, jays, ravens, chickadees, nuthatches, finches, chipmunks, ground squirrels, bears and probably mice (Hutchins and Lanner 1982, Tomback 2001). Pine squirrels (Tamiasciurus spp.) harvest and cache whitebark pine cones in middens (Hutchins and Lanner 1982, Kendall 1983). Whitebark pine seeds serve as an important food source for grizzly bears (Ursus arctos) and black bears (U. americanus) which raid the middens (Kendall 1983). Whitebark pine grows in a wide range of plant communities. It can be found in pure stands as the climax species on the coldest and driest sites where harsh growing conditions keep out the less hardy species (Pfister et al. 1977). At the highest elevations, it can be found growing as small stands of short, shrublike trees (krummholz) mixed in with alpine herblands; but on less harsh sites, it achieves larger size and straighter form. Whitebark pine grows as a co-climax species on sites capable of supporting shade-tolerant tree species such as subalpine fir, but on which they are unable to grow vigorously enough to replace the whitebark pine. These are described as whitebark pine-subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa) habitat types (Pfister et al. 1977) and whitebark pine phases of subalpine fir habitat types (Steele et al. 1983). On moister subalpine fir habitat types within the analysis area, whitebark pine can be present as a major seral species stand component, and on dryer subalpine fir habitat types as a minor seral species stand component. Whitebark pine’s presence as a seral species in subalpine fir habitat types is maintained by disturbances, mainly fires (Arno 2001). Prior to 1900, fires burned through whitebark pine forests at average intervals ranging from about 30 to and 400 years, usually with mixed-severity (Arno and Peterson 1983, Morgan and Bunting 1990, Barrett 1994, Brown et al. 1994, Keane et al. 1994, Tomback et al. 2001, Murray 2008, Larson et al. 2009), although the longest fire return intervals were associated with a stand-replacing fire regime (Romme 1982). Some of the seral whitebark pine stands have been perpetuated by low-intensity fires that kill understory fir and spruce (Arno 1986, Arno 1976, Fisher and Bradley 1987, Arno and Hoff 1990, Bradley et al. 1992). Severely burned patches within mixed-severity fires create openings that are used by nutcrackers for caching seeds, resulting in even-aged, whitebark pine stands. Whitebark pine has been declining throughout major portions of its range for the last 50 years due to the effects of diseases, insects, and succession (Kendall and Keane 2001) with a rapid decline since the 1960s (Keane et al. 1996). White pine blister rust (Cronartium ribicola) has led to the most rapid and precipitous decline in whitebark pine. Impacts from the disease have been highest in the more mesic parts of whitebark pine range, but although the coldest and driest whitebark pine stands have been impacted to a lesser degree, all whitebark pine can be considered at risk. White pine blister rust (WPBR) enters trees through tree needles and grows from the infected needles through branches to the main stem. Smaller trees die more quickly than larger trees. Although larger trees take longer to die, the ends of branches can be killed long before the tree dies, which reduces or eliminates cone production since whitebark pine cones are produced at the ends of branches in the upper portion of the tree crown. During the last 100 years, the area of whitebark pine cover type in the interior Columbia River Basin and the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex in Montana is estimated to have declined 45 percent with the whitebark pine in areas where it is a major seral species declining by 98 percent (Keane et al. 1996). In a disease study of white pines (Pinus albicaulis and P. flexilis) of the Intermountain West, Smith and Hoffman (2000) found the incidence (present within the sampled stands) of WPBR to be 55 percent in the middle Rocky Mountains. In the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex of Montana, Keane et al. (1994) reported an 83 percent infection intensity (percentage of live trees infected) with a 33 percent average crown kill in 1990. They found that snags were common, ranging from 0 to 123 trees/ha and attributed most of the whitebark pine mortality to blister rust because they found no evidence of extensive bark beetle mortality. South of the project area in the Grand Teton National Park, Kendall et al. (1996a) found an average of 7 percent dead (ranging from 0 to 50 percent), and in Yellowstone National Park found an average of 7 percent dead (ranging from 0 to 64 percent). Kendall et al. (1996b) on the Gallatin National Forest found 10 percent dead (ranging from 0 to 43 percent). These mortality values have almost certainly increased within the last 15 years due to additional WPBR-related mortality and due to the recent mountain pine beetle epidemic. Blister rust surveys of whitebark pine in two stands south of the Stonewall project area on the Helena National Forest done in 2007 and 2009 found 74 and 97 percent WPBR infection levels (see WBP Survey_granite.xls and WBP Survey_redmtn6253.xls in project records). Whitebark pine in the Northern Rocky Mountains depends upon fire to maintain its dominance or presence on sites where it is a successional species (Arno 2001, Keane 2001, Kendall and Keane 2001, Morgan and Murray 2001). It often can survive low-severity fires that kill its competitors. Many fires can kill most fir, spruce, and young whitebark pine, but few larger whitebark pines. Fire frequency has decreased in many whitebark pine forests since the late 1880s, with the greatest change in the last 60 years (Brown 1994, Murray et al. 1998, Rollins et al. 2000). This fire exclusion has allowed an increase in competition from shade-tolerant and fire-intolerant species and advanced the age of whitebark pine stands (Arno 1986, Kendall and Keane 2001, Keane et al. 1994) making whitebark pine trees more susceptible to WPBR and mountain pine beetle. Keane et al. (1994) reported that in the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex, their sampled stands typically consisted of an overstory of old whitebark pine and spruce with an understory of almost exclusively subalpine fir (8 to 1500+ trees/ha, 30 to 250 years of age). They found whitebark pine regeneration in only about 9 percent of their sample plots. The number and size of forest openings suitable for nutcracker caching and whitebark seedling growth has declined. Increases in fuel loads as stands transition to dominance by subalpine fir and Engelmann spruce has led to increases in fire-severity, which threatens the survival of even the largest and most fire resistant whitebark pine trees (Morgan and Bunting 1990). Mountain pine beetle attacks whitebark pine in addition to lodgepole pine. Increases in stand age, average tree size, and competition, increases whitebark pine tree and stand susceptibility to attack from mountain pine beetle as it does with lodgepole pine. White pine blister rust infection also stresses whitebark pine trees, making them more attractive or susceptible to mountain pine beetles (Keane et al. 1994). The recent mountain pine beetle epidemic has killed whitebark pine, along with lodgepole and ponderosa pine. Restoring whitebark pine must address the major factors causing its decline; competition, succession and white pine blister rust (Tomback et al. 2001). To be successful in the long term, restoration should emphasize the return of ecosystem processes rather than simply historic stand conditions (Keane and Arno 2001). The primary ecosystem process that should be returned is fire. Techniques that can be used to restore whitebark pine (Keane and Arno 1996, Keane and Arno 2001, Tomback et al. 2001) include: · Planting rust-resistant whitebark pine seedlings · Release cuttings · Thinning · Tree understory removal · Selective tree removal · Cutting small openings (50 m diameter) for caching by Clark’s nutcracker · Natural stand-replacement fire · Prescribed stand-replacement fire with or without cutting for fuel enhancement · Variable intensity prescribed burning in natural fuels · Variable intensity prescribed burning with cutting for fuel enhancement · Underburning Keane and Parsons (2010a) describe the results of a study to restore white pine ecosystems using treatments that emulate the historic fire regime—primarily combinations of prescribed fire, silvicultural cuttings, and fuel enhancement cuttings. They found that all treatments that included prescribed burning created suitable nutcracker caching habitat, and many birds were observed caching seeds in the burned areas. After 5 years, however, they had not found a significant increase in regeneration of whitebark pine. They attributed the lack of regeneration to the high level of blister rust in the surrounding area that had reduced available seed and forced the nutcrackers to reclaim most of the cached seed, as well as site severity, a lack of plant cover, and a relatively short time since disturbance. Keane and Parsons (2010b) recommended that an evaluation of natural regeneration in the treatments must be made at least a decade after burning. In four of the five study sites, they recorded 88 to 95 percent mortality from blister rust, with less than 1 percent mortality on the fifth study site. Based upon their findings, their recommendations included: · Emulating historical fire regimes · Using prescribed burning and augmenting fuelbeds by cutting trees where necessary · Letting wildland fires burn under acceptable conditions · Planting potentially rust-resistant trees where whitebark pine blister rust-caused mortality was above 20 percent, rust infection levels were above 50 percent, or bark beetle mortality levels were high Treatment Groups 7 and 8 in the Stonewall project would be prescribe burned with mixed-severity fires. The treatments in Group 7 would create mortality patches less than 5, 10, or 20 acres depending upon the unit and in Group 8 would create mortality patches less than 30 or 75 acres depending upon the unit. Where necessary, the treatments would involve cutting trees with chainsaws prior to burning to enhance increase surface fuel loadings. During cutting operations, individuals and patches of whitebark pine would be thinned around where available to reduce competition and to protect them from the prescribed burn. The result of the treatments would be to create a mosaic of lightly burned timbered areas and more severely burned patches. The patches would provide areas for nutcracker caching and for whitebark pine to establish and grow. These practices are consistent with recommendations stated above by Keane and Parsons (2010a), Keane and Arno (1996), Keane and Arno (2001), and Tomback et al. (2001) to emulate historical fire regimes, use variable intensity prescribed burning, augmenting fuels where necessary, thin to release whitebark pine trees, remove understories, and create small openings. Aspen Restoration Quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) is the most widely distributed tree in North America (Perala 2004). It is a fast-growing, short-lived, deciduous tree that reproduces by seed and vegetatively. Although aspen can produce an abundance of highly viable seeds, few aspen seedlings survive in nature due to the short period of seed viability (2-4 weeks following maturity under favorable conditions and perhaps much less under unfavorable), unfavorable moisture during seed dispersal, high soil surface temperatures, fungi, adverse diurnal temperature fluctuations during initial seedling growth, and the unfavorable chemical balance of some seedbeds (Maini and Cayford 1968, Meyer and Fechner 1980). Aspen forms clones, which are aggregations of stems mainly produced asexually from a single sexually produced individual through root suckers, although some root collar and stump sprouts can be produced (Perala 2004). Aspen clones typically produce root suckers in response to a disturbance, for example fires, that affect the clone and produce changes in the production of growth regulators (i.e. auxin and cytokinin) soil temperatures, and available moisture. In general, the greater the disturbance the greater the number of suckers produced due to increases in cytokinin-to-auxin ratios in the root systems, increases in soil temperatures, and increases in available site resources such as water and light. Root system carbohydrate reserves are also involved. Carbohydrate reserves provide the suckers with energy until they can provide their own through photosynthesis, and so the density of aspen regeneration following disturbance depends upon the level of those reserves. Although aspen stems are short-lived relative to other trees, aspen can reproduce through suckering following disturbance and so aspen clones can be quite old. Aspen can grow on site conditions that preclude the establishment of conifers but which have adequate subsurface moisture for a long-lived aspen clone to survive (Jones and DeByle 1985, Mueggler 1988). These self-perpetuating clones can be considered “stable” and “climax” and are not seral to a conifer species (Pfister et al. 1977). Most, if not all, of the aspen clones within the Stonewall Project area are growing within conifer stands and can be considered a seral species to a conifer species, either subalpine fir or Douglas-fir. They are usually small and have apparently been perpetuated by periodic wildfires (Pfister et al. 1977). As a seral species, without disturbance, over time the aspen can be expected to be overtopped by taller conifers and outcompeted for site resources. Thinning within and around aspen clones has been shown to be an effective treatment for increasing aspen regeneration and restoring aspen (Arikian et al. 1999, Huffman et al. 1999, Shepperd 2001, Prévost and Pothier 2002, Jones et al. 2005, Groot et al. 2009, Lennie et al. 2009). The heavier the thinning, the greater the number of aspen suckers produced (Huffman et al 1999, Prévost and Pothier 2002) and removing all competing trees from within and around aspen has been shown to produce the greatest increase in aspen suckering (Stone et al. 2001, Groot et al. 2009, Lennie et al. 2009, Prévost and Pothier 2002).Prescribed burning has also been shown effective at promoting aspen regeneration (Brown and DeByle 1987, Bartos et al. 1991, Kay 2001, Shepperd 2001, Durham 2008, Paragi and Haggstrom 2007). The effects of prescribed burning on aspen vary because fuels and flammability vary considerably within the aspen and mixed aspen-conifer overstory types (Brown and Simmerman 1986, Brown and DeByle 1987). In general, the fuel types in order from high potential fire intensity and rate of spread to low are: mixed conifer-aspen/shrub, aspen/shrub, mixed conifer-aspen/forb, aspen tall forb, and aspen low forb (Brown and Simmerman 1986). Brown and Simmerman (1986) rate the probability of successfully applying prescribed fire to aspen forests as moderate to high in the aspen/shrub, aspen/tall forb and mixed aspen-conifer fuel types. The aspen within the Stonewall area is present in mixed aspen-conifer fuel type.This page left blank intentionally Appendix C – Cumulative Effects  Stonewall Vegetation Project Cumulative Effects Activities The area analyzed in cumulative effects analysis is usually not limited to the project area, and it varies with the resource or species analyzed. Each resource has different “boundaries” for its effects analysis. Quantified, detailed information regarding effects, leading to specific reasoned conclusions can be found in the cumulative effects section of each specialist report located in the project record. Available information was reviewed. Many fires in the affected watersheds had no accompanying written information; however, fire occurrence data provides a glimpse of the fire suppression history in the project area. Fire information within all ownerships in the Stonewall Vegetation Project area and adjacent areas was considered. Records note there were 188 fires reported from 1920 till 2009. Acreage for fire size classes are as follows: (A) less than 0.25 acres, (B) 0.26-9.9 acres, (C) 10-99 acres, (D) 100 – 299 acres, (E) 300-999, (F) greater than 1,000 acres. Table C- 1. Number of fires in the Stonewall watersheds by decade and size class DECADE A B C D E F TOTAL 1920-1929 2 1930-1939  12  1    2 1940-1949 1950-1959 14 9  2  1  1  15 12 1960-1969 1970-1979 20 9  6 1 1    21 16 1980-1989 1990-1999 15 40 5 9 1 1  1   21 51 2000-2009 2010-2012 27 8 1 1 1  1  1 37 3 Total number of fires 148 31 6 1 2 1 191 (Kurtz 2009; updates L.Burns personal communication) Fires that escaped detection are not included. Fire occurrence data was digitized as point source data from historical maps that portrayed fires by year, size class, and cause for 1920 to 1969 (Kurtz 2009). For 1920 to 1969, no more than 1,243 acres on all ownerships have burned based on the maximum acreage per size class and the number of fires that occurred in that size class. For the period from 1970 to 2009, fire occurrence information was developed from Kansas City fire database (KCFast). The records from this period have detailed information including acreage, cost, and physical location. During the period from 1970 to 2009, 125 fires burned approximately 531 acres within the watershed area. Therefore, no more than 1,774 acres have burned across all ownerships since 1920, or less than 4 percent of the project area. The Snow/Talon fire burned 37,905 acres adjacent to the project area in 2003, approximately 87 acres burned within the project boundary. The Keep Cool Fire burned 302 acres within and adjacent to the project area in 2006, approximately 261 acres burned within the project boundary. In 2007, the Bull Mountain Fire burned 30 acres. The following tables of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable activities have been used by the interdisciplinary team members in determining the cumulative effects for their respective resource. Each resource specialist has determined which of the following activities are applicable to their analysis, depending on their cumulative effects boundary. Areas considered in the tables below include the Stonewall Vegetation project area (Stonewall), watersheds (6th Code HUCs) in and adjacent to the project area, and Stonewall project area and combined boundary (Stonewall Combined Boundary) (used for selected specific species). These represent the Row Labels 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s Grand Total Acres cumulative effects areas required for most resources, except for the Inventoried Roadless area. Activities are sorted by decade. Information on past activities beyond the HUC areas is available from the Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction – Healthy Forests Restoration Act Project analysis. Harvest/fire records prior to 1950 are not available. Harvest and fuel treatments are noted in the table below by the respective boundaries. Harvest activities are sorted by intermediate and regeneration treatments (see definitions). “Fuels activities” includes prescribed fire (including hand slashing), pile burning and jackpot burning. Timber harvest and/or fuel treatment acres could overlap on the same piece of ground so total acres reflected in the table may double count some parcels of ground; refer to Figure C- 1for clarification. Current stand conditions as a result of past disturbances are reflected in existing condition reports by resource area. Present or ongoing projects are those projects in the implementation phase. Reasonably foreseeable projects are in the planning phase, which means there is potential for change due to public input, changed conditions, etc. In addition, natural processes such as succession and natural events such as droughts are always occurring. Past Activities Table C- 2. Acres of past fire and fuels activities in the project area* Fuels treatments Prescribed burns 25 1,751 1,097 1,569 2,460 1,020 2,841 7,922 2,841 Other Grand Total  25  1,751  1,097  1,569  2,460 382** 4,243 382 11,145 * Past fire and fuels management activities obtained from Helena National Forest GIS spatial and tabular databases. **Forestwide Hazardous Tree Removal and unspecified amount of public fire wood Table C- 3. Past activities Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects 1950- 1959 Forest Service Timber Harvest Fire/Fuels Mining pre 1960 1950s multiple Multiple Stonewall Fuels treatments: 25 acres by HUCs Beaver Creek: Fuels treatments: 25 acres Humbug Creek, Keep Cool Creek, Lincoln Creek: No records Stonewall Combined Boundary Fuels treatments: 25 acres Small scale hard rock mining Effects included a short-term (<10 years) reduction in fuels, cover and forage, which have since been restored. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Small localized temporary disturbance to soils and streamside banks. Private and State lands Timber harvest 1950s Multiple Unspecified acres; primarily tractor logging, haul use of local existing roads. Removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest was reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity. Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects 1960 - 1969 See GIS Map Stonewall Regeneration harvest: 1,608 acres; Sanitation harvest: 37 acres; Intermediate: 254 acres; Reforestation: 1,144 acres By HUCs: Beaver Creek: Regen harvest: 589 acres; Intermediate harvest. 126 acres Humbug Creek: No records Keep Cool Creek: Regen harvest: 1,241 acres; Intermediate harvest. 1 53 acres: Lincoln Creek: Regen harvest: 258 acres; Sanitation harvest: 37 acres Stonewall Combined Boundary Regeneration Harvest: 3,535 acres; Intermediate Harvest: 254 acres; Sanitation Harvest: 60 acres; Reforestation: 2,340 acres Regeneration and salvage treatments created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area. Intermediate treatments reduce stand densities to improve vigor of remaining trees. Reforestation efforts increases stocking of desired tree species. A reduction in wildlife cover and forage occurred immediately following harvest; sites affected by these treatments now provide increased levels of herbaceous and woody forage on most sites, although some stands have closed canopy conditions and provide hiding and thermal cover with little forage. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. 1960 - 1969 Forest Service Timber Harvest Fire/Fuels Livestock Grazing on federal and private lands 1960-1969 1960-1969 See GIS Map and table 1 Multiple Stonewall Fuels treatments: 1,751 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek: Fuels treatments: 729 acres; Humbug Creek: Fuels treatments: 11 acres; Keep Cool Creek: Fuels treatments: 1,633 acres; Lincoln Creek: Fuels treatments: 78 acres Stonewall, HUC and Stonewall combined boundary: Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. Effects included a short-term (<10 years) reduction in fuels, cover and forage, which have since been restored. Effects of these disturbances are reflected in the existing condition. Grazing removed wildlife cover and forage on the site, reduced species diversity and increased the spread of invasive plants. While impacts still exist, these effects have been reduced due to more recent grazing management regimes, monitoring and mitigation. Effects of these Regeneration and salvage treatments created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area. Intermediate treatments reduce stand densities to improve vigor of remaining trees. Reforestation efforts increases stocking of desired tree species. A reduction in wildlife cover and forage occurred immediately following harvest; sites affected by these treatments now provide increased levels of herbaceous and woody forage on most sites, although some stands have closed canopy conditions and provide hiding and thermal cover with little forage. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Small localized temporary disturbance to soils and streamside banks. Private and State lands Timber harvest 1970 - 1979 1960s Forest Service Timber Harvest Multiple 1970 - 1979 Unspecified acres; primarily tractor logging, haul use of local existing roads. See GIS Map Removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest was reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity. Stonewall: Regeneration harvest: 502 acres Sanitation harvest: 82 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek: Regeneration harvest: 388 acres; Sanitation harvest: 21 acres Humbug Creek: Regeneration harvest: 37 acres Keep Cool Creek: Regeneration harvest: 116 ac.; Sanitation harvest: 24 ac. Lincoln Creek: Regeneration harvest: 116 acres; Sanitation harvest: 61 acres Regeneration treatments created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area. Sanitation and intermediate treatments reduce stand densities to improve vigor of remaining trees. Reforestation efforts increases stocking of desired tree species. A reduction in wildlife cover and forage occurred immediately following harvest; sites affected by these treatments now provide increased levels of herbaceous and woody forage on most sites, although some stands have closed canopy conditions and provide hiding and thermal cover with little forage. Effects of these Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects Fire/Fuels Livestock Grazing on federal and private lands 1970-1979 1970-1979 See GIS Map and table 1 Multiple Stonewall Fuels activities 1,097 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek: Fuels treatments: 875acres Humbug Creek: Fuels treatments: 49acres Keep Cool Creek: Fuels treatments : 524 acres Lincoln Creek: Fuels treatments: 161 acres Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. Effects included a short-term (<10 years) reduction in fuels, cover and forage, which have since been restored. Effects of these disturbances are reflected in the existing condition. Grazing removed wildlife cover and forage on the site, reduced species diversity and increased the spread of invasive plants. While impacts still exist, these effects have been reduced due to more recent grazing management regimes, monitoring and mitigation. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Mining 1980 - 1989 1970s Forest Service Timber Harvest Multiple 1980 - 1989 Small scale hard rock mining See GIS Map Small localized temporary disturbance to soils and streamside banks. Stonewall: Regeneration harvest: 575 acres Sanitation harvest: 17 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek: Regeneration harvest: 371 acres Keep Cool Creek: Regeneration harvest: 8 acres Lincoln Creek: Regeneration harvest: 205 acres Sanitation harvest: 17acres Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Effects included a short-term (<10 years) reduction in fuels, cover and forage, which have since been restored. Effects of these disturbances are reflected in the existing condition. Livestock Grazing on federal and private lands Private and State lands Timber harvest 1980-1989 1980s Multiple Multiple Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. Unspecified acres; primarily tractor logging, haul use of local existing roads. Grazing removed wildlife cover and forage on the site, reduced species diversity and increased the spread of invasive plants. While impacts still exist, these effects have been reduced due to more recent grazing management regimes, monitoring and mitigation. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest was reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity. Mining 1990 - 1999 1980s Multiple Small scale hard rock mining Small localized temporary disturbance to soils and streamside banks. Forest Service Timber Harvest 1990 – 1999 See GIS Map Stonewall Regeneration harvest: 787 acres Sanitation harvest: 220 acres Intermediate harvest: 17 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek Regeneration harvest: 275 acres Intermediate harvest: 16 acres Sanitation harvest: 186 acres Humbug Creek Intermediate harvest: 49 acres Keep Cool Creek Regeneration harvest: 393 acres Intermediate harvest. 78 acres Sanitation harvest: 279 acres Lincoln Creek Regeneration harvest: 432 acres Intermediate harvest: 17acres Sanitation harvest: 28 acres Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects Regeneration treatments created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area. Sanitation and intermediate treatments reduce stand densities to improve vigor of remaining trees. Reforestation efforts increases stocking of desired tree species. A reduction in wildlife cover and forage occurred immediately following harvest; sites affected by these treatments now provide increased levels of herbaceous and woody forage on most sites, although some stands have closed canopy conditions and provide hiding and thermal cover with little forage. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Fire/Fuels Livestock Grazing on federal and private lands 1990-1999 1990-1999 See GIS Map and table 1 Multiple Stonewall Fuels activities: 2,460 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek: Fuels treatments: 1,196 acres Humbug Creek: Fuels treatments: 1,145 acres Keep Cool Creek: Fuels treatments: 1,957 acres Lincoln Creek: Fuels treatments: 779 acres Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. Effects included a short-term (<10 years) reduction in fuels, cover and forage, which have since been restored. Effects of these disturbances are reflected in the existing condition. Grazing removed wildlife cover and forage on the site, reduced species diversity and increased the spread of invasive plants. While impacts still exist, these effects have been reduced due to more recent grazing management regimes, monitoring and mitigation. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Private and 1990s Multiple Unspecified acres; primarily tractor logging, haul use of local existing roads. Removal of live and dead and dying State lands Timber harvest trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest was reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects Regeneration treatments created an early-seral stage following the treatment and of which a few are still providing most of the early-seral in the project area. Sanitation and intermediate treatments reduce stand densities to improve vigor of remaining trees. A reduction in wildlife cover and forage occurred immediately following harvest; sites affected by these treatments now provide increased levels of herbaceous and woody forage on most sites, although some stands have closed canopy conditions and provide hiding and thermal cover with little forage. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Mining 2000 - 2010 1990s Forest Service Timber Harvest Multiple 2000-2010 Small hand-scale placer mining See GIS Map Small localized temporary disturbance to soils and streamside banks. Stonewall Regeneration harvest: 154 acres By HUCs: Beaver Creek: No records; Humbug Creek: Intermediate harvest: 60 acres; Keep Cool Creek: Regeneration harvest: 5 acres; Lincoln Creek: Regeneration harvest: 154 acres Sanitation harvest. 16 acres Fire/Fuels 2000 to 2010 See GIS map and table 1 Stonewall Fuels activities: 1,020 acres By HUCs Beaver Creek: Fuels treatments: 181 acres Humbug Creek: Fuels treatments: 166 acres Effects included a short-term (<10 years) reduction in fuels, cover and forage, some which may have since been restored. Effects of these disturbances are reflected in the existing condition. Keep Cool Creek: Fuels treatments: 285 acres Lincoln Creek: Fuels treatments: 571 acres Activity/Name Decade/Year Drainage Scope Of Activity Resource Effects Pheromone Control Livestock Grazing on federal and private lands 2002 2000-2010 Lincoln Gulch Multiple Placement of MCH caps, occurred just w/in Stonewall Vegetation area. Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. Small localized temporary disturbance from site visits Grazing removed wildlife cover and forage on the site, reduced species diversity and increased the spread of invasive plants. Effects of these disturbances on vegetation are reflected in the existing condition. Mining Pine Grove Campground Fencing 2000s 2011 Multiple Beaver Creek Small hand-scale placer mining Fence exclosure of 8 acres to keep livestock out of the developed campground area. Small localized temporary disturbance to soils and streamside banks. Removed impact from livestock use Ongoing Activities Table C- 4. Ongoing Activities 2010-present Alice Creek, Hogum Creek, and Poorman prescribed burns Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction HFRA Project 2010-present Ongoing  Forest wide BMSS IRA 2,841 acres Specimen Creek IRA 793 acres Hand pile, hand slashing, pile burning and prescribed burns for wildlife habitat improvement. Stonewall: 382 acres BMSS IRA: 82 acres By HUCs: total 568 acres Beaver Creek: 172 acres Keep Cool Creek: 270 acres Lincoln Creek: 127 acres Temporary localized disturbance during operations. Some felling of small diameter trees and reduction in fuels. Short-term increase in growth of shrubs and forbs. Potential for weed persistence or spread. Temporary localized disturbance during operations. Felling and removal of dead and damaged “hazardous” trees from roadsides. Very minor effects on live tree stocking, stand structures, and species compositions. Potential for weed persistence or spread. Pine Grove Campground Ongoing annual use & Upper Beaver Developed recreation site, overnight use (free-use facility). Season of use 5/15 – 11/15. Localized noise disturbance, road use. maintenance Creek ACTIVITY/NAME DECADE/YEAR DRAINAGE SCOPE OF ACTIVITY RESOURCE EFFECTS Livestock Grazing Permits Livestock Grazing on private lands Ongoing Ongoing  Multiple The Stone Dry area includes 3 allotments; 1 sheep and two cattle (see Stone Dry NFMA Report for more detail – pp. 1-3). Keep Cool Liverpool allotment: project area 3,171 acres Stonewall allotment: project area 2,000 acres By HUCs: total 4,486 acres Beaver Creek 3,510 acres; Keep Cool Creek HUC 785 acres; Lincoln Creek HUC 191 acres Portions of several allotments overlap the Bear-Marshal-Scapegoat-Swan (BMSS) IRA. Keep Cool Liverpool allotment: BMSS IRA 4,344 acres, Keep Cool Creek 7,500 acres Stonewall allotment: BMSS IRA 203 acres, LG IRA 124 acres Arrastra allotment: LG IRA 202 acres Alice Creek allotment: BMSS IRA 12,963 acres Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. May result in riparian vegetation, stream bank and upland impacts. Potential impacts on aspen and conifer regeneration in proposed treatment units analyzed. Proposed Unit 57 (93 acres) and most of Unit 43 (about 80 acres) are within livestock allotments. Grazing removes wildlife cover and forage on the site, and reduces species. Potential for spread of existing weed populations as well as introduce new populations, but with implementation of BMPs populations should not expand substantially. Continued potential negative effects to riparian areas, water quality, fish and fish habitat, with some potential for improvements from current conditions in some locations. Removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest was reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity. Potential for spread of existing weed populations as well as introduce new populations. Continued potential negative effects to riparian areas, water quality, fish and fish habitat, with some potential for improvements from current conditions in some locations. Mining Activity Noxious Weed Treatment Ongoing Ongoing Multiple Multiple Overall, permitted mining activity on the Lincoln Ranger District in recent years has been limited to small operations with mainly hand work. Herbicide treatment is primarily along roads and in patches that are accessible to mechanized equipment, and backpack/horsepack equipment; some biocontrol treatment (insects), grazing control (sheep), and mechanical. Small localized temporary disturbance to vegetation, soils and streamside banks. Potential impacts to small trees along roadsides and in proposed regeneration units. Of the 1,111 acres within the project ACTIVITY/NAME DECADE/YEAR DRAINAGE SCOPE OF ACTIVITY RESOURCE EFFECTS Stonewall Vegetation Project area 1,111 acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA 386 acres Lincoln Gulch IRA 261 acres Humbug Creek HUC 110 acres area, 443 acres are within intermediate treatment units, 50 acres are in prescribed burn units, and 492 are on roadsides. Applying herbicides for control of noxious weeds would have little potential impact to desirable tree stocking in these areas. 126 acres are within proposed regeneration harvest units, with herbicide application having minimal impacts if appropriate application methods are used. Potential short-term impacts to water quality if stream set-backs are not adhered to or if spills occur. Potential impact to sensitive plant populations, known populations would be protected from disturbance, but some habitat or individuals could be impacted. Continued disturbance within a developed area. Outfitting Road Maintenance Ongoing Annual Multiple Multiple Outfitter and guide special use permits for big game and spring bear seasons, day use and overnight camping. Grading and spot-gravelling performed as needed. Culvert maintenance may include clean out and or replacement where warranted for water flow. Temporary displacement of use of area. Potential impacts to water quality from inadvertent side casting of road material into stream channels and erosion of freshly bladed surface, but longer-term benefits based on road-drainage improvements and fish passage. . Road Special Use Permit Personal use firewood cutting. Ongoing Ongoing Multiple Multiple Re-issuance of existing road access permit for long-term. Dead trees with approximately 100 feet of existing travel routes within the analysis are being removed by the public for firewood. Continuation of existing use. Temporary disturbance, reduction of some down wood within travel corridors. Potential for weed spread. Private Land Timber Sale Ongoing Private property, State Property Unspecified acres; primarily tractor logging using existing roads for hauling. Temporary localized disturbance during operations. Removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest may be reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity. Felling and removal of trees, potential for weed persistence or spread. ACTIVITY/NAME DECADE/YEAR DRAINAGE SCOPE OF ACTIVITY RESOURCE EFFECTS Private Land Development Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter) and Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel Plan Ongoing Currently Under analysis Multiple Lincoln RD Development for housing in several areas in the vicinity of the town of Lincoln. The Lincoln Ranger District is currently developing the Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter) that would change existing non-winter motorized public access routes and prohibitions within the Blackfoot travel planning area. The overall objective of this proposal is to provide a manageable system of designated public motorized and non-motorized access routes and to designate motorized public access routes on a Motor Vehicle Use Map. The following changes are proposed: Approximately 98 miles of roads would be closed to public wheeled motorized use (348 miles of National Forest System roads would still be available) Approximately 30 additional miles of motorized trails would be designated (92 miles of motorized trails would be available) Approximately 18 additional miles of non-motorized trails would be designated (89 miles of non-motorized trails would be available) Approximately 2 miles of new road and motorized trail would be constructed Approximately 21 miles of roads would be considered naturally reclaimed per field investigations (roads that are vegetated to the point that they are not drivable and thus are reclaimed on their own) Approximately 62 miles acquired through land exchange would be identified for closure and possible decommissioning. Approximately 39 miles not previously part of the road or trail inventory Increased disturbance and road use may displace wildlife. Habitat alteration for developed sites. Action alternatives would reduce overall road density and related effects such as potential for weed spread, sedimentation delivery from roads to area streams, and disturbance to wildlife. Under the action alternatives use of roads may change from motorized to non-motorized; opportunities for both motorized and non-motorized recreation would continue to be available across the district.  Reasonably Foreseeable Future Activities Table C- 5. Foreseeable future activities ACTIVITY/NAME ESTIMATED IMPLEMENTATION DRAINAGE SCOPE OF ACTIVITY RESOURCE EFFECTS (unclassified routes) would be identified for closure and possible decommissioning Approximately 133 miles of roads would be stored Approximately 8 miles of roads would be decommissioned The Blackfoot-North Divide Winter Travel Plan would provide for a variety of motorized and non-motorized winter recreational opportunities. These plans are under analysis and are being developed in accordance with 36 CFR 212, Subpart B, Designation of Roads, Trails, and Areas for Motor Vehicle Use Grading and spot-gravelling performed as needed. Culvert maintenance may include clean out and or replacement where warranted for water flow. Livestock Grazing on federal and private lands Continuation Multiple Grazing of cattle, sheep and horses. Potential impacts on aspen and conifer regeneration. Grazing removes wildlife cover and forage on the site, and reduces species. Potential for spread of existing weed populations as well as introduce new populations. Continued potential negative effects to riparian areas, water quality, fish and fish habitat, with some potential for improvements from current conditions in some locations. Private Land Timber Sale  Continuation Private property, State Property Unspecified acres; primarily tractor logging using existing roads for hauling. Removal of live and dead and dying trees and potential for the spread of invasive species. Habitat for species that utilize mature forest may be reduced on some of the acres affected. Because off-forest lands occur at lower elevations in highly fragmented portions of the analysis area, most activities did not reduce landscape level connectivity or ACTIVITY/NAME ESTIMATED IMPLEMENTATION DRAINAGE SCOPE OF ACTIVITY RESOURCE EFFECTS adversely affect movement of wildlife species that are sensitive to fragmentation and human activity. Noxious Weed Treatment Continuation Multiple Herbicide treatment is primarily along roads and in patches that are accessible to mechanized equipment, and backpack/horsepack equipment; some biocontrol treatment (insects), grazing control (sheep), and mechanical. Stonewall Vegetation Project area 1,111 acres Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA 386 acres Lincoln Gulch IRA 261 acres Potential impacts to small trees along roadsides and in proposed regeneration units. Applying herbicides for control of noxious weeds would have minimal impacts to desirable tree stocking if appropriate application methods are used. Data source: HNF Lincoln RD GIS. Codes categorized as follows: Fuels treatments: 1111,1112,1113,1115,1117,1120,1130,1150,1152,1153,1154 Regeneration treatments: 4111,4112,4113,4117,4121,4131,4132,4133,4134,4141,4142,4148,4211 Intermediate treatments: 4151,4152,4210,4220 Sanitation treatments: 4230, 4231, 4232 Reforestation treatments:  Stonewall_Cumulative_Projects_deis_updated110712Figure C- 1. Past, Ongoing and Foreseeable Projects within the Cumulative Effects Boundaries (wildfire location information not available, not mappedPast, Ongoing and Future Activities in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA Table C- 6. Acres of past harvest and fuels activities in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA Past Harvest and Fuels Activity Acres within IRA Prescribed Burning 38,636.0 Wildfire 9,460.6 Man Caused Fire 653.2 Fuels Treatment (yarding, rearranging, compacting, crushing, piling) 4,493.5 Thinning (hazardous fuels reduction, fuel break) 7,992.5 Range Improvement 870.9 Timber Harvest (patch clearcut, stand clearcut, shelterwood establishment cut, seed tree seed cut, shelterwood staged removal cut, single tree selection cut, group selection cut, liberation cut, commercial thin, sanitation salvage, precommercial thin) 2,962.3 Reforestation Needs Created 2,708.7 Reforestation/Planting/Regeneration activities 6,856.3 Wildlife/T&E activities 337.8 TOTAL 74,971.8  Table C- 7. Ongoing and reasonably foreseeable future actions in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA Forest and District Project Name and Location Acres(miles) in BMSS IRA Type of Activity in BMSS IRA Effects Flathead NF/Spotted Bear RD Soldier Addition II EA (Decision Notice signed December 2011)  The portion of the district affected by the vegetation treatments in this project are bounded to the east by the Hungry Horse Reservoir and the South Fork Flathead River, to the north by Sullivan Creek, to the south by Bunker Creek, and to the west by Bruce Ridge 1,333 acres prescribed fire  and  1 acre of hand cutting of small trees 1,333 acres of prescribed burning to sustain the role of fire in the ecosystem and help restore whitebark pine habitat. and 1 acre of hand treatment to reduce hazardous fuels around the Stony Hill Electronic Site to protect the site from future wildland fire. Implementation expected: 2012 - 2022 Short-term effects to solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation would be minimal due to the increased presence of people and noise during project implementation. Helicopter use is expected to occur over a 1 to 2 day period during the ignition process; however, helicopter use is not unusual in the area. During the implementation of the fuels treatment at the Stony Hill Electronics Site, solitude may be interrupted by the power saws used in thinning and the presence of personnel on the site for several days. Short-term effects to the undeveloped characteristics while cut stumps are visible at the site; however, when viewed from off-site the area would resemble other subalpine openings. Thinning treatments would not affect the remoteness characteristic of the area. Burning would be expected to enhance the natural integrity and apparent naturalness of the area. Burning would not affect the feel of remoteness in this IRA. Flathead NF/Spotted Bear RD Spotted Bear River (Decision Notice signed August 2011)  The project area is bounded on the west by the Hungry Horse 436 acres of prescribed fire Prescribed burning on 436 acres to sustain the role of fire in the ecosystem and improve the availability of seasonal habitat for ungulates, grizzly bears, and other wildlife species Expected implementation: 2012-2022. Some Short-term effects to solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation would be minimal due to the increased presence of people and noise during project implementation. Helicopter use is expected to Forest and District Project Name and Location Acres(miles) in BMSS IRA Type of Activity in BMSS IRA Effects Reservoir and the South Fork Flathead River, on the north by South Fork Dry Park Creek, on the south by a minor ridge off Spotted Bear Mountain just north of the mouth of Cedar Creek, and on the east by the Great Bear Wilderness and Bob Marshall Wilderness boundaries. of the prescribed burning could begin in 2012. Due to the infrequency of achieving the desired combination of weather and fuel/vegetative conditions, implementation of the prescribed burning may take up to 10 years before completed. occur over a 1 to 2 day period during the ignition process; however, helicopter use is not unusual in the area. People who use the area for primitive recreation opportunities would still be able to use the area as they did before, although they may be restricted during the time the area is actively burning. Additionally, instead of the area being “green” as it was before, portions of the area would now be considered “black,” but this should not affect their recreational use of the area. Short-term effects to the undeveloped characteristics while cut stumps and areas blackened by fire are visible. Proposed burning is designed to produce effects similar to those expected in a historic natural fire and result in more resilient forest conditions for long-term benefits. The vegetation slashing and subsequent burning is not anticipated to detract from IRA characteristics such as natural integrity and apparent naturalness. Forest and District Project Name and Location Acres(miles) in BMSS IRA Type of Activity in BMSS IRA Effects Lewis and Clark NF/Rocky Mountain RD Benchmark Fuels EA (Analysis Complete – EA being revised due to remanding on appeal)  T19N R09W and T20N R10W 388 Use of Prescribed fire and mechanical fuels treatments to reduce fuel hazards. Expected implementation: chainsaw and hand-piling Summer/Fall 2013, Mechanical removal of trees may begin Winter 2013. Prescribed burn implementation anticipated to occur over the course of several years. Short-term effects to solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation due to the increased presence of people and noise during project implementation.  Short-term effects to the undeveloped characteristics while cut stumps and areas blackened by fire are visible.  Long-term benefits to naturalness as fuel hazards are reduced. Lewis and Clark NF/Rocky Mountain Ranger District Rocky Mountain Ranger District Travel Plan EIS—Badger -Two Medicine Area (Analysis Complete)  The project area extends from Birch Creek which is situated about 17 miles west of the town of Dupuyer, Montana, north about 20 miles to Glacier National Park near Highway 2 and west to Marias Pass and the Continental Divide. (7.59) 3.74 miles of road to be converted to non-motorized system trails  0.26 road miles to be decommissioned  3.59 trail miles to be decommissioned Long-term benefits to opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation, more effective management of unauthorized motorized use Lewis and Clark NF/Rocky Mountain Ranger District Rocky Mountain Ranger District Travel Plan EIS—Birch Creek South Area (Analysis Complete)  The project area extends from Birch Creek which is situated about 17 miles west of the town of Dupuyer, Montana, south about 70 miles to Red Mountain near Highway 200. (20.2) 2 miles of undetermined road adopted as part of the designated transportation system within the IRA.  12 miles of non-system trail adopted as part of the designated transportation system within the IRA (4 of these miles motorized trails).  6.2 miles of unneeded existing roads and trails decommissioned. Long-term benefits to opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation, more effective management of unauthorized motorized use Forest and District Project Name and Location Acres(miles) in BMSS IRA Type of Activity in BMSS IRA Effects Helena NF/Lincoln RD Forest-wide Hazardous Tree Removal and Fuels Reduction—HFRA (Analysis Complete) approximately 82  (2.86) Removal of trees that are dead or present a hazard (falling) within 1 . tree lengths of the edge of an open road. The trees to be removed in the IRA are all on existing, open roads that provide access to trailheads, trails, private lands, dispersed recreation sites, campgrounds, administrative sites, recreation opportunities and general forest access. Implementation began Fall 2010. Short-term effects to solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation due to the increased presence of people and noise during project implementation.  Short- term effects to the undeveloped characteristics while cut stumps are visible. Helena NF/Lincoln RD Blackfoot Winter Travel Plan—EA (Under Analysis) N/A Designate motorized and non-motorized trails for winter use Long-term benefits to opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation, more effective management of unauthorized motorized use Helena NF/Lincoln RD Blackfoot Travel Plan (non-winter)—EIS (Under Analysis) N/A Designate motorized and non-motorized trails Long-term benefits to opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation, more effective management of unauthorized motorized use Helena NF/Lincoln RD Alice Creek Wildlife Enhancement Project (Under Analysis)  13 miles northeast of Lincoln, MT. Bordered by the Continental Divide along the north and eastern edge, and the Scapegoat Wilderness along the western side. 2,823 Improve big game winter range by reducing conifer encroachment within native grasslands. In addition to creating and maintaining natural openings and improving stand structure, burning would improve forage quality and quantity. Short-term effects to solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation due to the increased presence of people and noise during project implementation.  Short term effects to the undeveloped characteristics while cut stumps and areas blackened by fire are visible.  Long-term benefits to naturalness as winter range and forage are improved. Helena NF/Lincoln RD Dry Creek Rx Fire (planned future activity in SW Crown) 2,000 Use of Prescribed fire and mechanical fuels treatments to reduce fuel hazards. Short-term effects to solitude and opportunities for primitive and unconfined recreation due to the increased presence of people and Forest and District Project Name and Location Acres(miles) in BMSS IRA Type of Activity in BMSS IRA Effects noise during project implementation.  Short-term effects to the undeveloped characteristics while cut stumps and areas blackened by fire are visible.  Long-term benefits to naturalness as fuel hazards are reduced. Helena NF/Lincoln RD Weed Treatments (ongoing) 388 Ground based herbicides applied to reduce invasive weed infestations. Short-term effects to solitude during project implementation,  Long-term beneficial effects to naturalness as weed infestations are reduced. Helena NF/Lincoln RD Grazing Allotments (ongoing) 17,511 Ongoing grazing in the Alice Creek, Keep Cool Liverpool, and Stonewall Allotments No new impacts to roadless resources are anticipated, there may be minor long-term (ongoing) impacts to naturalness due to the presence of livestock. LoloNF/Seeley Lake RD Dick Creek Fuels Management Project (Analysis complete, Decision signed 4/26/2008)  Located near McCabe Point within the “Monture Area” of the BMSS 1,075 This project includes prescribed burning on approximately 1,075 acres of transitory range and winter range located near the Blackfoot Clearwater Wildlife Management Area.  Implementation of approximately 775 acres of prescribed burning was conducted in 2011. Implementation of remaining approximately 300 acres of prescribed burning planned for fall of 2012, or later depending on available burn window. This project would not alter the natural character of the BMSS and when completed would appear as a natural fire would; leaving a mosaic of burn patterns on the landscape. Ignition would be conducted aerially, and control lines would utilize natural topographic breaks. No tree felling would be conducted as part of this project that would alter the character of the IRA. The feeling of isolation and solitude could be reduced for a short time period while aerial ignition activities occur. The sight and sounds of the helicopter would affect the feeling of solitude in the lower reaches of eh Dick Creek Forest and District Project Name and Location Acres(miles) in BMSS IRA Type of Activity in BMSS IRA Effects drainage for own to two days. Lolo NF/Seeley Lake RD Swan Face Prescribed Burn (Analysis Complete, Decisions signed 7/25/2011)  Located near Clearwater Lake in the Swan Front Area. 2,500 This project includes the reintroduction of fire to restore the role of fire and enhance ecosystem processes. Ignition would be conducted by hand and aerially, and control lines would utilize natural topographic breaks.  Implementation of prescribed burning planned to be conducted in the fall of 2012. No tree felling would be conducted as part of this project that would alter the character of the IRA. The feeling of isolation and solitude could be reduced for a short time period while ignition activities occur. The sight and sounds of the helicopter would affect the feeling of solitude in the vicinity of the burn for two to three days.   Appendix D – Stonewall Roadless Area Characteristics Worksheet  Roadless Areas: The Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) is 866,330 acres and managed by the Helena, Lewis and Clark, Lolo and Flathead National Forests. The portion of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA managed by the Lincoln Ranger District of the Helena National Forest covers 53,995 acres, and the Stonewall Vegetation Project area overlaps with 12,254 acres. The Lincoln Gulch IRA covers 8,246 acres, and the Stonewall Vegetation Project area overlaps with 3,193 acres. Table D- 1that follows displays effects to roadless characteristics. Table D- 1. Effects to roadless characteristics Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. Soil, Water and Air resources These three key resources are the foundation upon which other resource values and outputs depend. Healthy watersheds catch, store, and safely release water over time, protecting downstream communities from flooding; providing clean water for domestic, agricultural, and industrial uses; helping maintain abundant and healthy fish and wildlife populations; and are the basis for many forms of outdoor recreation. Identify any unique or critical watershed resources. Describe how the project will affect these key resources areas and the habitats that depend on them. Yes, Short Term    Yes, Short Term         Yes, Temporary Stable     Improving          Stable Soil: There would be some immediate effects to soils as fire consumes the organic layer. Project design features would minimize soil erosion and sediment delivery to streams is not likely.  Water: Decreased forest canopy would lead to an increased risk of surface erosion for about a year after a high severity fire or mixed severity burns. High severity burns would not pose an adverse risk of sedimentation unless they are over more than 10-20 acres and on steeper slopes. High severity burns near streams pose the highest risk for sedimentation. However, riparian buffers would provide protection and reduce the risk of sedimentation reaching streams. After about a year, vegetative recovery and reduced wildfire risk would improve conditions compared to present conditions.  Air: Management activities would likely cause direct short-term impacts from dust and smoke. Dust would be generated through various activities including transportation of material. These activities are not anticipated to result in significant impacts to regional air quality because of the transitory nature of fugitive dust. Smoke from burning operations could produce some smoky days in the local area and generally lasts 1-3 days after ignition is completed. Smoke may settle into the lower draws and drainages during the evening hours following ignition. Permissible burn days are determined based on metrological conditions that tend to disperse smoke. Sources of public drinking water Maybe Stable, then after a No sources of drinking water would be affected by the project. Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. National Forest System lands contain watersheds that are important sources of public drinking water. Roadless areas within the National Forest System contain all or portions of 354 municipal watersheds contributing drinking water to millions of citizens. Maintaining these areas in a relatively undisturbed condition saves downstream communities millions of dollars in water filtration costs. Careful management of these watersheds is crucial in maintaining the flow and affordability of clean water to a growing population.  Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area or that would be affected by the project. Describe how the project would affect water quality and quantity of the public drinking water source. year Improving Diversity of plant and animal communities Roadless areas are more likely than roaded areas to support greater ecosystem health, including the diversity of native and desired nonnative plant and animal communities due to the absence of disturbances caused by roads and accompanying activities. Inventoried roadless areas also conserve native biodiversity by serving as a bulwark against the spread of nonnative invasive species.  Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. Describe effects to the diversity of communities and impacts to populations in the areas. Yes Stable/Improving Project IRA’s provide habitat for large number of wildlife species that depend on their remote forested character including nine threatened, endangered and sensitive species (discussed below). These areas provide critical lynx habitat, grizzly bear core and den habitat and wolverine den habitat. While activities proposed under alternatives 2 and 3 would result in short-term disturbance, because no new roads are proposed, all alternatives would maintain the remote character of the area and long-term human access would be unchanged under all alternatives. Approximately 23,000 acres have recently burned and due to elevated fuel conditions, the likelihood of stand replacing wildfire and a long-term loss of suitable wildlife habitat is greatest under alternative 1, whereas alternatives 2 and 3 both reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire. Vegetative diversity would be relatively unchanged under alternative 1, although a continued reduction in whitebark pine and aspen is likely to occur. Treatments proposed under alternatives 2 and 3 would enhance stand and landscape level vegetative and habitat diversity, including maintenance or improvement of white-bark pine and aspen. Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land Roadless areas function as biological strongholds and refuges for many species. Of the nation’s species currently listed as threatened, endangered, or proposed Yes Stable/Improving Plants: Under both alternatives, all treatments in the roadless areas would be prescribed burning with hand preparation. More area would be treated under alternative 2. TES plants: Pinus albicaulis (whitebark pine) is the only sensitive species found in the project area. Sensitive plant habitat has not been mapped in the project area, but Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. for listing under the Endangered Species Act, approximately 25% of animal species and 13% of plant species are likely to have habitat within inventoried roadless areas on National Forest System lands. Roadless areas support a diversity of aquatic habitats and communities, providing or affecting habitat for more than 280 threatened, endangered, proposed, and sensitive species. More than 65% of all Forest Service sensitive species are directly or indirectly affected by inventoried roadless areas. This percentage is composed of birds (82%), amphibians (84%), mammals (81%), plants (72%), fish (56%), reptiles (49%), and invertebrates (36%).  Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. Describe how the project would affect the habitats or populations and whether this effect is significant across the normal range and distribution of these habitats and populations. there is likely to be potential habitat for eight additional herbaceous sensitive plant species. None of the herbaceous sensitive plants would be directly affected unless there are undiscovered occurrences in the roadless area. Treatment in the roadless area would be prescribed burns, generally of mixed severity that would create openings less than 75 acres in size. Low severity burns would be expected to have minimal impacts since these herbaceous species have adaptations to fire and all typically grow in moist to wet areas that would be less likely to burn. Large openings in the canopy could reduce the shade that is needed by several of these species. These species and their habitat would be expected to be similarly affected by wildfire. Occurrences of whitebark pine would be protected by the project design feature SILV-2 which is designed to protect individuals and enhance habitat for the species. Thus, while there is the potential for individuals to be charred or physically damaged during the treatment, beneficial effects for whitebark pine (in the form of habitat enhancement due to the removal of shade-tolerant species and creation of caching sites for Clark’s nutcrackers) are expected in the long-term.  Invasive plants: Small areas of spotted knapweed overlap roadless area units 80, 82, and 84. Effects of fire on spotted knapweed are variable but available studies have shown that fire may kill above ground plant parts but the sturdy perennial taproot is likely to survive all but the most severe fires. For the most part, spotted knapweed may be expected to establish, persist, or spread following fire. In some cases hot fires have shown the greatest increase in spotted knapweed cover after several years (Zouhar 2001). Project design features and the ongoing weed management program on the Helena National Forest (which treats 1/3 of infested acres each year) would reduce the potential for new establishment and spread of spotted knapweed in the roadless areas as a result of proposed actions.  Animals: Project IRA’s provide habitat for two federally listed species including the grizzly bear and Canada lynx and seven Regionally Sensitive Species including the gray wolf, wolverine, fisher, Townsend’s big-eared bat, black-backed woodpecker, flammulated owl and western toad. The following is a brief discussion of anticipated effects to these species.  Grizzly Bear – All but approximately 2,700 acres of Project level IRA’s are considered occupied grizzly habitat and these areas contain 39,000 acres of grizzly Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. bear core habitat and over 8,000 acres of den habitat. Because there are no roads proposed in the IRA, core habitat and Total Motorized and Open Motorized Road Densities would be unaffected under all alternatives. Under alternative 1, den habitat would be unaffected. Also while suitable habitat would be largely unchanged, over the long-term due to the absence of fire, whitebark pine would continue to decline under alternative 1. Under alternatives 2 and 3, localized short-term increases in human disturbance would occur during burning. Due to proposed low and mixed severity burning there would also be a reduction in cover on 4,845 acres and 3,564 acres under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively, although cover would be maintained within and adjacent to all units. Of this, potential short-term impacts to 979 acres of den habitat would occur under alternative2 and 920 acres of den habitat would be affected under alternative3. Unaffected den habitat would be widely available under both alternatives. Both alternatives 2 and 3 would maintain or promote development of white bark pine.  Canada Lynx – Project level IRA’s contain 32,587 acres of Lynx critical habitat. Because there is no hare habitat proposed for treatment within the IRA, lynx foraging habitat would remain relatively unchanged under all alternatives. Also due to the absence of treatment, lynx cover would be unchanged under alternative 1. Under alternatives 2 and 3, low and mixed severity fire would occur on 3,349 acres and 2,410 acres of suitable den habitat respectively and cover would be reduced on most of this acreage. However considering that up to 25 percent of the treatment sites would have unburned lands, suitable cover would continue to occur on all treatment sites. Also due to establishment of understory vegetation, proposed actions would increase long-term foraging habitat on the acreage treated. Large blocks of unaffected suitable habitat would be available in all watersheds and connectivity and landscape level habitat would be maintained under all alternatives. All alternatives are consistent with NRMLD standards and guidelines.  Gray Wolf – Due to its remote nature, virtually all of the project IRA’s provide suitable gray wolf habitat, although no known den or rendezvous sites would be affected under any alternative. Also because there are no new roads proposed, long-term human access would be unchanged under all alternatives, although alternative 2 and 3 would increase short-term human access 4,845 and 3,565 acres respectively. Gray wolf foraging habitat would likely continue to decline in some areas but would generally be maintained under alternative 1, whereas under alternatives 2 and 3, wolf Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. foraging would be maintained in the short-term and increased in the long-term.  Wolverine – Project level IRA contain approximately 16,500 acres of wolverine den habitat. Prey availability and landscape connectivity would be largely unchanged under all alternatives. Den habitat under alternative 1 would be unaffected, whereas mixed severity burning would affect 1,648 acres or 10 percent of the suitable IRA den habitat under alternatives 2 and 3. Also there would be a short-term increase in human activity on this acreage, as well as a long-term reduction in cover. However 90 percent of the suitable habitat would be unaffected and suitable den and foraging habitat would continue to be available in all affected watersheds under all alternatives.  Fisher – Project IRAs contain 478 acres of fisher summer habitat and 21,800 acres of winter habitat. Under alternative 1 suitable habitat and prey availability would be largely unchanged. Also because there would be no new roads, long-term human access would be unchanged under all alternatives. Due to proposed low and mixed severity burning, short-term disturbance to foraging individuals and a reduction in cover would occur on 39/1,189 acres of summer/winter habitat under alternatives 2 and 49/718 acres of summer/winter IRA habitat under alternative3. Also due to the canopy openings associated with mixed severity burning, suitable summer/winter habitat would be reduced 4/207 acres and 1/66 acres under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. Preferred riparian habitat and travel corridors would be maintained under all alternatives.  Townsend’s big-eared Bat – Most of the project IRA’s provide suitable foraging habitat for this species and under alternative 1 foraging habitat would be unaffected. Proposed burning would create more open understory conditions and improved foraging habitat on 3,564 and 4,845 acres under alternatives 2 and 3 respectively. While habitat would be reduced on sites where canopy openings would be created through mixed severity burning under alternatives 2 and 3 (up to 900 acres), suitable foraging habitat would continue to be widespread under all alternatives.  Black-backed Woodpecker – Project IRAs contain approximately 23,000 acres of recently burned high quality black-backed woodpecker habitat. In the absence of future wildfires, habitat may decline under alternative 1. Under alternatives 2 and 3, high intensity burning would create high quality habitat on approximately 1,500 Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. acres and 1,000 acres respectively.  Flammulated Owl – Suitable flammulated owl habitat occurs on approximately 4,300 acres of project IRAs. Under alternative 1, preferred open canopy habitat would continue to decline. Proposed burning under alternatives 2 and 3 would increase open canopy habitat on 3,900 acres and 2,900 acres respectively.  Western Boreal Toad – Suitable breeding habitat would be largely unchanged under all alternatives. While proposed burning would affect upland habitat on approximately 4,600 acres under alternatives 2 and 3, suitable habitat would continue to occur on all sites and foraging habitat would be improved on the acreage affected. Unaffected suitable upland habitat predominates across all watersheds under all alternatives. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation Roadless areas often provide outstanding dispersed recreation opportunities such as hiking, camping, picnicking, wildlife viewing, hunting, fishing, cross country skiing, and canoeing. While they may have many Wilderness-like attributes, unlike Wilderness the use of mountain bikes, and other mechanized means of travel is often allowed. These areas can also take pressure off heavily used wilderness areas by providing solitude and quiet, and dispersed recreation opportunities.  Describe current recreation opportunities within the Roadless area. Identify the effects of your project on the area and these activities. Describe the effect in terms of availability for similar experiences in surrounding areas or within the region of use. Consider link to ROS mapping. Yes Stable The ROS classification in the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan and Lincoln Gulch IRAs is primarily Semi Primitive Motorized with areas of Roaded Modified and Roaded Natural. The primary recreation activities occurring within the roadless areas include hunting, hiking, dispersed camping, use of motorized trails in the summer and snowmobiling and cross-country skiing in the winter. In the short term, visitors may be temporarily displaced during implementation of the proposed activities (prescribed burning, hand slashing of small diameter trees and construction of hand fireline). Noise associated with hand slashing of small diameter trees and hand fireline construction would affect the expected experience associated with the areas’ roadless character, however this would only impact visitors traveling through the area during project implementation. The proposed low severity and mixed severity prescribed fire would create openings ranging from 5 to 75 acres in size, the more open forest canopy is not expected to affect the recreation activities or experience within or adjacent to the project area in the long term. However, the prescribed fire activities would be noticeable by the area users, affecting the on-site management component of the expected setting. No road construction, reconstruction or maintenance is proposed within the IRA acreage; therefore the current IRA roadless characteristic would not change. There would be no long term impacts to recreation opportunities within the project area. Ecosystem restoration and a reduction in the risk of negative impacts from severe wildfire would help to maintain the recreation settings and opportunities. Alternative 2 would treat 4,846 acres out of the total combined 71,256 acres of both IRAs (managed by the Lincoln Ranger District); the prescribed fire would be Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape. implemented on 6.8 percent of the total Lincoln RD IRA acreage. Alternative 3 would treat 3,564 acres out of the total combined 71,256 acres of both IRAs (managed by the Lincoln Ranger District); the prescribed fire would be implemented on 5 percent of the total Lincoln RD IRA acreage. Opportunities to continue the popular dispersed recreation activities would exist over the vast majority of the IRA acreage during project implementation and would continue to exist on all of the IRA acres after project completion. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation The body of knowledge about the effects of management activities over long periods of time and on large landscapes is very limited. Reference landscapes of relatively undisturbed areas serve as a barometer to measure the effects of development on other parts of the landscape.  Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. Describe how the project activities might affect the reference landscape values of the Roadless area. Consider how the landscapes within the Inventoried Roadless area fits within the broader landscape and if the project creates any overall change. Consider landscape character descriptions in SMS. No Stable No documentation regarding reference landscapes within the project area were found. The current landscape is comprised of dense forests susceptible to insect and wildfire mortality (Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine). In addition, a large-scale mountain pine beetle epidemic has killed most of the mature lodgepole pine and ponderosa pine. The proposed action would result in a landscape setting that resembles a wildfire event which naturally follows a pine beetle event. Forest regeneration and “greenup” would occur shortly thereafter and improve upon the visual appearance of this landscape cycle by resembling an increasingly healthy forest. Natural appearing landscapes with high scenic quality. High quality scenery, especially scenery with natural-appearing landscapes, is a primary reason that people choose to recreate. In addition, quality scenery contributes directly to real estate values in nearby communities and residential areas.  Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Describe project effects to the scenic integrity of the area and changes to the character of the area. Consider existing scenic integrity. Yes Stable The current scenic quality of the unroaded areas resembles that of landscapes with high scenic integrity. Although visually unappealing to many, the scenes created by large scale beetle kill and wild fires (within their natural regime) do not change a landscapes scenic integrity or visual quality per the visual or scenery management systems. However, events that occur outside of a natural regime due to management decision (i.e., fire suppression) can. The proposed prescribed fire would help ensure the forest maintains a visual appearance characteristic of a wildfire within its natural regime as opposed to an unnaturally intense wildfire.  The scenic integrity within the IRAs may decrease from the viewpoint of a user traveling through the proposed prescribe fire treatment units. The fire handlines would create a linear disturbance within the roadless area and stumps from the hand Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape.  Scenic Quality- essential attributes of the landscape. (Glossary 5, Landscape Aesthetics Handbook)  Landscape Character – Particular attributes, qualities, and traits of a landscape that give it an image and make it identifiable or unique. (Glossary 3, Landscape Aesthetics Handbook)  slashing of small diameter trees may remain visible for several seasons following the prescribed fire, which would be an unexpected characteristic for the IRA landscape. The creation of openings in the forest from low and mixed severity prescribed fire ranging from 5 to 75 acres in size would create a more natural and visually appealing mosaic in the landscape, enhancing the overall existing landscape character. Less than 4,846 acres out of the combined 71,256 acres of both IRAs (managed by the Lincoln Ranger District) would be affected and only the users who travel through these areas would notice these changes. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites Traditional cultural properties are places, sites, structures, art, or objects that have played an important role in the cultural history of a group. Sacred sites are places that have special religious significance to a group. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites may be eligible for protection under the National Historic Preservation Act. However, many of them have not yet been inventoried, especially those that occur in inventoried roadless areas.  Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area and describe the effect of the project on these resources. Typically mitigation will be designed to prevent significant effects to these resources. Yes Degrading Hand slash pile burning within sites could affect historic structures and could alter prehistoric site artifacts. Hand lines within sites could alter historic and prehistoric sites. Other locally unique characteristics Inventoried roadless areas may offer other locally identified unique characteristics and values. Examples include uncommon geological formations, which are valued for their scientific and scenic qualities, or unique wetland complexes. Unique social, cultural, or historical characteristics may also depend on the roadless character of the landscape. Examples include ceremonial sites, places for local events, areas prized for collection of non-timber forest products, or exceptional hunting and fishing opportunities. No N/A The proposed action would not impact the special features or values of the Bear-Marshall-Scapegoat-Swan IRA because they do not fall within the Stonewall project area. In the long-term, the proposed action would potentially enhance the productive and primitive Elk hunting opportunities within the Lincoln Gulch IRA. Roadless Characteristics As described in 36 CFR 294 – Roadless Area Conservation Final Rule, 2001 Is there an effect?  Yes or No Is the effect improving, stable or degrading? Describe the actual effect. Use descriptive terms that discuss the effect, not the activity. Explain if the proposal would alter or modify the landscape.  Identify any locally unique characteristics and describe how the project would affect these values.   