FINALDRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT Draft Environmental Impact Statement to Analyze Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed 4(d) Determination under Limit 6 for Five Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound Prepared by the  National Marine Fisheries Service, West Coast Region March 2016November 2015 Page Intentionally Left Blank Page Intentionally Left Blank Cover Sheet March 2016November 2015 Title of Environmental Review: Responsible Agency and Official: Contact: Location of Proposed Activities: Proposed Action: Abstract: FinalDraft Environmental Impact Statement to Analyze Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed 4(d) Determination under Limit 6 for Five Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound William Stelle, Jr., Regional Administrator National Marine Fisheries Service, West Coast Region 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Building 1 Seattle, WA 98115 Steve Leider NMFS Sustainable Fisheries Division, West Coast Region 510 Desmond Drive SE, Suite 103 Lacey, WA 98503 Steve.Leider@noaa.gov (Note: not for commenting) (360) 753-4650 The Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins in Puget Sound, Washington State NMFS would review and evaluate five hatchery programs submitted by the fishery co-managers for the augmentation of steelhead fisheries. The operator is the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. NMFS would evaluate and make Endangered Species Act (ESA) take determinations under the ESA Limit 6 of 4(d) rules for listed Puget Sound Chinook salmon and steelhead.   The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Puget Sound treaty tribes jointly submitted five hatchery and genetic management plans for steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound, as resource management plans. These plans describe each hatchery program in detail, including fish life stages produced and potential measures to minimize risks of negative impacts that may affect listed fish. NMFS’s determination of whether the plans achieve the conservation standards of the ESA, as set forth in Limit 6 of 4(d) rules for listed salmon and steelhead, is the Federal action requiring National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) compliance. The analysis within the environmental impact statement (EIS) informs NMFS, hatchery operators, and the public about the current and anticipated direct, indirect, and cumulative environmental effects of operating the five Puget Sound steelhead hatchery programs under the full range of alternatives. Page Intentionally Left Blank Final Environmental Impact Statement to Analyze Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed 4(d) Determination under Limit 6 for Five Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound Introduction The National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) has prepared this environmental impact statement (EIS) in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) after the co-managers submitted to NMFS five hatchery and genetic management plans (HGMPs) for early winter steelhead in Puget Sound for review and approval under the ESA. The HGMPs involve early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Snohomish, and Snoqualmie River basins. NMFS began this EIS process in 2015 when it requested scoping input from the public to develop alternatives to evaluate in an environmental assessment (EA) for three of the early winter steelhead hatchery programs. After considering public comments on the draft EA, NMFS decided to prepare an EIS that would evaluate all five of the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound, including the three that were reviewed in the draft EA. Therefore, in November 2015, NMFS published a draft EIS for public review and comment. In that draft, NMFS evaluated the resource effects of four alternatives (one no-action alternative and three action alternatives).  NMFS received about 2,000 comments from the public during the comment period. NMFS has incorporated public comments and suggestions, as well as more recent information on the affected resources, into this final EIS. NMFS has identified and evaluated Alternative 5, the preferred alternative, in this final EIS. In addition to identifying the preferred alternative, several other updates and clarifications have been made to the EIS (for a summary of major changes to the draft EIS that are reflected in this final EIS, see the last subsection of this Summary). Some of the major changes include:  Clarifications regarding HGMP submissions, and the relationships between NEPA and ESA processes  Updated information describing existing conditions such as water quantity, genetic risks, summer-run steelhead hatchery programs, effects on recreational and tribal fishing, and more  Additional information on alternatives Background Steelhead have been produced in Puget Sound hatcheries since the early 1900s. The benefit of hatcheries at the outset was to produce hatchery-origin fish for harvest purposes. Hatcheries have contributed 70 to 80 percent of the catch in coastal salmon and steelhead fisheries. As the fish’s natural habitat was degraded by human development and activities like passage barriers, forest practices, and urbanization, the role of hatcheries shifted toward mitigation for lost natural production and reduced harvest opportunity. Hatchery production presents potential risks to natural-origin steelhead. These include genetic risks from hatchery-origin fish to natural-origin fish as a result of poor broodstock and rearing practices, risks of competition with and predation on naturally spawned populations, and incidental harvest of natural-origin fish in fisheries targeting hatchery-origin fish. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) and the Puget Sound treaty tribes (hereafter referred to as the co-managers) have jointly submitted to the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) hatchery and genetic management plans (HGMPs) for five hatchery programs that would produce early returning (“early”) winter steelhead in Puget Sound. The HGMPs describe the hatchery programs, including fish life stages produced and potential research, monitoring, and evaluation actions to minimize the risk of negatively affecting listed salmon and steelhead (Table S-1). The HGMPs have been submitted for review and approval as resource management plans (RMPs) under Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).  The plans are consistent with the framework of United States v. Washington (1974) for coordination of treaty fishing rights, non-tribal harvest, artificial production objectives, and artificial production levels. Table S-1. ESA status of listed Puget Sound salmon and steelhead. Species  ESU/DPS  Current Endangered Species Act Listing Status  Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha)  Puget Sound  Threatened (76 Fed. Reg. 50448, August 15, 2011)  Chum salmon (O. keta)  Hood Canal summer-run (includes Strait of Juan de Fuca summer-run)  Threatened (76 Fed. Reg. 50448, August 15, 2011)  Steelhead (O. mykiss)  Puget Sound  Threatened (76 Fed. Reg. 50448, August 15, 2011)   Coho salmon (O. kisutch)  Puget Sound/Strait of Georgia  Species of Concern (69 Fed. Reg. 19975, April 15, 2004)  Source: NMFS NMFS’s determination of whether the HGMPs submitted as RMPs achieve the conservation standards of the ESA, as set forth in Limit 6 under the salmon and steelhead 4(d) Rules, is the Federal action requiring National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) compliance. Although this environmental impact statement (EIS) itself will not determine whether the HGMPs submitted as RMPs meet ESA requirements—those determinations are made under the specific criteria of the ESA and the section 4(d) Rule—the analyses within the EIS will inform NMFS, hatchery operators, and the public about the current and anticipated cumulative environmental effects of operating the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs under the full range of alternatives. What are 4(d) rules? Section 4(d) of the ESA directs NMFS to issue regulations to conserve species listed as threatened. This applies particularly to "take," which can include any act that kills or injures fish, and may include habitat modification. The ESA prohibits any take of species listed as endangered, but some take of threatened species that does not interfere with survival and recovery may be allowed. The salmon and steelhead 4(d) rules apply take prohibitions to all actions except those within the 13 limits to the rules. The limits, or exemptions, describe specified categories of activities that contribute to conserving listed salmon. A separate, but closely related, tribal 4(d) Rule creates an additional limit for tribal RMPs. Limit 5 of the 4(d) Rule, using specific criteria, provides limits on the prohibitions of “take” for a variety of hatchery purposes, based on NMFS’ evaluation and approval of HGMPs submitted by hatchery operators. Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule provides limits on the prohibitions of “take” for joint tribal and state plans developed under United States v. Washington processes, including artificial production actions. Proposed Action Under the Proposed Action, NMFS would make a determination that the HGMPs submitted as RMPs, meet the requirements of Limit 6 under the 4(d) Rule of the ESA. The HGMPs for Puget Sound hatcheries would be implemented by the co-managers. Project Area The project area covered in this EIS includes the places where the proposed steelhead hatchery programs would (1) collect broodstock; (2) spawn, incubate, and rear fish; (3) release fish; or (4) remove surplus hatchery-origin adult steelhead that return to hatchery facilities; and (5) conduct monitoring and evaluation activities. The project area includes the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Snohomish/Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins. Portions of 5 counties in Washington State are included. These five hatchery programs operate using eight hatchery facilities, and would produce 620,000 juvenile steelhead per year. Purpose and Need NMFS’s purpose for the Proposed Action is to ensure the sustainability and recovery of Puget Sound salmon and steelhead by conserving the productivity, abundance, diversity, and distribution of listed species of salmon and steelhead in Puget Sound. NMFS’s need for the Proposed Action is to:  Respond to the co-managers’ request for an exemption from take prohibitions of section 9 of the ESA for their hatchery programs triggered by submission of HGMPs as RMPs under Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule.  Provide, as appropriate, tribal and non-tribal fishing opportunities as described under the state and tribal co-managers’ Puget Sound Salmon Management Plan implemented under United States v. Washington. The co-managers’ purpose in developing and submitting HGMPs and submitting them as RMPs under Limit 6 is to operate their hatcheries to meet resource management and protection goals with the assurance that any harm, death, or injury to fish within a listed evolutionarily significant unit (ESU) or distinct population segment (DPS) does not appreciably reduce the likelihood of a species’ survival and recovery and is not in the category of prohibited take under the ESA’s 4(d) Rule. What is an ESU? What is a DPS? NMFS lists salmon as threatened or endangered according to the status of their evolutionarily significant units (ESUs). An ESU is a salmon population that is 1) substantially reproductively isolated from conspecific populations and 2) represents an important component of the evolutionary legacy of the species. In contrast to salmon, NMFS lists steelhead under the joint NMFS-U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) policy for recognizing distinct population segments (DPSs) under the ESA. This policy adopts criteria similar to, but somewhat different than, those in the ESU policy for determining when a group of vertebrates constitutes a DPS. A group of organisms is discrete if it is “markedly separated from other populations of the same taxon as a consequence of physical, physiological, ecological, and behavioral factors.” NMFS lists steelhead according to the status of the steelhead DPS. The co-managers’ need for the Proposed Action is to continue to maintain and operate steelhead hatchery programs using existing facilities for conservation, mitigation, and tribal and non-tribal fishing opportunity pursuant to the Puget Sound Salmon Management Plan implemented under United States v. Washington, and treaty rights preservation purposes while meeting ESA requirements. WDFW and the Puget Sound treaty tribes strive to protect, restore, and enhance the productivity, abundance, and diversity of Puget Sound salmon and steelhead and their ecosystems to sustain treaty ceremonial and subsistence fisheries, treaty and non-treaty commercial and recreational fisheries, non-consumptive fish benefits, and other cultural and ecological values. Relationship between the ESA and NEPA The relationship between the ESA and NEPA is complex, in part because both laws address environmental values related to the impacts of a Proposed Action. However, each law has a distinct purpose, and the scope of review and standards of review under each statute are different.  The purpose of an EIS under NEPA is to promote disclosure, analysis, and consideration of the broad range of environmental issues surrounding a proposed major Federal action by considering a full range of reasonable alternatives, including a No-action Alternative. Public involvement promotes this purpose. The purpose of the ESA is to conserve listed species and the ecosystems upon which they depend. Determinations about whether hatchery programs in Puget Sound meet ESA requirements are made under section 4(d) or section 7 of the ESA. Each of these ESA sections has its own substantive requirements, and the documents that reflect the analyses and decisions are different than those related to a NEPA analysis.  It is not the purpose of this EIS to suggest to the reader any conclusions relative to the ESA analysis for this action. While the NEPA Record of Decision (ROD) identifies the selected NEPA alternative, the ROD does not conclude whether that alternative complies with the ESA. Alternatives Analyzed in Detail Alternative 1 (No Action) Under this alternative, NMFS would not make a determination under the 4(d) Rules for any of the five HGMPs, and WDFW would discontinue its early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins (Table S-2). This No-action Alternative represents NMFS’s best estimate of what would happen in the absence of the Proposed Action – a determination that the co-managers’ submitted HGMPs meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule.   Table S-2. Annual hatchery releases of juvenile steelhead under the alternatives by river basin. River Basin  Alternative 1 (No Action)  Alternative 2 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Dungeness  0  10,000  5,000  10,000  10,000  Nooksack  0  150,000  75,000  150,000  150,000  Stillaguamish  0  130,000  65,000  130,000  130,000  Skykomish  0  256,000  128,000  256,000  167,600  Snoqualmie  0  74,000  37,000  74,000  74,000  Total  0  620,000  310,000  620,000  531,600  Source: HGMPs. Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) This alternative consists of hatchery operations as proposed under the co-managers’ HGMPs. NMFS would make a determination that the HGMPs submitted by the co-managers meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule.  The early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be implemented as described in the five submitted HGMPs (Table S-2), and up to 620,000 steelhead yearlings would be released. The hatchery programs would utilize existing hatchery capacity for operations, and would be adaptively managed over time to incorporate best management practices as new information is available. Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) Under this alternative, WDFW would reduce the number of fish released from each of the five proposed hatchery programs by 50 percent (to 310,000 steelhead yearlings) because it represents a mid-point between the Proposed Action (Alternative 2) and the No-action Alternative (Alternative 1) (Table S-2).  Revised HGMPs would be submitted reflecting these reduced production levels, and NMFS would make a determination that the revised HGMPs submitted as RMPs meet the requirements of the 4(d) Rule. NMFS’s 4(d) regulations do not provide NMFS with the authority to order changes of this magnitude as a condition of approval of the HGMPs submitted as RMPs.  NMFS’s 4(d) regulations require NMFS to make a determination that the HGMPs submitted as RMPs as proposed either meet or do not meet the standards prescribed in the rule.  Nonetheless, NMFS supports analysis of this alternative to assist with a full understanding of potential effects on the human environment under various management scenarios. Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) Under this alternative, WDFW would change its program management to transition the programs from the current non-native Chambers Creek stock to broodstock derived from fish native to the respective watershed in the project area (Table S-2).  While this could be done in multiple ways, involving different periods of time and various objectives (e.g., conservation, and later, harvest), for the purpose of this analysis NMFS assumes that use of Chambers Creek stock in the broodstock would be terminated immediately. Fish taken for broodstock would then only be those determined to be native to the given watershed.  It is likely that considerable time would be needed for development and implementation of a native broodstock program after termination of an early winter steelhead program. Broodstock collection would be contingent upon availability of natural-origin fish, ensuring first that an appropriate number of fish would be able to spawn naturally; after that critical threshold is ensured, then a proportion of additional returns would be taken into the hatchery facilities.  NMFS’s 4(d) regulations do not provide NMFS with the authority to order changes of this magnitude as a condition of approval of the HGMPs submitted as RMPs.  NMFS’s 4(d) regulations require NMFS to make a determination that the HGMPs submitted as RMPs as proposed either meet or do not meet the standards prescribed in the rule.  Nonetheless, NMFS supports analysis of this alternative to assist with a full understanding of potential effects on the human environment under various management scenarios. Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) Following release of the draft EIS for public comment and discussions with NMFS, the co-managers submitted a revised HGMP for the Skykomish River basin that included reduced smolt release levels. Under this alternative, NMFS would make a determination that the HGMPs submitted by the co-managers, including the newly revised HGMP for the Skykomish early winter steelhead program, meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule.  The early winter steelhead hatchery programs proposed in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be implemented as described in the submitted HGMPs. The total annual maximum release level of early winter steelhead into the Skykomish River basin would be up to 167,600 yearlings. The difference in early winter steelhead release levels in the Skykomish River basin described under Alternative 2, which would be up to 256,000 yearlings, and under this alternative, was proposed to address additional data and analyses of gene flow and fitness from hatchery-origin steelhead to natural-origin winter steelhead. Under Alternative 3, up to 128,000 steelhead yearlings would be released, compared to 167,000 under Alternative 5. A summary of distinguishing features of the alternatives is shown in Table S-3. Summary of Resource Effects Table S-4 provides a summary of the predicted resource effects under each of the four alternatives. The summary reflects the detailed resource discussions in Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences. The relative magnitude and direction of impacts is described in Table S-4 using the following terms: Undetectable:  The impact would not be detectable.  Negligible:  The impact would be at the lower levels of detection, and could be either  positive or negative.  Low:   The impact would be slight, but detectable, and could be either positive or  negative.  Moderate:   The impact would be readily apparent, and could be either positive or negative.  High:  The impact would be greatly positive or severely negative.  Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table S-3. Summary of distinguishing features of the alternatives. Alternative  NMFS Review, Evaluation, and Approval of Plans under 4(d) Rules  Number of Hatchery-origin Fish Released  Changes in Hatchery Programs  Conservation Benefit1 to Salmon and Steelhead  Alternative 1 (No Action)  No evaluation and determination under the 4(d) rules  0  Early winter steelhead programs would be terminated.  Teminating releases would eliminate any risk to listed salmon and steelhead from early winter steelhead hatchery programs.  Alternative 2 (Proposed Action)  Evaluation and determination under the 4(d) rules  620,000  Existing production levels would continue, and conservation measures would be applied to early winter steelhead hatchery programs to reduce risks and to meet conservation requirements.  Conservation requirements for listed salmon and steelhead would be met.  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production)  Same as Alternative 2  310,000  Releases of early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be reduced 50 percent.  Conservation requirements for listed salmon and steelhead would be met, and risks from early winter steelhead production would be reduced.  Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock)  Same as Alternative 2  620,000  Use of early winter steelhead broodstock would be terminated immediately; the hatchery programs would transition to broodstock derived from fish native to the watershed.  Conservation requirements for listed salmon and steelhead would be met.  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Same as Alternative 2  531,600  Existing production levels would continue, but the number of early winter steelhead smolts released into the Skykomish River basin would be 167,600, which is between Alternative 2 (256,000) and Alternative 3 (128,000). Conservation measures would be applied to early winter steelhead hatchery programs to reduce risks and to meet conservation requirements.  Conservation requirements for listed salmon and steelhead would be met, and risks from early winter steelhead production would be reduced.  1 ESA determinations will not be made in this EIS. They will be made in separate processes consistent with the applicable regulations as required by the ESA. March 2016 S-9 Summary Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table S-4. Summary of environmental consequences for EIS alternatives for each resource. Resource  Alternative 1 (No Action – termination)  Alternative 21 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 31 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 41 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Water Quantity   Compared to existing conditions, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be terminated, but all of the hatchery facilities that support the programs would continue to operate to produce fish for programs that are not part of the Proposed Action.   The hatchery programs would continue to operate at existing levels, and would have negligible to moderate negative effects on water quantity, depending on the hatchery program, compared to Alternative 1.  Effects on water quantity would be the same as Alternative 2, because all of the hatchery facilities that support the programs would continue to operate to produce fish for programs that are not part of the Proposed Action.   Same as Alternative 3.  Same as Alternative 3.  Salmon and  Because early winter  The hatchery programs  Same as Alternative 2,  Same as Alternative 2  Similar to Alternative 2,  Steelhead  steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, negative and positive effects to salmon or steelhead from the programs would be eliminated, compared to existing conditions.   would continue to operate at existing levels, and would generally have negligible to low negative effects on gene flow, competition and predation, hatchery facilities, masking, incidental fishing, and disease transfer effects; and negligible positive effects from nutrient cycling, depending on the hatchery program and affected species. As under existing conditions, there would be no benefit to the viability of the listed steelhead DPS.  except that effects from gene flow, competition and predation, hatchery facilities, masking, incidental fishing, and disease transfer from early winter steelhead would be reduced.  There would be no change in viability benefit to the listed steelhead DPS compared to existing conditions.  except that collection of local native broodstock could have a low negative effect on the abundance and spatial structure of the natural-origin populations (i.e., mining), and a potential positive benefit to viability of the listed steelhead DPS.  except that negative and positive effects would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  Summary S-10 March 2016 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table S-4. Summary of environmental consequences for EIS alternatives for each resource. (continued) Resource  Alternative 1 (No Action – termination)  Alternative 21 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 31 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 41 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Other Fish  Because early winter  The hatchery programs  Same as Alternative 2,  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2,  Species  steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, other fish species would be affected if they compete with, are prey of (positive effect), or prey on (negative effect) early winter hatchery-origin steelhead, compared to existing conditions.   would continue to operate at existing levels, and would have low negative to negligible positive effects on other fish species if they compete with or are prey of (negative effect), or prey on fish from early winter steelhead hatchery programs (positive effect), compared to Alternative 1.  except that the food supply for fish species that benefit from steelhead as prey would be reduced, and risk to other fish species that compete with, are prey of, or prey on steelhead would be reduced, compared to Alternative 2.  except that negative and positive effects would be less than Alternative 2 but greater than Alternative 3.  Wildlife –  Because early winter  The hatchery programs  Similar to Alternative 2,  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2,  Southern  steelhead hatchery  would continue to operate at  except that early winter  except that positive  Resident killer  production would be  existing levels, and would  steelhead hatchery  effects would be less than  whale  terminated, early winter steelhead prey that would have been available to Southern Resident killer whales under existing conditions would be eliminated. This reduction from existing conditions would likely result in a negligible negative effect. Southern Resident killer whales would continue to occupy their existing habitats with a similar abundance, and would continue to prey on available salmon and other steelhead, especially Chinook salmon, as under existing conditions.  have a negligible positive effect on Southern Resident killer whales, which would continue to occupy their existing habitats with a similar abundance, and would continue to prey on salmon and steelhead, especially Chinook salmon, compared to Alternative 1.   production and adult returns would decrease, reducing the supply of steelhead available to Southern Resident killer whales as prey. Alternative 3 would have a less negligible positive effect than Alternative 2.  Alternative 2 but greater than Alternative 3.  March 2016 S-11 Summary Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table S-4. Summary of environmental consequences for EIS alternatives for each resource. (continued) Resource  Alternative 1 (No Action – termination)  Alternative 21 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 31 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 41 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Socioeconomics  Because early winter steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, non-tribal and tribal fishing opportunities would be reduced and there would be a loss of person income and jobs, compared to existing conditions.  The hatchery programs would continue to operate at existing levels, and would have low to moderate positive socioeconomic effects from hatchery operations and fishing activities (non-tribal and tribal), compared to Alternative 1.  Same as Alternative 2, except that the socioeconomic effects from hatchery operations and fishing (non-tribal and tribal) would decrease.  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2, except that positive effects would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  Environmental  Because early winter  The hatchery programs  Same as Alternative 2,  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2,  Justice   steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, reduced fishing opportunities would negatively impact all communities of concern, and affected Native American tribes, compared to existing conditions.  would continue to operate at existing levels, and would provide low positive effects from fishing opportunities for all communities of concern, and moderate positive effects for Native American tribes, compared to Alternative 1.  except that fishing opportunities for all communities of concern, and for Native American tribes, would decrease.  except that positive effects would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  1 Potential differences between the no action and the action alternatives would be due to differences in hatchery production levels and program type under the action alternatives. Summary S-12 March 2016 Summary of Major Changes Made in Response to Public Comments on the Draft EIS Below is a summary of major changes made to the draft EIS.  Changes were also made for editorial reasons or purposes of clarification, and these are not listed. The location of text modifications is denoted by chapter. Summary: 1. Added information on the NEPA process. 2. Added Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) and information summarizing its effects. 3. Added information summarizing major changes that resulted from public comments on the draft EIS. Chapter 1: 1. Added information clarifying the five early winter steelhead HGMPs that were submitted to NMFS for review under the ESA and for NEPA analysis. 2. Clarified monitoring activities under the proposed HGMPs. 3. Added information on public review and comments received on the draft EIS. 4. Added information on Secretarial Order 3206, regarding limits on tribal activity. Chapter 2: 1. Added information clarifying changes in HGMPs submitted to NMFS for review under the ESA. 2. Added Table X showing numbers of steelhead smolts that would be released under each alternative. 3. Provided more information on Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock). 4. Added Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative). 5. Provided additional rationale for not analyzing an increased production alternative. 6. Added the rationale for selection of the preferred alternative in the final EIS, and identified a potential environmentally preferable alternative (to be identified in the Record of Decision). Chapter 3: 1. Added information clarifying existing conditions in the context of the Consent Decree in Wild Fish Conservancy’s lawsuit against WDFW regarding operation of the hatcheries producing early winter steelhead. 2. Included information from the most recent 5-year status review for Puget Sound steelhead. 3. Added Table Y showing total numbers of salmon and steelhead analyzed in the Puget Sound Hatcheries Draft Environmental Impact Statement (2014a) and in this EIS. 4. Updated information on analysis of genetic risks. 5. Added information on hatchery-origin summer-run steelhead. 6. Added information on predation effects, including indirect predation. 7. Added information on early returning natural-origin steelhead. 8. Added information on effects of incidental fishing on early returning natural-origin steelhead and tribal fisheries. 9. Clarified harvest impacts to Puget Sound steelhead, and added text to clarify the other ESA and NEPA analyses that address those impacts. Chapter 4: 1. Added information on effects to all resources under Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative). 2. Updated information on the amount of water use at hatchery facilities under all alternatives. 3. Updated analyses of effects of water used under the alternatives. 4. Clarified monitoring activities under the action alternatives. 5. Updated information on analysis of genetic risks under the alternatives. 6. Added information on effects to early returning natural-origin steelhead under the alternatives. 7. Clarified that jobs at hatchery facilities that would produce early winter steelhead would not be affected under the alternatives. 8. Updated the summary of environmental consequences by resource and alternative in Table 16. Chapter 5: 1. Added information on density-dependent effects in the marine environment. Appendices: 1. Updated information in Appendix A to include a resubmitted HGMP. 2. Updated information in Appendix B to include new information and analysis. 3. Added a new Appendix D that summarizes information on public review of the draft EIS, general comment themes, and comment responses. Acronyms and Abbreviations 2  CEQ  Council on Environmental Quality  3  CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  4  cfs  Cubic feet per second  5  DAO  Departmental Administrative Order  6  DGF  Demographic gene flow  7  DPS  Distinct population segment  8  EA  Environmental assessment  9  Ecology  Washington Department of Ecology  10  EIS  Environmental impact statement  11  EPA  Environmental Protection Agency  12  ESA  Endangered Species Act  13  ESU  Evolutionarily significant unit  14  FONSI  Finding of No Significant Impact  15  FTE  Full-time equivalent  16  HGMP  Hatchery and genetic management plan  17  HSRG  Hatchery Scientific Review Group  18  MMPA  Marine Mammal Protection Act  19  NEPA  National Environmental Policy Act  20  NMFS  National Marine Fisheries Service (also called NOAA Fisheries Service)  21  NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  22  PEHC  Proportionate effective hatchery contribution  23  PEPD  Pending Evaluation and Proposed Determination  24  pHOS  Proportion of hatchery-origin spawners  25  PNI  Proportionate natural influence  1  RM  River mile  2  RMP  Resource management plan  3  ROD  Record of Decision  4  Services  USFWS and NMFS  5  TRT  Technical Recovery Team  6  USC  U.S. Code  7  USFWS  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  8  USGS  U.S. Geological Survey  9  WAC  Washington Administrative Code  10  WDFW  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife  1  Glossary of Key Terms  2  Abundance: Generally, the number of fish in a defined area or unit. It is also one of four parameters  3  used to describe the viability of natural-origin fish populations (McElhany et al. 2000).  4  Adaptive management: A deliberate process of using research, monitoring, and scientific evaluation in  making decisions in the face of uncertainty.   6  Acclimation pond: A concrete or earthen pond or a temporary structure used for rearing and imprinting  7  juvenile fish in the water of a particular stream before their release into that stream.  8  Adipose fin: A small fleshy fin with no rays, located between the dorsal and caudal fins of salmon and  9  steelhead. The adipose fin is often “clipped” on hatchery-origin fish so they can be differentiated from  natural-origin fish.  11  Anadromous: A term used to describe fish that hatch and rear in fresh water, migrate to the ocean to  12  grow and mature, and return to freshwater to spawn.  13  Analysis area: Within this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), the analysis area is the geographic  14  extent that is being evaluated for each resource. For some resources (e.g., socioeconomics and  environmental justice), the analysis area is larger than the project area. See also Project area.  16  Best management practice (BMP): A policy, practice, procedure, or structure implemented to mitigate  17  adverse environmental effects.  18  Broodstock: A group of sexually mature individuals of a species that is used for breeding purposes as  19  the source for a subsequent generation.  Co-managers: Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and Puget Sound treaty tribes, which are  21  jointly responsible for managing fisheries and hatchery programs in the state of Washington.  22  Commercial harvest: The activity of catching fish for commercial profit.  23  Conservation: Used generally in the EIS as the act or instance of conserving or keeping fish resources  24  from change, loss, or injury, and leading to their protection and preservation. This contrasts with the  definition under the United States Endangered Species Act (ESA), which refers to use and the use of all  26  methods and procedures which are necessary to bring any endangered species or threatened species to the  27  point at which the measures provided pursuant to the ESA are no longer necessary.  1  Critical habitat: A specific term and designation within the ESA, referring to habitat area essential to  2  the conservation of a listed species, though the area need not actually be occupied by the species at the  3  time it is designated.  4  Density dependence: A term used in population ecology to describe how population growth rates are  regulated by the density of a population. Usually, the denser a population is, the greater its mortality.  6  Most density-dependent factors are biological in nature, such as predation and competition.  7  Dewatering: Typically, the immediate downstream habitat effects associated with a water withdrawal  8  action that diverts the entire flow of a stream or river to another location.  9  Distinct Population Segment (DPS): Under the ESA, the term “species” includes any subspecies of fish  or wildlife or plants, and any “Distinct Population Segment” of any species or vertebrate fish or wildlife  11  that interbreeds when mature. The ESA thus considers a DPS of vertebrates to be a “species.” The ESA  12  does not however establish how distinctness should be determined. Under NMFS policy for Pacific  13  salmon, a population or group of populations will be considered a DPS if it represents an Evolutionarily  14  Significant Unit (ESU) of the biological species. In contrast to salmon, NMFS lists steelhead runs under  the joint NMFS-U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) Policy for recognizing DPSs (DPS Policy:  16  61 Fed. Reg. 4722, February 7, 1996). This policy adopts criteria similar to those in the ESU policy, but  17  applies to a broader range of animals to include all vertebrates.  18  Diversion screen: A screen used at a hatchery facility, dam, or weir to direct fish, usually to keep fish  19  from entering a water intake. See also Water intake screen.  Diversity: Variation at the level of individual genes (polymorphism); provides a mechanism for  21  populations to adapt to their ever-changing environment. It is also one of the four parameters used to  22  describe the viability of natural-origin fish populations (McElhany et al. 2000).  23  Domestication: See Hatchery-influenced selection.  24  Endangered species: As defined in the ESA, any species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or  a significant portion of its range.  26  Endangered Species Act (ESA): A United States law that provides for the conservation of endangered  27  and threatened species of fish, wildlife, and plants.  28  Environmental justice: The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race,  29  color, national origin, or income with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of  environmental laws, regulations, and policies.  1  Escapement: Adult salmon and steelhead that survive fisheries and natural mortality, and return to  2  spawn.  3  Estuary: The area where fresh water of a river meets and mixes with the salt water of the ocean.  4  Evolutionarily Significant Unit (ESU): A concept NMFS uses to identify Distinct Population Segments  5  of Pacific salmon (but not steelhead) under the ESA. An ESU is a population or group of populations of  6  Pacific salmon that 1) is substantially reproductively isolated from other populations, and 2) contributes  7  substantially to the evolutionary legacy of the biological species. See also Distinct Population Segment  8  (pertaining to steelhead).  9  Federal Register: The United States government’s daily publication of Federal agency regulations and  10  documents, including executive orders and documents that must be published per acts of Congress.  11  Fingerling: A juvenile fish.  12  First Nation: A term referring to the aboriginal people located in what is now Canada.  13  Fishery: Harvest by a specific gear type in a specific geographical area during a specific period of time.  14  Fishway: Any structure or modification to a natural or artificial structure for the purpose of providing or  15  enhancing fish passage.  16  Fitness: As used in this EIS, the propensity of a group of fish (e.g., populations) to survive and  17  reproduce.  18  Forage fish: Small fish that breed prolifically and serve as food for predatory fish.  19  Fry: Juvenile salmon and steelhead that are usually less than one year old and have absorbed their  20  egg sac.  21  Gene flow: See Introgression  22  Habitat: The physical, biological, and chemical characteristics of a specific unit of the environment  23  occupied by a specific plant or animal; the place where an organism naturally lives.  24  Hatchery and genetic management plan (HGMP): Technical documents that describe the composition  25  and operation of individual hatchery programs. Under Limit 5 of the 4(d) rule, NMFS uses information in  26  HGMPs to evaluate impacts on salmon and steelhead listed under the ESA.  27  Hatchery facility: A facility (e.g., hatchery, rearing pond, net pen) that supports one or more hatchery  28  programs.  1  Hatchery-influenced selection: The process whereby genetic characteristics of hatchery populations  2  become different from their source populations as a result of selection in hatchery environments (also  3  referred to as domestication).  4  Hatchery operator: A Federal agency, state agency, or Native American tribe that operates a hatchery  5  program.  6  Hatchery-origin fish: A fish that originated from a hatchery facility.  7  Hatchery-origin spawner: A hatchery-origin fish that spawns naturally.  8  Hatchery program: A program that artificially propagates fish. Most hatchery programs for salmon and  9  steelhead spawn adults in captivity, raise the resulting progeny for a few months or longer, and then  10  release the fish into the natural environment where they will mature.  11  Hatchery scientific review group (HSRG): The independent scientific panel established and funded by  12  Congress to provide an evaluation of hatchery reform in Puget Sound from 2000 to 2005.  13  Hydropower: Electrical power generation through use of gravitational force of falling water at dams.  14  Incidental: Unintentional, but not unexpected.  15  Incidental fishing effects: Fish, marine birds, or mammals unintentionally captured during fisheries  16  using any of a variety of gear types.  17  Integrated hatchery program: A hatchery program that intends for the natural environment to drive the  18  adaptation and fitness of a composite population of fish that spawns both in a hatchery and in the natural  19  environment. Differences between hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish are minimized, and hatchery 20  origin fish are integrated with the local populations included in an ESU or DPS.  21  Isolated hatchery program: A hatchery program that intends for the hatchery-origin population to be  22  reproductively segregated from the natural-origin population. These programs produce fish that are  23  different from local populations. They do not contribute to conservation or recovery of populations  24  included in an ESU or DPS.  25  Limit 6: Under section 4(d) of the ESA (see Section 4(d) Rule), a limit on “take” prohibitions that  26  applies to joint state/tribal resource management plans developed under the United States v. Washington  27  (1974) or United States v. Oregon (1969) proceedings.  28  Limiting factor: A physical, chemical, or biological feature that impedes species and their independent  29  populations from reaching a viable status.  Glossary vi March 2016November 2015  1  National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA): A United States environmental law that established  2  national policy promoting the enhancement of the environment and established the President’s Council on  3  Environmental Quality (CEQ).  4  National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS): A United States agency within the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration and under the Department of Commerce charged with the stewardship of  6  living marine resources through science-based conservation and management, and the promotion of  7  healthy ecosystems.  8  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES): A provision of the Clean Water Act that  9  prohibits discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States unless a special permit is issued by the  Environmental Protection Agency, a state, or, where delegated, a tribal government on an  11  Indian reservation.  12  Native fish: Fish that are endemic to or limited to a specific region.  13  Natural-origin: A term used to describe fish that are offspring of parents that spawned in the natural  14  environment rather than the hatchery environment, unless specifically explained otherwise in the text.  “Naturally spawning” and similar terms refer to fish spawning in the natural environment.  16  Net pen: A fish rearing enclosure used in marine areas.  17  Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC): A support service organization to 20 treaty Indian  18  tribes in western Washington, created following the U.S. vs Washington ruling, that assists member tribes  19  in their role as natural resources co-managers.  Out-migration: The downstream migration of salmon and steelhead toward the ocean.  21  Pathogen: An infectious microorganism that can cause disease (e.g., virus, bacteria, fungus) in its host.  22  Population: A group of fish of the same species that spawns in a particular locality at a particular season  23  and does not interbreed substantially with fish from any other group.  24  Preferred alternative: The alternative selected or developed from an evaluation of alternatives. Under  NEPA, the preferred alternative is the alternative an agency believes would fulfill its statutory mission  26  and responsibilities, giving consideration to economic, environmental, technical, and other factors.  27  Productivity: The rate at which a population is able to produce reproductive offspring. It is one of the  28  four parameters used to describe the viability of natural-origin fish populations (McElhany et al. 2000).  29  Project area: Geographic area where the Proposed Action will take place. See also Proposed Action.  March 2016November 2015 vii Glossary  1  Proportion of hatchery-origin spawners (pHOS): The proportion of naturally spawning salmon or  2  steelhead that are hatchery-origin fish.  3  Proportionate natural influence (PNI): A measure of hatchery influence on natural populations that is  4  a function of both the proportion of hatchery-origin spawners spawning in the natural environment  (pHOS) and the percent of natural-origin broodstock incorporated into the hatchery program (pNOB).  6  PNI can also be thought of as the percentage of time all the genes of population collectively have spent in  7  the natural environment.  8  Proposed Action: NMFS’s review and approval under Limit 6 of the 4(d) rules for five early winter  9  steelhead hatchery and genetic management plans (and hatchery releases) submitted as resource  management plans by the co-managers.  11  Puget Sound treaty tribes: Indian tribes in the project area with treaty fishing rights pursuant to United  12  States v. Washington. The tribes are the Jamestown S’Klallam, Lower Elwha Klallam, Lummi, Makah,  13  Muckleshoot, Nisqually, Nooksack, Port Gamble S’Klallam, Skokomish, Suquamish, Puyallup, Sauk 14  Suiattle, Squaxin Island, Stillaguamish, Swinomish, Tulalip, and Upper Skagit Tribes.  Record of Decision (ROD): The formal NEPA decision document that is recorded for the public. It is  16  announced in a Notice of Availability in the Federal Register.  17  Recovery: Defined in the ESA as the process by which the decline of an endangered or threatened  18  species is stopped or reversed, or threats to its survival neutralized so that its long-term survival in the  19  wild can be ensured, and it can be removed from the list of threatened and endangered species.  Recovery plan: Under the ESA, a formal plan from NMFS (for listed salmon and steelhead) outlining  21  the goals and objectives, management actions, likely costs, and estimated timeline to recover the listed  22  species.  23  Recreational harvest: The activity of catching fish for non-commercial reasons (e.g., sport or  24  recreation).  Redd: The spawning site or “nest” in stream and river gravels in which salmon and steelhead lay their  26  eggs.  27  Residuals: Hatchery-origin fish that out-migrate slowly, if at all, after they are released. Residualism  28  occurs when such fish residualize rather than out-migrate as most of their counterparts do.  1  Resource management plan (RMP): A plan that includes a process, management objectives, specific  2  details, and other information required to manage a natural resource. For this EIS, the resources are early  3  winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound.  4  Run: The migration of salmon or steelhead from the ocean to fresh water to spawn. Defined by the  5  season they return as adults to the mouths of their home rivers.  6  Run size: The number of adult salmon or steelhead (i.e., harvest plus escapement) returning to their natal  7  areas. See also Total Return.  8  Salish Sea: The network of coastal waterways located between the southwestern tip of British Columbia  9  and the northwestern tip of the state of Washington.  10  Salmonid: A fish of the taxonomic family Salmonidae, which includes salmon, steelhead, and trout.  11  Scoping: In NEPA, an early and open process for determining the extent and variety of issues to be  12  addressed and for identifying the significant issues related to a proposed action (40 CFR 1501.7).  13  Section 4(d) Rule: A special regulation developed by NMFS under authority of section 4(d) of the ESA,  14  modifying the normal protective regulations for a particular threatened species when it is determined that  15  such a rule is necessary and advisable to provide for the conservation of that species.  16  Section 7 consultation: Federal agency consultation with NMFS or USFWS (dependent on agency  17  jurisdiction) on any actions that may affect listed species, as required under section 7 of the ESA.  18  Section 10 permit: A permit for direct take of listed species for scientific purposes or to enhance the  19  propagation or survival of listed species. Issued by NMFS or USFWS (dependent on agency jurisdiction)  20  as authorized under section 10(a)(1)(A) of the ESA.  21  Smolts: Juvenile salmon and steelhead that have left their natal streams, are out-migrating downstream,  22  and are physiologically adapting to live in salt water.  23  Smoltification: The process of physiological change that juvenile salmon and steelhead undergo in fresh  24  water while out-migrating to salt water that allow them to live in the ocean.  25  Spatial structure: The spatial structure of a population refers both to the spatial distributions of  26  individuals in the population and the processes that generate that distribution. It is one of the four  27  parameters used to describe the viability of natural-origin fish populations (McElhany et al. 2000).  28  Stock: A group of fish of the same species that spawns in a particular lake or stream (or portion thereof)  29  at a particular season and which, to a substantial degree, does not interbreed with fish from any other  30  group spawning in a different place or in the same place in a different season.  March 2016November 2015 ix Glossary  1  Straying (of hatchery-origin fish): A term used to describe when hatchery-origin fish return to and/or  2  spawn in areas where they are not intended to return/spawn.  3  Subsistence fisheries: Harvest by Puget Sound treat tribes to meet the nutritional needs of tribal  4  members.  Subyearling: Juvenile salmon less than 1 year of age.  6  Supplementation: Release of fish into the natural environment to increase the abundance of naturally  7  reproducing fish populations.  8  Take: Under the ESA, the term “take” means to “harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap,  9  capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct.” Take for hatchery activities includes, for  example, the collection of listed fish (adults and juveniles) for hatchery broodstock, the collection of  11  listed hatchery-origin fish to prevent them from spawning naturally, and the collection of listed fish  12  (juvenile and adult fish) for scientific purposes.  13  Threat: A human action or natural event that causes or contributes to limiting factors; threats may be  14  caused by past, present, or future actions or events.  Threatened species: As defined by section 4 of the ESA, any species that is likely to become  16  endangered within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range.  17  Tributary: A stream or river that flows into a larger stream or river.  18  Viability: As used in this EIS, a measure of the status of listed salmon and steelhead that uses four  19  criteria:  abundance, productivity, spatial distribution, and diversity.  Viable salmonid population (VSP): An independent population of salmon or steelhead that has a  21  negligible risk of extinction over a 100-year timeframe (McElhany et al. 2000).  22  Volitional: A term used to describe the method of passively releasing fish that allows fish to leave  23  hatchery facilities when the fish are ready.  24  Water intake screen: A screen used to prevent entrainment of salmonids into a water diversion or  intake. See also Diversion screen.  26  Watershed: An area of land where all of the water that is under it or drains off of it goes into the same  27  place.  28  Weir: An adjustable dam placed across a river to regulate the flow of water downstream; a fence placed  29  across a river to catch fish.  Yearling: Juvenile salmon or steelhead that has reared at least 1 year in the hatchery.  Table of Contents SUMMARY................................................................................................................................................. S-1 ACRONYMS ...................................................................................................................................................i GLOSSARY ...................................................................................................................................................iii 1 PURPOSE OF AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTION .........................................................................1 1.1 Background ....................................................................................................................................1 1.1.1 Administering the Endangered Species Act........................................................................1 1.1.2 Hatcheryand Genetic Management Plan Submittal ...........................................................2 1.1.3 Related National Environmental Policy Act Reviews ........................................................4 1.2 Description ofthe Proposed Action ...............................................................................................5 1.3 Purpose ofand Need for the Proposed Action .............................................................................12 1.4 Project and Analysis Areas ..........................................................................................................13 1.5 Decisions to be Made ...................................................................................................................14 1.5.1 Preferred Alternative to be Identified in the Final EIS .....................................................14 1.5.2 Record of Decision ...........................................................................................................14 1.5.3 NMFS’s Determination as to Compliance with the 4(d) Rule..........................................15 1.5.4 Biological Opinion on NMFS’s Determination asto Compliance with the 4(d) Rule.....15 1.6 Scoping and Relevant Issues........................................................................................................16 1.6.1 Scoping Process ................................................................................................................16 1.6.2 Internal Scoping................................................................................................................16 1.6.3 Notices of Public Scoping.................................................................................................17 1.6.4 Written Comments Received during the Public Scoping Process ....................................17 1.6.5 Issues Identified During Scoping......................................................................................18 1.6.6 Future Public Review and Comment ................................................................................18 1.7 Relationship to Other Plans and Policies .....................................................................................20 1.7.1 Clean Water Act................................................................................................................20 1.7.2 Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act ...................................................................20 1.7.3 Marine MammalProtection Act .......................................................................................20 1.7.4 Executive Order 12898 .....................................................................................................21 1.7.5 Treaties ofPoint Elliot, Medicine Creek, and Point No Point ..........................................21 1.7.6 United States v. Washington .............................................................................................22 1.7.7 Secretarial Order 3206......................................................................................................23 1.7.8 The Federal Trust Responsibility......................................................................................24 1.7.9 Tribal Policy for Salmon Hatcheries.................................................................................24 1.7.10 Washington State Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive Species Act...........................25 1.7.11 Hatchery and Fishery Reform Policy................................................................................25 1.7.12 RecoveryPlans for Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead ..................................................25 1.7.13 Federal Wilderness Act.....................................................................................................26 1.8 Organization of this Draft the Final EIS ......................................................................................26 2 ALTERNATIVES INCLUDING THE PROPOSED ACTION........................................................................29 2.1 Development of Alternatives .......................................................................................................29 2.2 Alternatives Analyzed in Detail ...................................................................................................30 2.2.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ............31 2.2.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ................................................................................31 2.2.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ...................................32 2.2.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) -Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule...................................................................................................................................32 2.2.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule..........................................................................................33 2.3 Alternatives Considered But Not Analyzed in Detail ..................................................................33 2.4 Selection of a Preferred Alternative and an Environmentally Preferred Preferable Alternative..36 3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT...................................................................................................................39 3.1 Water Quantity.............................................................................................................................41 3.2 Salmon and Steelhead ..................................................................................................................48 3.2.1 General Factors that Affect the Presence and Abundance of Salmon and Steelhead .......49 3.2.2 Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs .......................................................................51 3.2.3 Effects of Current Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs on Salmon and Steelhead ..........................................................................................................................................59 3.3 Other Fish Species........................................................................................................................75 3.4 Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale .................................................................................78 3.5 Socioeconomics............................................................................................................................80 3.5.1 Hatchery Operations .........................................................................................................81 3.5.2 Fisheries............................................................................................................................82 3.6 Environmental Justice ..................................................................................................................85 4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES.....................................................................................................89 4.1 Water Quantity.............................................................................................................................90 4.1.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ............90 4.1.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet the Requirements of the 4(d) Rule...........................................................................96 4.1.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ...................................99 4.1.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule.................................................................................................................................102 4.1.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Level in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule........................................................................................102 4.2 Salmon and Steelhead ................................................................................................................102 4.2.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ..........103 4.2.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ..............................................................................106 4.2.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule .................................109 4.2.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule.................................................................................................................................112 4.2.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule........................................................................................116 4.3 Other Fish Species......................................................................................................................119 4.3.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ..........120 4.3.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ..............................................................................120 4.3.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule .................................121 4.3.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule.................................................................................................................................122 4.3.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule........................................................................................122 4.4 Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale ...............................................................................123 4.4.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ..........123 4.4.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ..............................................................................123 4.4.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule .................................124 4.4.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule.................................................................................................................................124 4.4.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule........................................................................................125 4.5 Socioeconomics..........................................................................................................................126 4.5.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ..........126 4.5.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ..............................................................................127 4.5.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule .................................127 4.5.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule.................................................................................................................................129 4.5.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule........................................................................................129 4.6 Environmental Justice ................................................................................................................131 4.6.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule ..........131 4.6.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule ..............................................................................131 4.6.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule .................................132 4.6.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule.................................................................................................................................133 4.6.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs including a Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule........................................................................................133 4.7 Summary of Resource Effects....................................................................................................134 5 CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ......................................................................................................................139 5.1 Introduction................................................................................................................................139 5.1.1 Geographic and Temporal Scales ...................................................................................140 5.1.2 Chapter Organization......................................................................................................141 5.2 Past Actions................................................................................................................................141 5.3 Present Conditions......................................................................................................................142 5.4 Future Actions and Conditions...................................................................................................144 5.4.1 Climate Change...............................................................................................................145 5.4.2 Development...................................................................................................................146 5.4.3 Habitat Restoration .........................................................................................................148 5.4.4 Hatchery Production .......................................................................................................150 5.4.5 Fisheries..........................................................................................................................151 5.5 Cumulative Effects by Resource ................................................................................................151 5.5.1 Water Quantity and Quality............................................................................................152 5.5.2 Salmon and Steelhead.....................................................................................................153 5.5.3 Other Fish Species ..........................................................................................................157 5.5.4 Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale ....................................................................158 5.5.5 Socioeconomics ..............................................................................................................160 5.5.6 Environmental Justice.....................................................................................................161 5.6 Summary of Effects....................................................................................................................162 6 REFERENCES.......................................................................................................................................165 7 DISTRIBUTION LIST............................................................................................................................185 8 LIST OF PREPARERS ...........................................................................................................................189 9 INDEX ..................................................................................................................................................191 List of Tables Table S-1. ESA status of listed Puget Sound salmon and steelhead. ................................................. S-3 Table S-2. Annual hatchery releases of juvenile steelhead under the alternatives by river basin...... S-6 Table S-3. Summary of distinguishing features of the alternatives. .................................................. S-9 Table S-4. Summary of environmental consequences for EIS alternatives for each resource......... S-10 Table 1. HGMPs describing hatchery programs for five early winter steelhead hatchery programs (Dungeness River, Nooksack River, Stillaguamish River, Skykomish River, and Snoqualmie River)................................................................................................................4 Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead programs in Puget Sound......................................................................................................6 Table 3. NMFS documents and decisions required under the ESA and NEPA regarding early winter steelhead hatchery programs, public notices, and comment opportunities. .......................19 Table X. Maximum annual hatchery releases of juvenile steelhead under the alternatives by river basin....................................................................................................................................31 Table 4. Water use at the eight hatchery facilities that support five early winter steelhead programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins..43 Table 5.  A summary of natural-origin salmon and steelhead populations in the analysis area........49 Table Y. Annual juvenile salmon and steelhead hatchery production (in thousands) as described in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) and in Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and Facilities, of this EIS. ..................................................52 Table 6.  General mechanisms through which hatchery programs can affect natural-origin salmon and steelhead populations...................................................................................................53 Table 7. Summary of analyses of gene flow from five Puget Sound early winter steelhead hatchery programs into listed steelhead populations, based on recent past practices.. .....................63 Table 8. Ecological relationship between hatchery-origin steelhead and natural-origin salmon and steelhead in the analysis area..............................................................................................64 Table 9. Compliance of instream structures at hatchery facilities used for five Puget Sound early winter steelhead hatchery programs with NMFS's screening and fish passage criteria. ....67 Table 10.  Common fish pathogens found in hatchery facilities. ........................................................73 Table 11.  Broodstock needs and natural-origin abundance information for five early winter steelhead hatchery programs Puget Sound.........................................................................................74 Table 12. Range and status of other fish species that may be affected by five early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound.....................................................................................76 Table 13. Population size, percent minority, per capita income, and percent below poverty level in Clallam, Whatcom, Snohomish, and King Counties and Washington State. .....................87 Table 14.  Water diverted to support five early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins................................92 Table 15.  Number of natural-origin winter steelhead in the hatchery broodstock by alternative in five early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound...............................................106 Table 16. Summary of environmental consequences by resource and alternative. ..........................136 Table 17. CEQ cumulative effects analysis process and documentation within this EIS.................140 Table 18. Examples of potential impacts of climate change by salmon and steelhead life stage under all alternatives...................................................................................................................155 Table 19. Summary of effects of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions on the affected resources evaluated in this EIS...........................................................................163 Table 20. Summary of the cumulative effects of the Proposed Action. ...........................................164 List of Figures Figure 1. Schematic of temporal spawning overlap between early winter hatchery steelhead and natural-origin winter steelhead.  Shape, sizes and placement of curves is conceptual and is not meant to represent anyspecific situation (Scott and Gill 2008, Fig. 4-7). ...................60 List of Appendices A Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and Facilities B Genetic effects analysis of early winter steelhead programs proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington Socioeconomics Methods D Public Comment Analysis Summary 2  1  PURPOSE OF AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTION  3  1.1  Background  4  1.1.1  Administering the Endangered Species Act  5  NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) is the lead agency responsible for administering the  6  Endangered Species Act (ESA) as it relates to listed salmon and steelhead.  Actions that may affect listed  7  species are reviewed by NMFS under section 7 or section 10 of the ESA or under section 4(d), which can  8  be used to limit the application of take prohibitions described in section 9. On June 19, 2000, NMFS  9  issued a final rule pursuant to ESA section 4(d) (4(d) Rule), adopting regulations necessary and advisable  10  to conserve threatened species (50 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 223.203). The 4(d) Rule applies  11  the take prohibitions in section 9(a)(1) of the ESA to salmon and steelhead listed as threatened, and also  12  sets forth specific circumstances when the prohibitions will not apply, known as 4(d) limits.  With regard  13  to hatchery programs described in hatchery and genetic management plans (HGMPs) (Box 1-1), NMFS  14  declared under Limit 5 and Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule that section 9 take prohibitions would not apply to  15  activities carried out under those HGMPs when NMFS determines that the HGMPs meet the requirements  16  of Limit 5 and, where applicable, Limit 6.  Box 1-1.  What are hatchery and genetic management plans and hatchery resource management plans?  What are the differences between hatchery programs and hatchery facilities? Hatchery and Genetic Management Plans – Hatchery and genetic management plans, or HGMPs, are specific to the ESA and are outlined under Limit 5 of the 4(d) Rule. They are the plans that describe hatchery programs and reflect the fish species propagated, the main hatchery facility used, the life stage when the fish are released, and the location of fish releases. In general, several hatchery programs and their associated HGMPs may be associated with each primary hatchery facility.  For example, the Dungeness Hatchery facilities support steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, coho salmon, and pink salmon programs described in four HGMPs (Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and Facilities). Box 1-1.  What are hatchery and genetic management plans and hatchery resource  management plans?  What are the differences between hatchery programs and  hatchery facilities? (continued)  Resource Management Plans – Resource management plans, or RMPs, are also specific to  the ESA and are outlined under Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule. They can pertain to fishery  management plans or hatchery management plans. HGMPs can serve as RMPs for hatchery  programs. They are jointly prepared by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and  Puget Sound treaty tribes. The plans may encompass tribal, state, and Federal hatchery  programs and facilities, which often operate in the same watersheds, exchange eggs, and  share rearing space to maximize effectiveness.  Hatchery Programs and Facilities – Hatchery programs are defined by how the artificial  production for individual species at facilities are managed and operated. Hatchery facilities are  defined by the physical structures required for artificial production (e.g., hatchery buildings,  adult holding or juvenile rearing ponds).  1  2  1.1.2  Hatchery and Genetic Management Plan Submittal  3  The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) and Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, Lummi  4  Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe, and Tulalip Tribes as co-managers of the fisheries resource  5  under United States v. Washington (1974) (hereafter referred to as “the co-managers”) (Box 1-2), have  6  provided NMFS with five HGMPs describing five hatchery programs for early returning (hereafter  7  referred to as “early”) winter steelhead and associated monitoring and evaluation actions in the  8  Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins that affect ESA-listed  9  Puget Sound Chinook salmon, Hood Canal summer chum salmon, and Puget Sound steelhead (Table 1)  10  (Scott and Gobin 2014). An HGMP for a Soos Creek early winter steelhead program in the  11  Duwamish/Green River basin had been submitted by the co-managers to NMFS for review and approval  12  in 2014 (Scott 2014) but was subsequently withdrawn from consideration by the co-managers (K.  13  Cunningham, WDFW, email sent to Isabel Tinoco, Muckleshoot Indian Tribe, regarding Soos Creek early  14  winter steelhead; and I. Tinoco, Muckleshoot Indian Tribe, email sent to Steve Leider, NMFS, July 8,  15  2015, regarding Soos Creek early winter steelhead). Thus, the withdrawn HGMP is not included in the  16  Proposed Action and is not reviewed in this EIS. In addition, following release of the draft EIS for public  17  comment and discussions with NMFS, the co-managers submitted a revised HGMP for the Skykomish  18  River basin that included reduced smolt release levels (Unsworth 2016; WDFW 2016). The revised  19  Skykomish River basin HGMP is reviewed in this EIS as a component of Alternative 5.  1  The HGMPs provide the frameworks through which the Washington State and Tribal jurisdictions can  2  jointly and adaptively manage hatchery operations, monitoring, and evaluation activities, while meeting  3  requirements specified under the ESA.  4  The co-managers developed the plans jointly, and have provided the HGMPs for review and  5  determination by NMFS as to whether they address the criteria of Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule, using the  6  specific criteria for hatchery programs under Limit 5 of the 4(d) Rule. For the purposes of the proposed  7  recommendation, NMFS considers the five joint HGMPs, submitted for consideration under Limit 6, to  8  be a Resource Management Plan (RMP).  For more information on the 4(d) Rule, see Subsection 1.5.3,  9  NMFS’s Determination as to Compliance with the 4(d) Rule.   10  Box 1-2. What is United States v. Washington, and what does it do?  United States v. Washington is the 1974 Federal court proceeding that enforces and  implements treaty fishing rights for salmon and steelhead (and other species) returning to  Puget Sound (and other areas). Fishing rights and access to fishing areas in Puget Sound  were reserved in treaties that the Federal government signed with the tribes in the 1850s.  Under United States v. Washington, the Puget Sound Salmon Management Plan is the  implementation framework for the allocation, conservation, and equitable sharing principles  defined in United States v. Washington that governs the joint management of harvest of  salmon and steelhead resources between the Puget Sound treaty tribes and State of  Washington. The joint hatchery RMPs reviewed in this EIS, and joint harvest RMPs such as  the Puget Sound Chinook harvest management plan, are components of the Puget Sound  Salmon Management Plan.  1  Table 1.  HGMPs describing hatchery programs for five early winter steelhead hatchery programs  2  (Dungeness River, Nooksack River, Stillaguamish River, Skykomish River, and Snoqualmie  3  River).  Hatchery Program  Location  Facilities  Operator  HGMP Last Updated  Dungeness River Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program  Dungeness River Basin  Dungeness River Hatchery Hurd Creek Hatchery  WDFW  July 26, 2014  Kendall Creek Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program  Nooksack River Basin  Kendall Creek Hatchery McKinnon Pond  WDFW  July 26, 2014  Whitehorse Ponds Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program  Stillaguamish River Basin  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  WDFW  July 26, 2014  Snohomish/Skykomish Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program  Skykomish River Basin  Wallace River Hatchery Reiter Ponds  WDFW  February 16, 2016 November 25, 2014  Tokul Creek Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program  Snoqualmie River Basin  Tokul Creek Hatchery  WDFW  November 25, 2014  4  5  1.1.3  Related National Environmental Policy Act Reviews  6  NMFS conducted two previous NEPA analyses relevant to this EIS, specifically, a draft EIS reviewing  7  two RMPs and appended HGMPs for Puget Sound salmon and steelhead hatcheries (i.e., Draft  8  Environmental Impact Statement on Two Joint State and Tribal Resource Management Plans for Puget  9  Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs – herein referred to as the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS  10  2014a]) (79 Fed. Reg. 43465, July 25, 2014), subsequently terminated (80 Fed. Reg. 15986, March 26,  11  2015), and, a draft environmental assessment (EA) for three early winter steelhead programs in the  12  Dungeness, Nooksack, and Stillaguamish River basins (i.e., Draft Environmental Assessment to Analyze  13  the Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed 4(d) Determination Under Limit 4  14  for Three Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, and Stillaguamish  15  River Basins – herein referred to as the EWS Hatcheries DEA [NMFS 2015a]) (80 Fed. Reg. 15985,  16  March 26, 2015).  As discussed in the Federal Register Notice terminating review of two RMPs and  17  appended HGMPs for hatchery programs in Puget Sound basin, NMFS determined that, following the  Chapter 1  4  March 2016November 2015  1 public comment period on the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a), NEPA analyses organized around 2 smaller numbers of HGMPs would allow for a more detailed analyses of potential effects of individual 3 HGMPs than the scope of review in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  Additionally, analyses of all 4 hatchery programs in the Puget Sound basin under one NEPA review is not necessary to fully consider 5 effects of those programs.  Although currently over 100 salmon and steelhead hatchery programs operate 6 in the Puget Sound basin (Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and 7 Facilities), they are not connected; they have different operators (e.g., state and tribal), do not rely on each 8 other for their operation or justification, and recently either have been or are expected to be submitted by 9 the co-managers to NMFS for approval generally on a watershed-specific basis. The combined effects of 10 hatchery programs within the Puget Sound basin are addressed in this EIS in Chapter 5, Cumulative 11 Effects.   12 Public comments on the EWS Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 2015a) lead NMFS to conclude that preparation 13 of this EIS was warranted to analyze the same three early winter steelhead hatchery programs. 14 Furthermore, in addition to the three hatchery programs analyzed in the EWS Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 15 2015a), this EIS includes HGMPs describing early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Skykomish 16 and Snoqualmie River basins. The five HGMPs were grouped into this EIS review because all five 17 hatchery programs pertain to early winter steelhead and would affect similar resources. 18 This EIS incorporates information by reference from the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a), including 19 detailed discussions on the ESA (PS Hatcheries DEIS, Subsection 1.1.1, The Endangered Species Act) 20 and take of listed species with specific information related to Puget Sound Hatchery RMPs and HGMPs 21 and background on the use of hatcheries in Puget Sound (PS Hatcheries DEIS, Subsection 1.1.2, Take of 22 a Listed Species).  Other information incorporated by reference from the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 23 2014a) is summarized within various sections of this EIS. 24 1.2 Description of the Proposed Action 25 Under the Proposed Action, NMFS would make a determination that the HGMPs submitted as RMPs 26 meet the requirements of Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule.  Activities included in the HGMPs are as follows: 27  Broodstock collection through operation of weirs, fish traps, and collection ponds (Table 2) 28  Transport of broodstock from Dungeness River Hatchery to Hurd Creek Hatchery 29  Holding, identification, and spawning of adult fish at Dungeness River, Hurd Creek, Kendall 30 Creek, Whitehorse Ponds, and Wallace River Hatcheries, Reiter Ponds, and Tokul Creek 31 Hatchery (Table 2) 1  Egg incubation at Dungeness River, Hurd Creek, Kendall Creek, Whitehorse Ponds, Wallace 2 River, and Tokul Creek Hatcheries (Table 2) 3  Fish rearing at Dungeness River, Hurd Creek, Kendall Creek, Whitehorse Ponds, Wallace 4 River, and Tokul Creek Hatcheries, and McKinnon Pond and Reiter Ponds (Table 2) 5  Clipping the adipose fin of 100 percent of the hatchery-origin juveniles prior to release 6  Release of up to 10,000 steelhead yearlings into the Dungeness River basin, 7 150,000 steelhead yearlings into the Nooksack River basin, 130,000 steelhead yearlings into 8 the Stillaguamish River basin, 256, 000 steelhead yearlings into the Skykomish River basin, 9 and 74,000 steelhead into the Snoqualmie River basin, for a total of 620,000 fish 10  Removal of adult hatchery-origin steelhead returning to the Dungeness, Nooksack, 11 Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins at weirs, fish traps, and other 12 collection facilities 13  Monitoring and evaluation activities to assess the performance of the programs in meeting 14 conservation, harvest augmentation, and listed fish risk minimization objectives (Table 2) 15 Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead 16 programs in Puget Sound. Activity  Facility  Location  Does Facility Exist under Baseline Conditions?  Is Facility Operated under Baseline Conditions?  Broodstock collection  Dungeness River Hatchery  RM 10.5 on the Dungeness River  Yes  Yes  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Located at the mouth of Kendall Creek (WRIA 01.0406), tributary to the NF Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0120) at RM 46  Yes  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  Located at RM 1.5 of Whitehorse Springs Creek (WRIA 05.0254A), tributary to the NF Stillaguamish River (WRIA 05.0135) at RM 28  Yes  Yes  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River (WRIA 07.0940), RM 4 at the confluence with May Creek (WRIA 07.0943); enters Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 36, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead programs in Puget Sound. (continued) Activity  Facility  Location  Does Facility Exist under Baseline Conditions?  Is Facility Operated under Baseline Conditions?  Reiter Ponds  Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 46, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Located on Tokul Creek (WRIA 07.0440) at RM 0.5; tributary to Snoqualmie River (WRIA 07.0219) at RM 39.6; tributary to the Snohomish River (WRIA 07.0001) at RM 20.5  Yes  Yes  Spawning  Dungeness River Hatchery  RM 10.5 on the Dungeness River  Yes  Yes  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Located at the mouth of Kendall Creek (WRIA 01.0406), tributary to the North Fork Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0120) at RM 46  Yes  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  Located at RM 1.5 of Whitehorse Springs Creek (WRIA 05.0254A), tributary to the North Fork Stillaguamish River (WRIA 05.0135) at RM 28  Yes  Yes  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River (WRIA 07.0940), RM 4 at the confluence with May Creek (WRIA 07.0943); enters Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 36, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Reiter Ponds  Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 46, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Located on Tokul Creek (WRIA 07.0440) at RM 0.5; tributary to Snoqualmie River (WRIA 07.0219) at RM 39.6; tributary to  the Snohomish River (WRIA 07.0001) at RM 20.5  Yes  Yes  Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead programs in Puget Sound. (continued) Activity  Facility  Location  Does Facility Exist under Baseline Conditions?  Is Facility Operated under Baseline Conditions?  Incubation  Dungeness River Hatchery  RM 10.5 on the Dungeness River  Yes  Yes  Hurd Creek Hatchery  RM 0.2 on Hurd Creek, tributary to the Dungeness River at RM 2.7  Yes  Yes  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Located at the mouth of Kendall Creek (WRIA 01.0406), tributary to the North Fork Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0120) at RM 46  Yes  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  Located at RM 1.5 of Whitehorse Springs Creek (WRIA 05.0254A), tributary to the NF Stillaguamish River (WRIA 05.0135) at RM 28  Yes  Yes  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River (WRIA 07.0940), RM 4 at the confluence with May Creek (WRIA 07.0943); enters Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 36, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Located on Tokul Creek (WRIA 07.0440) at RM 0.5; tributary to Snoqualmie River (WRIA 07.0219) at RM 39.6; tributary to  the Snohomish River (WRIA 07.0001) at RM 20.5  Yes  Yes  Rearing  Dungeness River Hatchery  RM 10.5 on the Dungeness River  Yes  Yes  Hurd Creek Hatchery  RM 0.2 on Hurd Creek, tributary to the Dungeness River at RM 2.7  Yes  Yes  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Located at the mouth of Kendall Creek (WRIA 01.0406), tributary to the North Fork Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0120) at RM 46  Yes  Yes  Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead programs in Puget Sound. (continued) Activity  Facility  Location  Does Facility Exist under Baseline Conditions?  Is Facility Operated under Baseline Conditions?  McKinnon Pond  Located just downstream from the Mosquito Lake Road Bridge on the left bank of the Middle Fork Nooksack River with water from and outlet to a creek (WRIA 01.0352, known locally as “Peat Bog Creek”), which emanates from Peat Bog, tributary to Middle Fork Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0339) at RM 4.4.  Yes  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  Located at RM 1.5 of Whitehorse Springs Creek (WRIA 05.0254A), tributary to the North Fork Stillaguamish River (WRIA 05.0135) at RM 28  Yes  Yes  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River (WRIA 07.0940), RM 4 at the confluence with May Creek (WRIA  07.0943); enters Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 36, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Reiter Ponds  Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 46, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Located on Tokul Creek (WRIA 07.0440) at RM 0.5; tributary to Snoqualmie River (WRIA 07.0219) at RM 39.6; tributary to the Snohomish River (WRIA 07.0001) at RM 20.5  Yes  Yes  Juvenile Fish  Dungeness River Hatchery  RM 10.5 on the Dungeness River  Yes  Yes  Release  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Located at the mouth of Kendall Creek (WRIA 01.0406), tributary to the NF Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0120) at RM 46  Yes  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  Located at RM 1.5 of Whitehorse Springs Creek (WRIA 05.0254A), tributary to the NF Stillaguamish River (WRIA 05.0135) at RM 28  Yes  Yes  Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead programs in Puget Sound. (continued) Activity  Facility  Location  Does Facility Exist under Baseline Conditions?  Is Facility Operated under Baseline Conditions?  Whitehorse fish in excess of release goals are released into various King and Snohomish County lakes for harvest.  Various lakes that are functionally isolated from anadromousaccessible freshwater  Yes  Yes  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River (WRIA 07.0940), RM 4 at the confluence with May Creek (WRIA 07.0943); enters Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 36, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Reiter Ponds  Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 46, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Located on Tokul Creek (WRIA 07.0440) at RM 0.5; tributary to Snoqualmie River (WRIA 07.0219) at RM 39.6; tributary to the Snohomish River (WRIA 07.0001) at RM 20.5  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek fish in excess of release goals are released into various King County lakes for harvest.  Various lakes that are functionally isolated from anadromousaccessible freshwater  Yes  Yes  Monitoring and  Dungeness River Hatchery  RM 10.5 on the Dungeness River  Yes  Yes  evaluation  Hurd Creek Hatchery  RM 0.2 on Hurd Creek, tributary to the Dungeness River at RM 2.7  Yes  Yes  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Located at the mouth of Kendall Creek (WRIA 01.0406), tributary to the NF Nooksack River (WRIA 01.0120) at RM 46  Yes  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  Located at RM 1.5 of Whitehorse Springs Creek (WRIA 05.0254A), tributary to the NF Stillaguamish River (WRIA 05.0135) at RM 28  Yes  Yes  Table 2. Activities, hatchery facilities, and locations associated with five early winter steelhead programs in Puget Sound. (continued) Activity  Facility  Location  Does Facility Exist under Baseline Conditions?  Is Facility Operated under Baseline Conditions?  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River (WRIA 07.0940), RM 4 at the confluence with May Creek (WRIA 07.0943); enters Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 36, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Reiter Ponds  Skykomish River (WRIA 07.0012) at RM 46, which continues as Snohomish River at RM 20.51  Yes  Yes  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Located on Tokul Creek (WRIA 07.0440) at RM 0.5; tributary to Snoqualmie River (WRIA 07.0219) at RM 39.6; tributary to the Snohomish River (WRIA 07.0001) at RM 20.5  Yes  Yes  Watershed areas accessible to natural salmon and steelhead migration, spawning and rearing  Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basin areas, including tributaries, extending from the river mouths through the upstream extent of anadromous fish access.  N/A  N/A  1  Sources: WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e, WDFW 2016.  2  RM: River mile, measured from the farthest downstream point on the stream in question.  3  WRIA: Water Resources Inventory Area, typically defining geographic areas where surface-water run-off drains  4  into a common surface-water body, such as a lake, section of a stream, or a bay.  5  1 As described in Subsection 1.5.3, NMFS’s Determination as to Compliance with the 4(d) Rule, NMFS 2 will require monitoring and evaluation as a condition of its approvals under the 4(d) Rule. Monitoring and 3 evaluation under approved HGMPs would address the performance of the hatchery programs in meeting 4 and adaptively managing their objectives. Monitoring activities (Table 2) would include, but not be limited to obtaining information on smolt-to-adult survival, fishery contribution, natural-origin and 6 hatchery-origin spawning abundance, juvenile out-migrant abundance and diversity, genetics (DNA) and 7 gene flow (e.g., Anderson et al. 2014), and juvenile and adult fish health when the fish are in the hatchery. 8 1.3 Purpose of and Need for the Proposed Action 9 This EIS identifies the purpose and need for the NMFS action as well as that of the state and tribal fisheries co-managers. 11 NMFS’s purpose for the Proposed Action is to ensure the sustainability and recovery of Puget Sound 12 salmon and steelhead by conserving the productivity, abundance, diversity, and distribution of listed 13 species of salmon and steelhead in Puget Sound. 14 NMFS’s need for the Proposed Action is to:  Respond to the co-managers’ request for an exemption from take prohibitions of section 9 of 16 the ESA for their hatchery programs triggered by submission of HGMPs as RMPs under 17 Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule. 18  Provide, as appropriate, tribal and non-tribal fishing opportunities as described under the state 19 and tribal co-managers’ Puget Sound Salmon Management Plan implemented under United States v. Washington. 21 The co-managers’ purpose in developing and submitting HGMPs as RMPs under Limit 6 is to operate 22 their hatcheries to meet resource management and protection goals with the assurance that any harm, 23 death, or injury to fish within a listed evolutionarily significant unit (ESU) or distinct population segment 24 (DPS) does not appreciably reduce the likelihood of a speciesʼ survival and recovery and is not in the category of prohibited take under the ESA’s 4(d) Rule. 26 The co-managers’ need for the Proposed Action is to continue to maintain and operate salmon and 27 steelhead hatchery programs using existing facilities for conservation, mitigation, and tribal and non-tribal 28 fishing opportunity pursuant to the Puget Sound Salmon Management Plan implemented under United 29 States v. Washington, and treaty rights preservation purposes while meeting ESA requirements. 1  WDFW and the Puget Sound treaty tribes strive to protect, restore, and enhance the productivity,  2  abundance, and diversity of Puget Sound salmon and steelhead and their ecosystems to sustain treaty  3  ceremonial and subsistence fisheries, treaty and non-treaty commercial and recreational fisheries, non 4  consumptive fish benefits, and other cultural and ecological values.  5  As described in Box 1-3, NMFS has an obligation to administer the provisions of the ESA and to protect  6  listed salmon and steelhead, and also has a Federal trust responsibility to treaty Indian tribes. Thus,  7  NMFS seeks to harmonize the reduction in the negative effects of hatchery programs with the provision  8  of hatchery-origin fish for tribal harvest and for conservation purposes.  Box 1-3. How does NMFS harmonize its conservation mandate under the ESA with  stewardship of treaty Indian fishing rights?  In addition to the biological requirements for conservation under the ESA, NMFS has a Federal  trust responsibility to treaty Indian tribes. In recognition of its treaty rights stewardship  obligation and consistent with Secretarial Order 3206 (see Subsection 1.7.7, Secretarial  Order 3206), NMFS, as a matter of policy, will make every effort to harmonize the protection of  listed species and the provision for tribal fishing opportunity. NMFS recognizes that the treaty  tribes have a right to conduct their fisheries within the limits of conservation constraints.  Because of the Federal government’s trust responsibility to the tribes, NMFS is committed to  considering the tribal co-managers’ judgment and expertise regarding conservation of trust  resources. Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule explicitly requires this. However, the opinion of tribal co- managers and their immediate interest in fishing must be balanced with NMFS’ responsibilities  under the ESA.  9  This EIS will not document whether specific actions of hatchery programs meet the requirements of  10  Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule under the ESA. Those ESA decisions will be made in separate processes  11  consistent with applicable regulations as required by the ESA.  12  1.4  Project and Analysis Areas  13  The project area is the geographic area where the Proposed Action would take place.  It includes the  14  places where the proposed steelhead hatchery programs would (1) collect broodstock; (2) spawn,  15  incubate, and rear fish; (3) release fish; or (4) remove surplus hatchery-origin adult steelhead that return  16  to hatchery facilities; and (5) conduct monitoring and evaluation activities. The project area includes the  17  Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, as well as the following  18  hatchery and satellite facilities and their immediate surroundings:  19  March 2016November 2015  13  Chapter 1  1  Dungeness River Hatchery 2  Hurd Creek Hatchery 3  Kendall Creek Hatchery 4  McKinnon Pond  Whitehorse Ponds 6  Wallace River Hatchery 7  Reiter Ponds 8  Tokul Creek Hatchery 9 The analysis area is the geographic extent that is being evaluated for a particular resource.  For some resources, the analysis area may be larger than the project area, since some of the effects of the 11 alternatives may occur outside the project area. The analysis area is described at the beginning of 12 Chapter 3, Affected Environment, for each resource. 13 1.5 Decisions to be Made 14 NMFS must decide on the following before the Proposed Action can be implemented:  The preferred alternative following an analysis of all alternatives in this EIS and review of 16 public comment on the EIS 17  Whether the Proposed Action complies with ESA criteria under the section 4(d) Rule 18 1.5.1 Preferred Alternative to be Identified in the Final EIS 19 Although a preferred alternative was not identified in the draft EIS; it has been identified in the final EIS in Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative). The preferred alternative for all programs could 21 be the Proposed Action, or it could be comprised of components of the alternatives evaluated in the final 22 EIS. Information from the public review process was used in selecting a preferred alternative. 23 1.5.2 Record of Decision 24 This NEPA process will culminate in a Record of Decision (ROD) that will record the selected alternative. The ROD will identify the environmentally preferred alternative; describe the preferred 26 alternative and the selected alternative; and summarize the impacts expected to result from 27 implementation of the selected alternative. As for the preferred alternative in the final EIS, the selected 28 alternative in the ROD could be the preferred alternative or could be comprised of components of 29 alternatives evaluated in the final EIS. The ROD will also consider comments on the final EIS. The ROD 1 will be completed after public review and comment on the final EIS, and after the ESA determinations 2 and associated public review processes are completed. 3 1.5.3 NMFS’s Determination as to Compliance with the 4(d) Rule 4 Discussions between the co-managers and NMFS during development of hatchery RMPs are conducted with the knowledge and understanding that the specific criteria under Limit 5 and Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule 6 must be met before take coverage under the ESA can be issued. Criteria for ESA evaluation of HGMPs 7 that form RMPs submitted under Limit 6 are the same as for Limit 5 (Artificial Propagation). HGMPs 8 must: 9 1. Specify the goals and objectives for the hatchery program. 2. Specify the donor population’s critical and viable threshold levels. 11 3. Prioritize broodstock collection programs to benefit listed fish. 12 4. Specify the protocols that will be used for spawning and raising the hatchery-origin fish. 13 5. Determine the genetic and ecological effects arising from the hatchery program. 14 6. Describe how the hatchery operation relates to fishery management. 7. Ensure that the hatchery facility can adequately accommodate listed fish if collected for the 16 program. 17 8. Monitor and evaluate the management plan to ensure that it accomplishes its objective. 18 9. Be consistent with tribal trust obligations (65 Fed. Reg. 42422, July 10, 2000).  19 NMFS has a limited role (i.e., approve or deny) under Limit 6 of the 4(d) Rule. The decision as to whether the ESA 4(d) Rule Limit 5 and Limit 6 criteria have been met will be documented in NMFS’s 21 ESA decision documents at the end of the ESA evaluation process. Included with the ESA decision 22 documents will be responses to comments on the HGMPs received during public review as required by 23 the 4(d) Rule. 24 1.5.4 BiologicalOpinion on NMFS’s Determination as to Compliance with the 4(d) Rule ESA section 7(a)(2) provides that any action authorized, funded, or carried out by a Federal agency shall 26 not jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered or threatened species or result in the adverse 27 modification or destruction of designated criticalhabitat. NMFS’s actions under section 4(d) are Federal 28 actions, and NMFS must comply with section 7(a)(2). NMFS’s consultations under section 7 on those 1  actions may be informed by this NEPA analysis. The results of these consultations are documented in  2  biological opinions developed by NMFS and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (the Services) for the  3  species under their jurisdiction. Biological opinions are produced near the end of the ESA evaluation and  4  determination process, providing the Services conclusions regarding the likelihood that the proposed  hatchery actions will jeopardize the continued existence of any listed species or adversely modify  6  designated critical habitat for any listed species.  7  1.6 Scoping and Relevant Issues  8  The first step in preparing an EIS is to conduct scoping of the issues that may be associated with the  9  Proposed Action. This occurs through internal agency and public scoping processes. The purpose of that  scoping is to identify the relevant human environmental issues, to eliminate insignificant issues from  11  detailed study, and to identify the alternatives to be analyzed in the EIS. Scoping can also help determine  12  the level of analysis and the types of data required for analysis.  13  1.6.1 Scoping Process  14  This EIS involved activities that included both internal and public scoping that are described in the  following paragraphs.   16  1.6.2 Internal Scoping  17  NMFS initially conducted internal project scoping on early winter steelhead hatchery programs in 2014,  18  as part of the process of developing the draft EA for three early winter steelhead hatchery programs, and  19  convened later, internal-only, meetings for the process of developing this EIS. Internal scoping for this  EIS was informed by public comments on previous NEPA analyses including the PS Hatcheries DEIS  21  (NMFS 2014a) and the EWS Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 2015a).  22  A review of available NEPA analyses of salmon and steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound  23  watersheds including the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) and EWS Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 2015a),  24  the Final Environmental Assessment to Analyze Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service  Determination that Five Hatchery Programs for Elwha River Salmon and Steelhead as Described in Joint  26  State-Tribal Hatchery and Genetic Management Plans and One Tribal Harvest Plan Satisfy the  27  Endangered Species Act Section 4(d) Rule – herein referred to as the Elwha FEA (NMFS 2012) (77 Fed.  28  Reg. 75611, December 21, 2012), Final Supplemental Environmental Assessment to Analyze Impacts of  29  NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Determination that Five Hatchery Programs for Elwha River  Salmon and Steelhead as Described in Joint State-Tribal Hatchery and Genetic Management Plans and  31  One Tribal Harvest Plan Satisfy the Endangered Species Act 4(d) Rule – herein referred to as the Elwha  32  FSEA (NMFS 2014b) (79 Fed. Reg. 35318, June 20, 2014), and Draft Environmental Assessment to  Chapter 1 16 March 2016November 2015  1 Analyze the Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Determination that Three Hatchery 2 Programs for Dungeness River Basin Salmon as Described in Joint State-Tribal Hatchery and Genetic 3 Management Plans Satisfy the Endangered Species Act Section 4(d) Rule – herein referred to as 4 Dungeness Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 2015b) (80 Fed. Reg. 9260, February 20, 2015), found that the proposed actions had negligible effects on some resources or parts of resources. These resources were 6 wildlife, water quality, and human health. Analyses of these resources in the above documents are 7 incorporated by reference; further analyses were not proposed to be reviewed in Chapter 3, Affected 8 Environment, and Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences, in this EIS. 9 1.6.3 Notices of Public Scoping Public scoping for this EIS commenced with publication of a Notice of Intent in the Federal Register on 11 July 14, 2015 (80 Fed. Reg. 41011, July 14, 2015). That notice started a 30-day public comment period 12 (July 14, 2015, to August 13, 2015) to gather information on the scope of the issues and the range of 13 alternatives to be analyzed in the EIS.  NMFS developed a website for the EIS at 14 http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/hatcheries/salmon_and_steelhead_hatcheries.html. The website was available during the scoping period and will be updated and available throughout the project duration. 16 During 2015, NMFS held two public scoping workshops in the project area, in Mount Vernon (on 17 July 20), and in Lynnwood (on July 21), Washington. Presentations were made by NMFS personnel, and 18 a question-and-answer session followed. At these workshops, NMFS provided clarifying information and 19 requested that public comments be submitted on issues and alternatives associated with the project. Notifications about the workshops, the public scoping process, and the EIS schedule were distributed in a 21 press release and in emails to a list of over 2,000 addresses that had been compiled from people that 22 commented on the EWS Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 2015a) and PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a). 23 Electronic and other notifications were sent to agencies, private individuals, businesses, and non24 governmental organizations, which contained a link to the website for this EIS and the address to the EIS electronic mailbox. Invitations to attend the public workshops were also advertised through a NMFS press 26 release and on applicable organization and agency websites. 27 1.6.4 Written Comments Received during the Public Scoping Process 28 Written comments received on this EIS during the public scoping process included: 29  1 from a governmental agency  1 from a tribal organization 31  5 from non-governmental organizations 32  639 from individual citizens 1 1.6.5 Issues Identified During Scoping 2 Based on all input received during the scoping process and the purpose and need for the Proposed Action, 3 input relevant to development of EIS alternatives include: 4  Modify hatchery programs to help conserve species listed under the ESA.  Modify hatchery programs to provide more fishing opportunities for steelhead. 6 Comments from public scoping were also received on resources to be analyzed, the importance of habitat 7 to steelhead, and new information. Scoping identified water quantity, salmon and steelhead, Southern 8 Resident killer whales, socioeconomics, and environmental justice as the resources to be analyzed, along 9 with cumulative effects. Scoping comments emphasized the importance of habitat to natural-origin steelhead, life history and adult return-timing considerations, and identified recently available information 11 (e.g., steelhead genetic data from WDFW, and Salish Sea juvenile steelhead survival studies) to be 12 considered in the EIS. 13 1.6.6 Future Public Review and Comment 14 Under NEPA, the draft EIS was issued for a 45-day public review period, which was announced in newspapers, through electronic distribution to interested parties, and by publication in the Federal 16 Register (80 Fed. Reg.70206, November 13, 2015). NMFS received nearly 2,100 comment submissions 17 on the draft EIS, including: 18  3 from governmental agencies 19  4 from tribal organizations  4 from fish conservation non-governmental organizations 21  5 fishing organizations 22  103 from individual citizens, plus nearly 2,000 form-email or form-letter submissions 23 Following the public review period, responses to substantive public comments were prepared and 24 included in the final EIS (Table 3). Responses will identify any changes to the EIS resulting from public comments, as warranted. Appendix D, Comment Analysis Summary, summarizes public comments 26 received on the draft EIS, identifies global comments, and provides responses to those comments. 27 Changes made to the draft EIS are shown as red text for new additions and as strikethrough text for 28 deleted information. Following a 30-day public review period for the final EIS, the ROD 29 (Subsection 1.5.2, Record of Decision) will be signed and made publicly available. 1  Under the ESA 4(d) Rule Limit 6, NMFS will prepare Pending Evaluation and Proposed Determination  2  (PEPD) documents for the proposed RMPs (Table 3). PEPD documents for early winter steelhead  3  hatchery programs reviewed in this EIS were released for public review and comment on March 26, 2015  4  (80 Fed. Reg. 15985, March 26, 2015), and February 23, 2016 (81 Fed. Reg. 8941, February 23, 2016).  5  To the extent that the co-managers propose substantive changes to the HGMPs reviewed in this EIS in the  6  future in response to new information or proposed actions (including potential increases in hatchery  7  production), additional NEPA and ESA compliance may be warranted. The nature and extent of changes  8  to plans or new information will determine the type of additional NEPA and ESA compliance that may be  9  needed. Subsequent public review opportunities may be warranted as part of these additional NEPA and  10  ESA reviews.  11  Table 3.  NMFS documents and decisions required under the ESA and NEPA regarding early winter  12  steelhead hatchery programs, public notices, and comment opportunities.  Determination  Federal Register Notice of Intent and Public Scoping Comment Period  Federal Register Notice of Availability and Public Comment Period  Federal Register Notice of Availability and Public Access/Review  Decision Document  ESA  NMFS 4(d)  Pending Evaluation and Determination (30-day comment period)  Evaluation and Recommendation Determination1  NMFS BiOp2  Signed BiOp  USFWS BiOp  Signed BiOp  NEPA  EIS3  Notice of Intent (30-day comment period)  Draft EIS (45-day comment period)  Final EIS (30-day “cooling off” period)  Record of Decision  Progression of Steps for Each Determination  Start  End  13 1 Notification of decision published in Federal Register. 14 2 BiOp = Biological Opinion under section 7 of the ESA. 15 3 EIS = Environmental Impact Statement. 1  1.7 Relationship to Other Plans and Policies  2  In addition to NEPA and ESA, other plans, regulations, agreements, treaties, laws, and Secretarial and  3  Executive Orders also affect hatchery operations in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish,  4  and Snoqualmie River basins.  They are summarized below to provide additional context for the hatchery  programs and their proposed HGMPs (see Box 1-1).  6  1.7.1 Clean Water Act  7  The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251, 1977, as amended in 1987), administered by the U.S. Environmental  8  Protection Agency and state water quality agencies, is the principal Federal legislation directed at  9  protecting water quality. Each state implements and carries forth Federal provisions, as well as approves  and reviews National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) applications, and establishes total  11  maximum daily loads for rivers, lakes, and streams. The states are responsible for setting the water quality  12  standards needed to support all beneficial uses, including protection of public health, recreational  13  activities, aquatic life, and water supplies.  14  The Washington State Water Pollution Control Act, codified as Revised Code of Washington  Chapter 90.48, designates the Washington Department of Ecology (Ecology) as the agency responsible  16  for carrying out the provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act within Washington State. The agency is  17  responsible for establishing water quality standards, making and enforcing water quality rules, and  18  operating waste discharge permit programs. These regulations are described in Washington  19  Administrative Code (WAC) 173. Hatchery operations are required to comply with the Clean Water Act.  1.7.2 Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act  21  The Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act (16 USC. 668-668c), enacted in 1940, and amended  22  several times since then, prohibits the taking of bald eagles, including their parts, nests, or eggs. The act  23  defines “take” as "pursue, shoot, shoot at, poison, wound, kill, capture, trap, collect, molest or disturb."  24  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, who is responsible for carrying out provisions of this Act, defines  “disturb” to include “injury to an eagle; a decrease in its productivity, by substantially interfering with  26  normal breeding, feeding, or sheltering behavior; or nest abandonment, by substantially interfering with  27  normal breeding, feeding, or sheltering behavior.” Changes in hatchery production have the potential to  28  affect eagle productivity through changes in its salmon and steelhead prey sources.  29  1.7.3 Marine Mammal Protection Act  The Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) of 1972 (16 USC 1361) as amended, establishes a national  31  policy designated to protect and conserve wild marine mammals and their habitats.  This policy was  1  established so as not to diminish such species or populations beyond the point at which they cease to be a  2  significant functioning element in the ecosystem, nor to diminish such species below their optimum  3  sustainable population. All marine mammals are protected under the MMPA.  4  The MMPA prohibits, with certain exceptions, the take of marine mammals in United States waters and  by United States citizens on the high seas, and the importation of marine mammals and marine mammal  6  products into the United States. The term “take,” as defined by the MMPA, means to “harass, hunt,  7  capture, or kill, or attempt to harass, hunt, capture, or kill any marine mammal.” The MMPA further  8  defines harassment as “any act of pursuit, torment, or annoyance, which (i) has the potential to injure a  9  marine mammal or marine mammal stock in the wild; or (ii) has the potential to disturb a marine mammal  or marine mammal stock in the wild by causing a disruption of behavioral patterns, including, but not  11  limited to, migration, breathing, nursing, breeding, feeding, or sheltering but which does not have the  12  potential to injure a marine mammal or marine mammal stock in the wild.”  13  NMFS is responsible for reviewing Federal actions for compliance with the MMPA. Changes in fish  14  production can indirectly affect marine mammals by altering the number of available salmon and  steelhead prey sources.  16  1.7.4 Executive Order 12898  17  In 1994, the President issued Executive Order 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice  18  in Minority and Low-income Populations. The objectives of the Executive Order include developing  19  Federal agency implementation strategies, identifying minority and low-income populations where  proposed Federal actions could have disproportionately high and adverse human health and  21  environmental effects, and encouraging the participation of minority and low-income populations in the  22  NEPA process.  Changes in hatchery production have the potential to affect the extent of harvest available  23  for minority and low-income populations.  24  1.7.5 Treaties of Point Elliot, Medicine Creek, and Point No Point  Beginning in the mid-1850s, the United States entered into a series of treaties with tribes in Puget Sound.  26  The treaties were completed to secure the rights of the tribes to land and the use of natural resources in  27  their historically inhabited areas, in exchange for the ceding of land to the United States for settlement by  28  its citizens. The first treaty bearing upon the actions evaluated in this EIS is the Treaty of Medicine Creek  29  (signed in 1854), followed by two treaties signed in 1855—the Point Elliot Treaty and the Point No Point  Treaty. These treaties secured the rights of tribes for taking fish at usual and accustomed grounds and  31  stations in common with all citizens of the United States.  Marine and freshwater areas of Puget Sound  1  were affirmed as the usual and accustomed fishing areas for treaty tribes under United States v.  2  Washington (1974).   3  The Lummi Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe, and Tulalip Tribes are signatory to the Treaty  4  of Point Elliot, the lands settlement treaty between the United States government and the Native American  tribes of the North Puget Sound and Strait of Georgia regions, in the recently-formed Washington  6  Territory.  The Treaty of Point Elliot was signed on January 22, 1855, at Muckl-te-oh or Point Elliott, now  7  Mukilteo, Washington.  8  The Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe is signatory to the Treaty of Point No Point, the lands settlement treaty  9  between the United States government and the Native American tribes of the Strait of Juan de Fuca and  Hood Canal regions (then, the S'Klallam, the Chimakum, and the Skokomish Tribes), also in the recently 11  formed Washington Territory. The Treaty of Point No Point was signed on January 26, 1855, at  12  Hahdskus – the Salish dialect name for Point No Point – on the northern tip of the Kitsap Peninsula.   13  1.7.6 United States v. Washington  14  Salmon and steelhead fisheries within the project area are jointly managed by the WDFW and Puget  Sound treaty tribes (co-managers) under the continuing jurisdiction of United States v. Washington  16  (1974). United States v. Washington (1974) is the Federal court proceeding that enforces and implements  17  reserved treaty fishing rights with regards to salmon and steelhead returning to Puget Sound. Hatcheries  18  in Puget Sound provide salmon and steelhead for these fisheries. Without many of these hatcheries, there  19  would be few, if any, fish for the tribes to harvest (Stay 2012; NWIFC 2013). These fishing rights and  attendant access were established by treaties that the Federal government signed with the tribes in the  21  1850s. In those treaties, the tribes agreed to allow the peaceful settlement of Indian lands in western  22  Washington in exchange for their continued right to fish, gather shellfish, hunt, and exercise other  23  sovereign rights. Under Phase II of United States v. Washington, the Federal District Court ensured tribes  24  the rights to the protection of fish habitat subject to treaty catch and a right to the fish that are produced by  hatcheries. In 1974, Judge George Boldt decided in United States v. Washington that the tribes’ fair and  26  equitable share was 50 percent of all of the harvestable fish destined for the tribes’ traditional fishing  27  places. Hatchery-origin fish are considered fish to the same extent as natural-origin fish and, thus, are  28  counted in the determination of the treaty share (U.S. v. Washington, 759 F.2d 1353, 1358-60 (9th Cir.),  29  cert. denied, 474 U.S. 994 (1985)).   1 1.7.7 Secretarial Order 3206 2 Secretarial Order 3206 (American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal Trust Responsibilities and the 3 ESA, http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/sfa/reg_svcs/Councils/Webinar/secretarial_order.pdf) issued by the 4 secretaries of the Departments of Interior and Commerce, clarifies the responsibilities of the agencies, 5 bureaus, and offices of the departments when actions taken under the ESA and its implementing 6 regulations affect, or may affect, Indian lands, tribal trust resources, or the exercise of American Indian 7 tribal rights as they are defined in the Order. The Secretarial Order acknowledges the trust responsibility 8 and treaty obligations of the United States toward tribes and tribal members, as well as its government-to9 government relationship when corresponding with tribes. Under the Order, NMFS and the U.S. Fish and 10 Wildlife Service (Services) “will carry out their responsibilities under the [ESA] in a manner that 11 harmonizes the Federal trust responsibility to tribes, tribal sovereignty, and statutory missions of the 12 [Services], and that strives to ensure that Indian tribes do not bear a disproportionate burden for the 13 conservation of listed species, so as to avoid or minimize the potential for conflict and confrontation.” 14 In the event that the Services determine that conservation restrictions directed at a tribal activity are 15 necessary to protect listed species, specifically where the activity could result in incidental take under the 16 ESA, the Services shall provide the affected tribe(s) written notice, including an analysis and 17 determination that (i) the restriction is reasonable and necessary for conservation of the species; (ii) the 18 conservation purpose of the restriction cannot be achieved by reasonable regulation of non-Indian 19 activities; (iii) the measure is the least restrictive alternative available to achieve the required conservation 20 purpose; (iv) the restriction does not discriminate against Indian activities, either as stated or applied; and 21 (v) voluntary tribal measures are not adequate to achieve the necessary conservation purpose.  22 More specifically, the Services shall, among other things, do the following: 23  Work directly with Indian tribes on a government-to-government basis to promote healthy 24 ecosystems (Section 5, Principle 1). 25  Recognize that Indian lands are not subject to the same controls as Federal public lands 26 (Section 5, Principle 2). 27  Assist Indian tribes in developing and expanding tribal programs so that healthy ecosystems 28 are promoted and conservation restrictions are unnecessary (Section 5, Principle 3). 29  Be sensitive to Indian culture, religion, and spirituality (Section 5, Principle 4). 1  Additionally, the U.S. Department of Commerce has issued a Departmental Administrative Order (DAO)  2  addressing Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments (DAO 218-8, April 26, 2012;  3  http://www.osec.doc.gov/opog/dmp/daos/dao218_8.html), which implements relevant Executive Orders,  4  Presidential Memoranda, and Office of Management and Budget Guidance. The DAO describes actions  to be “followed by all Department of Commerce operating units … and outlines the principles governing  6  Departmental interactions with Indian tribal governments.” The DAO affirms that the “Department works  7  with Tribes on a government-to-government basis to address issues concerning … tribal trust resources,  8  tribal treaty, and other rights.”  9  1.7.8 The Federal Trust Responsibility  The United States government has a trust or special relationship with Indian tribes. The unique and  11  distinctive political relationship between the United States and Indian Tribes is defined by statutes,  12  executive orders, judicial decisions, and agreements and differentiates tribes from other entities that deal  13  with, or are affected by the Federal government. Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination  14  with Indian Tribal Governments, states that the United States has recognized Indian tribes as domestic  dependent nations under its protection. The Federal government has enacted numerous statutes and  16  promulgated numerous regulations that establish and define a trust relationship with Indian tribes.  17  The relationship has been compared to one existing under common law trust, with the United States as  18  trustee, the Indian tribes or individuals as beneficiaries, and the property and natural resources of the  19  United States as the trust corpus (Cohen 2005; Newton et al. 2005). The trust responsibility has been  interpreted to require Federal agencies to carry out their activities in a manner that is protective of Indian  21  treaty rights. This policy is also reflected in the March 30, 1995, document, Department of Commerce –  22  American Indian and Alaska Native Policy (U. S. Department of Commerce 1995). The Ninth Circuit  23  Court of Appeals has held, however, that “unless there is a specific duty that has been placed on the  24  government with respect to Indians, [the government’s general trust obligation] is discharged by [the  government’s] compliance with general regulations and statutes not specifically aimed at protecting  26  Indian tribes” (Gros Ventre Tribe v. United States, 2006, citing Morongo Band of Mission Indians v.  27  FAA, 1998; United States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation, U.S., 131 S.Ct. 2313, 180 L.Ed.2nd 187, 2011).  28  1.7.9 Tribal Policy for Salmon Hatcheries  29  The Puget Sound Treaty Tribes’ (tribes) Tribal Policy Statement for Salmon Hatcheries in the Face of  Treaty Rights at Risk (NWIFC 2013) was submitted to NMFS and WDFW by the tribes for the purpose  31  of reaffirming “the role salmon and steel head hatcheries play in implementing the treaty right to fish and  32  in recovering salmon populations in the face of continuing loss of salmon habitat by degradation and  1  climate change.” The Policy acknowledges that state and Federal governments historically developed and  2  used hatcheries as a means of mitigating for the loss of habitat and natural production they had permitted.   3  The Policy states that “As long as watersheds, the Salish Sea estuary, and the ocean are unable to  4  maintain self-sustaining salmon populations in sufficient abundance, hatcheries will remain an integral  and indispensable component of salmon management. Hatcheries are necessary for tribes to be able to  6  harvest salmon in their traditional areas to carry out the promises of the treaties fully and meet the  7  requirements of United States vs. Washington and Hoh vs. Baldrige.”  8  1.7.10 Washington State Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive Species Act  9  This EIS will consider the effects of hatchery programs and harvest actions on state endangered,  threatened, and sensitive species. The State of Washington has species of concern listings (Washington  11  Administrative Code Chapters 232-12-014 and 232-12-011) that include all state endangered, threatened,  12  sensitive, and candidate species. These species are managed by WDFW, as needed, to prevent them from  13  becoming endangered, threatened, or sensitive. The state-listed species are identified on WDFW’s  14  website (http://wdfw.wa.gov/conservation/endangered/lists/); the most recent update occurred in  May 2015. The criteria for listing and de-listing, and the requirements for recovery and management  16  plans for these species are provided in WAC Chapter 232-12-297. The state list is separate from the  17  Federal ESA list; the state list includes species status relative to Washington state jurisdiction only.  18  Critical wildlife habitats associated with state or federally listed species are identified in WAC Chapter  19  222-16-080. Species listed under the state endangered, threatened, and sensitive species list are reviewed  in this EIS if actions could affect these species.  21  1.7.11 Hatchery and Fishery Reform Policy  22  WDFW’s Hatchery and Fishery Reform Policy (Policy C-3619) was adopted by the Washington Fish  23  and Wildlife Commission in 2009 (WFWC 2009). It supersedes WDFW’s Wild Salmonid Policy, which  24  was adopted in 1997. Its purpose is to advance the conservation and recovery of wild salmon and  steelhead by promoting and guiding the implementation of hatchery reform. The policy applies to state  26  hatcheries and its intent is to improve hatchery effectiveness, ensure compatibility between hatchery  27  production and salmon recovery plans and rebuilding programs, and support sustainable fisheries.  28  1.7.12 Recovery Plans for Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead  29  Federal recovery plans are in place for the ESA-listed Puget Sound Chinook Salmon (SSPS 2007; 72 Fed.  Reg. 2493, January 19, 2007) and Hood Canal Summer Chum Salmon ESUs (Hood Canal Coordinating  31  Council 2005; 72 Fed. Reg. 29121, May 24, 2007).  Broad partnerships of Federal, state, local, and tribal  32  governments and community organizations collaborated in the development of the two completed salmon  1  recovery plans under Washington’s Salmon Recovery Act.  The comprehensive recovery plans include  2  conservation goals and proposed habitat, hatchery, and harvest actions needed to achieve the conservation  3  goals for each watershed within the geographic boundaries of the two listed ESUs.  Although the Puget  4  Sound Steelhead DPS was listed in 2007, a recovery plan has not yet been completed, but is currently in  the process of assembly. It is projected to be completed in 2017  6  (http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/protected_species/salmon_steelhead/recovery_planning_and_i  7  mplementation/puget_sound/overview_puget_sound_steelhead_recovery_2.html).  8  1.7.13 Federal Wilderness Act  9  The 1964 Wilderness Act directs Federal agencies to manage wilderness so as to preserve its wilderness  character. Lands classified as wilderness through the Wilderness Act may be under the jurisdiction of the  11  U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or the U.S. Bureau of Land  12  Management. With some exceptions, the Wilderness Act prohibits motorized and mechanized vehicles,  13  timber harvest, new grazing and mining activity, or any kind of development. In 1988, Congress  14  designated 95 percent of the Olympic National Park as wilderness under the Wilderness Act. The  Olympic Wilderness Area is under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service.  Some of the Dungeness  16  River basin is within the Olympic Wilderness Area and within the Buckhorn Wilderness Area.  All three  17  forks of the Nooksack River originate in the Mount Baker Wilderness. One tributary of the Stillaguamish  18  River – Boulder River – originates in the Boulder River Wilderness Area. Parts of the Skykomish River  19  originate in the Henry M. Jackson Wilderness Area and the Wild Sky Wilderness Area. Parts of the  Snoqualmie River originate in the Alpine Lakes Wilderness Area.  21  1.8 Organization of this Draft the Final EIS  22  This EIS has been prepared in accordance with NEPA (40 CFR 1500 to 1508) and with the NEPA  23  implementing regulations adopted by NMFS (NOAA 1999). The EIS should be reviewed in conjunction  24  with the co-managers’ HGMPs for the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs  (http://wdfw.wa.gov/hatcheries/hgmp/2012_puget_sound.html), which contain more detailed information  26  and explanations of hatchery programs affecting Puget Sound resources. Links to online sources of  27  information used in the EIS are active at the time of publication; however, NMFS cannot guarantee that  28  they will remain active over time. The contents of this draft EIS are described briefly below:  29   Introductory Materials. Prior to Chapter 1 are a cover sheet, summary, list of acronyms,  glossary of key terms, and table of contents.  1  Chapter 1. This chapter provides the background and context leading to the development of 2 the Proposed Action. It describes the purpose and need for the action; background and 3 decisions to be made; scoping and relevant issues; and the relationship of this action to other 4 plans, regulations, and laws. 5  Chapter 2. This chapter describes each of the alternatives and lists their major components. 6 The No-action Alternative is included, along with four three action alternatives, including the 7 Proposed Action, the Preferred Alternative, and alternatives considered but not analyzed in 8 detail. 9  Chapter 3. This chapter describes the existing environmental setting that would be affected 10 by the alternatives (i.e., existing conditions). It includes subsections on water quantity, 11 salmon and steelhead, wildlife (Southern Resident killer whales), socioeconomics, and 12 environmental justice resources. 13  Chapter 4. This chapter contains a description and analyses of the potential direct and 14 indirect effects of each alternative on the resources identified in Chapter 3. It also compares 15 the action alternatives to the No-action Alternative. 16  Chapter 5. This chapter addresses cumulative impacts, which are the incremental effects of 17 an action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions, regardless of 18 what agency or person undertakes such actions. Climate change is addressed in this chapter. 19  Remaining Material. This material includes a list of references, distribution list, list of 20 preparers, and appendices. 21 1 2 Page Intentionally Left Blank 2 2 ALTERNATIVES INCLUDING THE PROPOSED ACTION 3 This chapter describes the four five alternatives evaluated in this EIS. The alternatives are fully described 4 in this chapter, and their environmental effects are presented in Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences. 5 Specifically, this chapter describes the following: 6  How the alternatives were developed 7  Alternatives that were analyzed in detail 8  Alternatives that were considered but eliminated from detailed analysis 9  A preferred alternative 10  The process for developing a preferred alternative and an environmentally preferred 11 alternative 12 2.1 Development of Alternatives 13 In 2015, NMFS solicited and considered public comment on the development of alternatives for this EIS 14 (Subsection 1.6, Scoping and Relevant Issues). Two workshops were convened by NMFS and included 15 the general public, the co-managers, and NMFS staff to discuss issues associated with possible EIS 16 alternatives. In the Notice of Intent to develop this EIS (80 Fed. Reg. 41011, July 14, 2015), NMFS 17 identified four alternatives for possible analysis: the Proposed Action (NMFS’s approval under the ESA 18 of implementation of the co-managers’ HGMPs), no action (no hatchery releases of early winter 19 steelhead), a 50 percent decrease in number of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead released, and a 20 change in program type such that they would transition to use of locally-returning native steelhead as 21 broodstock. 22 The public scoping process (Subsection 1.6, Scoping and Relevant Issues) identified 11 potential 23 alternatives, including those proposed in the Notice of Intent. Of these 11 alternatives, 4 were found to 24 represent the full range of reasonable alternatives because their components differed meaningfully from 25 the other alternatives analyzed. The three alternatives other than the No-action Alternative met the 1  purpose and need for the Proposed Action. Seven potential alternatives were carefully considered but  2  eliminated from detailed analysis because (1) they are already encompassed by other alternatives  3  analyzed in detail and thus would not provide substantive new information for the decision-maker to  4  consider, or (2) do not meet the purpose and need for the Proposed Action.  Following release of the draft EIS for public comment, NMFS conferred with WDFW regarding concerns  6  about the genetic effects of the Skykomish HGMP on wild steelhead in combination with the genetic  7  effects of Skamania summer steelhead programs in the same basin.  Following that discussion, and  8  discussions between WDFW and the Tulalip Tribes, WDFW submitted a revised Skykomish HGMP  9  proposing lower releases of early winter steelhead smolts in combination with reductions in releases of  summer steelhead.   Consequently, the revised HGMP is now represented in the final EIS in Alternative 5  11  (Subsection 1.1.2, Hatchery Genetic Management Plan Submittal).  The only difference between  12  Alternative 2 and Alternative 5 is that Alternative 5 includes the reductions in releases of early winter  13  steelhead smolts from the Skykomish hatchery program.   14  2.2 Alternatives Analyzed in Detail  Four Five alternatives are considered in this EIS: (1) NMFS would not make a determination under the  16  4(d) Rule (No Action); (2) NMFS would make a determination that the submitted HGMPs meet  17  requirements of the 4(d) Rule (Proposed Action); (3) NMFS would make a determination that revised  18  HGMPs with reduced production levels would meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule (Reduced Production);  19  (4) NMFS would make a determination that revised HGMPs that replace Chambers Creek stock with a  native broodstock meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule (Native Broodstock); and (5) NMFS would make a  21  determination that the submitted and revised HGMPs meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule (Preferred  22  Alternative).  These alternatives are described below.  Production levels under the alternatives are  23  summarized in Table X. Relative to Alternative 2, Alternative 5 reflects a reduced number of early winter  24  steelhead smolt releases for the Skykomish River basin. Monitoring activities would be part of all action  alternatives, and would include, but not be limited to obtaining information on smolt-to-adult survival,  26  fishery contribution, natural-origin and hatchery-origin spawning abundance, juvenile out-migrant  27  abundance and diversity, genetics (DNA) and gene flow (e.g., Anderson et al. 2014), and juvenile and  28  adult fish health when the fish are in the hatchery.  29  Table X. Maximum annual hatchery releases of juvenile steelhead under the alternatives by river basin. River Basin  Alternative 1 (No Action)  Alternative 2 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Dungeness  0  10,000  5,000  10,000  10,000  Nooksack  0  150,000  75,000  150,000  150,000  Stillaguamish  0  130,000  65,000  130,000  130,000  Skykomish  0  256,000  128,000  256,000  167,600  Snoqualmie  0  74,000  37,000  74,000  74,000  Total  0  620,000  310,000  620,000  531,600  3 2.2.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule 2 Source: HGMPs (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e; WDFW 2016). 4 Under this alternative, NMFS would not make a determination under the 4(d) Rule for any of the five 5 HGMPs, and WDFW would discontinue its early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, 6 Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins.  All steelhead currently being raised 7 within the proposed hatchery programs would be killed, and no additional broodstock would be collected. 8 This No-action Alternative represents NMFS’s best estimate of what would happen in the absence of the 9 Proposed Action – a determination that the co-managers’ submitted HGMPs meet requirements of the 10 4(d) Rule.  11 2.2.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet 12 Requirements of the 4(d) Rule 13 Under this alternative, NMFS would make a determination that the HGMPs submitted by the co14 managers meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule. The early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the 15 Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be implemented 16 as described in the five submitted HGMPs (WDFW 2014a, WDFW 2014b, and WDFW 2014c, WDFW 17 2014d, WDFW 2014e).  18 Under Alternative 2, the total annual maximum release level would be 620,000 steelhead yearlings into 19 the following river basins: 20  Dungeness River basin: up to 10,000 steelhead yearlings 21  Nooksack River basin: up to 150,000 steelhead yearlings 22  Stillaguamish River basin: up to 130,000 steelhead yearlings 23  Skykomish River basin: up to 256,000 steelhead yearlings 24  Snoqualmie River basin: up to 74,000 steelhead yearlings 1  The hatchery programs would utilize existing hatchery capacity for operations, and would be adaptively  2  managed over time to incorporate best management practices as new information is available. These may  3  include practices such as reducing release levels during times of extremely poor ocean survival, or  4  developing water re-use or recirculation systems, or contingency plans for hatchery operations at times of  low flow and high water temperature.  6  2.2.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  7  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  8  Under this alternative, WDFW would reduce the number of fish released from each of the five proposed  9  hatchery programs.  Revised HGMPs would be submitted reflecting these reduced production levels, and  NMFS would make a determination that the revised HGMPs meet the requirements of the 4(d) Rule.  11  For the purposes of analysis, NMFS will evaluate a 50 percent reduction from the proposed hatchery  12  program (310,000 steelhead yearlings) because it represents a mid-point between the Proposed Action  13  (Alternative 2) and the No-action Alternative (Alternative 1).  Note that NMFS’s 4(d) regulations do not  14  provide NMFS with the authority to order changes of this magnitude as a condition of approval of the  HGMPs.  NMFS’s 4(d) regulations require NMFS to make a determination that the HGMPs as proposed  16  either meet or do not meet the standards prescribed under Limit 5 and Limit 6 under the 4(d) Rule.   17  Nonetheless, NMFS supports analysis of this alternative to assist with a full understanding of potential  18  effects on the human environment under various management scenarios.  19  2.2.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) -Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that  Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d)  21  Rule  22  Under this alternative, WDFW would change its program management to transition the programs from  23  the current non-native Chambers Creek stock to broodstock derived from fish native to the respective  24  watershed in the project area.  While this could be done in multiple ways, involving different periods of  time and various objectives (e.g., conservation, and later, harvest), for the purpose of this analysis NMFS  26  assumes that use of Chambers Creek stock fish in the broodstock would be terminated immediately.  Fish  27  taken for broodstock would then only be those determined to be native to the given watershed.  It is likely  28  that considerable time would be needed for development and implementation of a native broodstock  29  program after termination of an early winter steelhead program.  Broodstock collection would be contingent upon availability of natural-origin fish, ensuring first that an  31  appropriate minimum number of fish would be able to spawn naturally; after that critical threshold is  32  ensured, then a proportion of additional returns would be taken into the hatchery facilities. Broodstock  1  collection would occur through fish volunteering to the hatcheries, but might also require additional  2  collection methods, including at weirs, via hook and line, or through seining.  The Proportionate Natural  3  Influence (PNI, described in Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks) would be 0.67 or higher, and no more  4  than 10 percent of the naturally spawning fish in the river would be hatchery-origin spawners.  Note that NMFS’s 4(d) regulations do not provide NMFS with the authority to order changes of this  6  magnitude as a condition of approval of the HGMPs.  NMFS’s 4(d) regulations require NMFS to make a  7  determination that the HGMPs as proposed either meet or do not meet the standards prescribed in the  8  rule.  Nonetheless, NMFS supports analysis of this alternative to assist with a full understanding of  9  potential effects on the human environment under various management scenarios.  2.2.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a Revised  11  HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the  12  4(d) Rule  13  Under this alternative, NMFS would make a determination that the HGMPs submitted by the co 14  managers, including the newly revised HGMP for the Skykomish early winter steelhead hatchery  program, meet requirements of the 4(d) Rule. The early winter steelhead hatchery programs proposed in  16  the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be  17  implemented as described in the submitted HGMPs (WDFW 2014a, WDFW 2014b, WDFW 2014c,  18  WDFW 2014e, WDFW 2016). The total annual maximum release level of early winter steelhead into the  19  Skykomish River basin would be up to 167,600 yearlings (WDFW 2016). The difference in early winter  steelhead release levels in the Skykomish River basin described under Alternative 2 (WDFW 2014d),  21  which would be up to 256,000 yearlings, and under this alternative (WDFW 2016), is a result of  22  additional data and analyses of gene flow from hatchery-origin steelhead to natural-origin winter  23  steelhead as described by Unsworth (2016) 1 . Under Alternative 3 (Reduced Production), up to  24  128,000 steelhead yearlings would be released (Table X).  2.3 Alternatives Considered But Not Analyzed in Detail  26  The following additional seven alternatives identified during scoping (Subsection 1.6, Scoping and  27  Relevant Issues), were carefully considered, but NMFS determined that (1) they are already encompassed  28  by other alternatives analyzed in detail and thus would not provide substantive new information for the  29  decision-maker to consider, or (2) do not meet the purpose and need for the Proposed Action  (Subsection 1.3, Purpose of and Need for the Proposed Action).   1 Unsworth (2016) describes proposed releases of up to 167,600 early winter steelhead and up to 116,000 hatchery- origin summer steelhead into the Skykomish River basin.  1    Hatchery programs with greater levels of hatchery production than those proposed – Under  2  this potential alternative, WDFW would revise its HGMPs to incorporate higher production  3  levels than those proposed.  This alternative is not analyzed in detail because higher  4  production levels would be expected to have incrementally higher environmental impacts on  various resources than production levels under the Proposed Action. In addition, analysis of  6  such an alternative would not help inform NMFS’ response to the co-managers’ request for  7  an exemption from ESA take prohibitions under the 4(d) Rule, because the ESA and the  8  4(d) Rule are focused on limiting impacts to listed salmon and steelhead.  9  the purpose and need for the proposed action is for NMFS to respond to the comanagers’  request for approval of the programs under Limit 6 of the 4(d) rule.  Analyzing the effects of  11  production levels higher than what the comanagers have proposed would not inform NMFS’  12  decision, which is to approve or disapprove the proposed programs.  Should the comanagers  13  decide to propose higher production levels at some point in the future, based on new  14  information or circumstances, additional ESA and NEPA review would likely be required.   and thus would not meet the element of the purpose and need regarding compliance with the  16  ESA.  Specifically, a criterion that NMFS considers for approval of an HGMP under the 4(d)  17  Rule is whether the HGMP “evaluates, minimizes, and accounts for the propagation  18  program’s genetic and ecological effects on natural populations . . . .”.  WDFW has submitted  19  HGMPs that it believes “minimize” such effects; presumably programs with greater effects  would not do so. In addition, the increased production levels would require additional  21  capacity and development of additional hatchery facilities, which would not meet the purpose  22  of and need for action, which includes use of existing capacity.  23    Implement all Hatchery Scientific Review Group (HSRG) recommendations – This potential  24  alternative would implement all recommendations made by the HSRG as an action  alternative. The Washington Recreation and Conservation Office (RCO 2014) indicates that  26  continuing and substantial progress has been made in increasing the percentage of WDFW’s  27  Puget Sound steelhead hatchery programs that meet HSRG standards (92 percent of the  28  programs met HSRG standards in 2014). In addition, the co-managers intend to continue to  29  implement HSRG recommendations over time using adaptive management under the  Proposed Action. Thus, this potential alternative will not be analyzed in detail because it  31  would not be substantially different from the Proposed Action.  32    Confine early winter steelhead programs to pHOS less than 2 percent – Included under this  33  potential alternative would be early winter steelhead programs having percentages of  1  hatchery-origin spawners (pHOS) based on census methods demonstrated to be less than  2  2 percent (or pHOS of 5 percent maximum, regardless of effective pHOS). The pHOS metric  3  reflects levels of hatchery-origin spawners in natural spawning areas. The co-managers,  4  especially WDFW as a matter of policy, use pHOS to help keep genetic risks to natural-origin  salmon and steelhead from hatchery programs within acceptable limits. The Proposed Action  6  involves early winter steelhead hatchery programs that already are at or are close to those  7  limits, and also involves rigorous genetic monitoring to detect how well the programs  8  perform in relation to the targeted limits. Therefore, this potential alternative will not be  9  analyzed in detail because it would not be measurably different from the Proposed Action.    Release levels no greater than in recent years – Under this potential alternative, numbers of  11  early winter steelhead released would be no greater than what has occurred in recent years.  12  Release levels under the Proposed Action reflect recent steelhead program reductions and  13  discontinuations. Thus, this potential alternative will not be analyzed in detail because it  14  would not be measurably different from the Proposed Action.    Production levels same as Proposed Action, but suspend releases from programs having the  16  lowest marine survival during periods of extremely low marine survival – Under this  17  potential alternative, early winter steelhead hatchery programs would produce hatchery fish at  18  the same levels as under the Proposed Action; however, in years in which marine survival is  19  extremely low, production would be suspended from programs displaying the poorest marine  survival. Such practices and other best management practices would occur under the  21  Proposed Action. Furthermore, reductions in production levels are analyzed under  22  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production). Therefore, this potential alternative will not be analyzed  23  in detail because it would not be measurably different from other alternatives analyzed in  24  detail.    Maximize recovery potential for listed species – Under this potential alternative, early winter  26  steelhead hatchery programs would be designed to reduce risks to and increase benefits for  27  recovery of listed species. Under the No-action Alternative, early winter steelhead hatchery  28  programs would be terminated, effectively eliminating risks to listed species from the  29  programs. Under Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock), early winter steelhead programs would  be terminated, and new steelhead programs using local, native broodstock would be  31  developed, consistent with the status of the listed natural-origin populations in the respective  32  watershed. These new programs would be carefully implemented and managed under the  33  ESA to minimize risks to the listed hatchery and natural-origin fish, and could contribute to  1  the viability of the local natural-origin steelhead populations. Therefore, this potential  2  alternative will not be analyzed in detail because it would not be measurably different from  3  other alternatives analyzed in detail.  4    Develop plans for water re-use or recirculation, and plan for low flow and high  temperatures – Under this potential alternative, WDFW would revise its HGMPs to address  6  water issues by developing plans for re-use or recirculation, and contingency plans for  7  implementation during periods when flows are especially low, and water temperatures are  8  especially high. Under this potential alternative, these and other best management practices  9  would continue to reduce the risk of negative impacts of the hatchery programs on natural- origin salmon and steelhead populations. NMFS would determine the revised HGMPs meet  11  requirements of the 4(d) Rule.  However, because the HGMPs have already incorporated best  12  management practices identified by independent reviewers, and because the HGMPs allow  13  for incorporation of additional best management practices in the future as a result of  14  monitoring and evaluation activities and adaptive management, this alternative would not be  measurably different from the Proposed Action and will not be analyzed in detail.  16  2.4  Selection of a Preferred Alternative and an Environmentally Preferred Preferable  17  Alternative  18  As explained in Subsection 1.6.6, Future Public Review and Comment, NMFS will review reviewed  19  public comments received on the draft EIS and prepare a to prepare the final EIS. A preferred alternative  has been identified in this final EIS. The agency’s preferred alternative is “the alternative which the  21  agency believes would fulfill its statutory mission and responsibilities, giving consideration to economic,  22  environmental, technical, and other factors” (CEQ 1981).  The preferred alternative may be one of the  23  alternatives or a combination of components of more than one alternative, possibly varying for each  24  hatchery program. Information from the public review process will be was used in choosing a preferred  alternative. As described in Subsection 2.2.5, Preferred Alternative, NMFS has identified Alternative 5 as  26  its preferred alternative because it would meet the components of the purpose and need for this action  27  regarding socioeconomic and cultural benefits to recreational and tribal fishing interests and  28  other biological and physical resources. Further, it has been preliminarily analyzed in two Proposed  29  Evaluation and Pending Determination documents issued by NMFS (80 Fed. Reg. 15985, March 26,  2015; 81 Fed. Reg. 8941, February 23, 2016).  31  NMFS will also identify an environmentally preferred preferable alternative in the ROD. This alternative  32  may or may not be the same as the preferred alternative.  The environmentally preferable alternative is  33  “the alternative that will promote the national environmental policy as expressed in NEPA’s Section 101.  1  Ordinarily, this means the alternative that causes the least damage to the biological and physical  2  environment; it also means the alternative which best protects, preserves, and enhances historic, cultural,  3  and natural resources (CEQ 1981). Under Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock), programs would transition  4  to native broodstock programs, which have the potential to benefit conservation and recovery of listed  5  Puget Sound steelhead, while potentially providing harvest benefits when population sizes are large  6  enough. Therefore, Alternative 4 may be identified as the environmentally preferable alternative in the  7  ROD because it would further reduce environmental effects and contribute to conservation and recovery  8  while contributing to cultural resources associated primarily with recreational and tribal fishing interests.  9  See Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences, for a full analysis of predicted impacts of this alternative on  10  the human environment.  11  1 2 Page Intentionally Left Blank 2 3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 3 Chapter 3, Affected Environment, describes existing conditions for six resources that may be affected by 4 implementation of the EIS alternatives: 5  Water Quantity (Subsection 3.1) 6  Salmon and Steelhead (Subsection 3.2) 7  Other Fish Species (Subsection 3.3) 8  Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale (Subsection 3.4) 9  Socioeconomics (Subsection 3.5) 10  Environmental Justice (Subsection 3.6) 11 No other resources were identified during scoping that would have the potential to be significantly 12 impacted by the Proposed Action or alternatives (Subsection 1.6, Scoping and Relevant Issues). 13 Additionally, a review of available NEPA analyses of salmon and steelhead hatchery programs in Puget 14 Sound watersheds including the Elwha FEA (NMFS 2012), PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a), Elwha 15 FSEA (NMFS 2014b), EWS Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 2015a), and Dungeness Hatcheries DEA (NMFS 16 2015b), suggests that water quality and wildlife (other than Southern Resident killer whale) resources are 17 unlikely to have the potential to be significantly impacted by the Proposed Action or alternatives. 18 Therefore, analyses of water quality and wildlife (other than Southern Resident killer whale) in the above 19 documents are incorporated by reference; thus there are no further analyses in Chapter 3, Affected 20 Environment, and Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences, in this EIS. 21 Existing conditions within the project area include effects of the past and present operation of the early 22 winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and 23 Snoqualmie River basins (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas).  Under existing conditions, the 24 early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and 25 Snoqualmie River basins produce up to 620,000 yearling smolts annually, as follows: 26  Dungeness River basin: up to 10,000 yearlings 27  Nooksack River basin: up to 150,000 yearlings 1  Stillaguamish River basin: up to 130,000 yearlings 2  Skykomish River basin: up to 256,000 yearlings 3  Snoqualmie River basin: up to 74,000 yearlings 4 Since the entry of the Consent Decree in Wild Fish Conservancy v. WDFW (W.D. Wash.) on April 25, 2014, WDFW has not released these early winter steelhead smolts into waters connected to Puget Sound, 6 with the exception of up to 180,000 smolts into the Skykomish River basin.  However, the agreement not 7 to release early winter steelhead smolts expires 2½ years after entry of the decree. 8 Because the Consent Decree applied only to the 2014 and 2015 release years, after many years of 9 operation, the reduced numbers of early winter steelhead released for those 2 years would not be expected to have had a substantial impact on the analysis of the affected environment (i.e., existing environmental 11 conditions). Consequently, existing environmental conditions are described in the context of the releases 12 of salmon and steelhead shown in Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs 13 and Facilities. 14 The alternatives are likely to result in more direct, indirect, and cumulative effects to salmon and steelhead than to other resources. Consequently, this EIS contains more information on salmon and 16 steelhead resources, and early winter hatchery-origin steelhead in particular, than on the other resources 17 analyzed. This is because in contrast to the other resources, effects of the hatchery programs on salmon 18 and steelhead resources under the alternatives would be expected to occur in areas beyond the locations of 19 the hatchery facilities used to produce fish from the hatchery programs. Effects would also be expected to occur in areas farther away, including upstream spawning areas, and marine areas through which juvenile 21 and adult salmon and steelhead pass on their way to and from the ocean. 22 The project area is the geographic area where the Proposed Action would occur (Subsection 1.4, Project 23 and Analysis Areas).  It includes the places where early winter hatchery steelhead would be spawned, 24 incubated, reared, acclimated, released, or harvested in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas).  The analysis 26 area for each resource includes the project area and each of the rivers to its confluence with the Puget 27 Sound as a minimum area, but may include locations beyond the project area to fully analyze effects of 28 various resources under the alternatives. The analysis area for each resource is described in Chapter 3, 29 Affected Environment. 1  The effects of the hatchery programs under current conditions are summarized using the following terms:  2  Undetectable: The impact is not detectable.  3  Negligible: The impact is at the lower levels of detection, and can be either positive or  4  negative.  Low: The impact is slight, but detectable, and can be either positive or negative.  6  Moderate: The impact is readily apparent, and can be either positive or negative.  7  High: The impact is greatly positive or severely negative.  8  3.1 Water Quantity  9  Hatchery programs can affect water quantity when they take water from a well (groundwater) or a  neighboring river or tributary stream (surface water) to use in the hatchery facility for broodstock holding,  11  egg incubation, juvenile rearing, and juvenile acclimation. All water, minus evaporation, that is diverted  12  from a river or taken from a well is discharged into the water course adjacent to the hatchery rearing  13  location after it circulates through the hatchery facility (non-consumptive use1).  When hatchery programs  14  use groundwater (i.e., from wells), they may reduce the amount of water for other users in the same  aquifer. When hatchery programs use surface water, they may lead to dewatering of the stream between  16  the water intake and discharge structures (called the “bypass reach”), which may impact fish and wildlife  17  if migration is impeded or dewatering leads to increased water temperatures.  Generally, water intake and  18  discharge structures are located as closely together as possible to minimize the area of the stream that may  19  be impacted by a water withdrawal. Additional information on water quantity conditions in the analysis  area associated with hatchery programs can be found in Subsection 3.6, Water Quality and Quantity, in  21  the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  22  As shown in Table 1, there are eight hatchery facilities currently used to support the five proposed early  23  winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and  24  Snoqualmie River basins. The early winter steelhead hatchery programs and associated hatchery facilities  are: 26  Dungeness River Program 27 28  Kendall Creek Program 29  Whitehorse Ponds Program 31  Snohomish/Skykomish Program 32 33  Tokul Creek Program Dungeness River Hatchery Hurd Creek Hatchery Kendall Creek Hatchery McKinnon Pond Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery Wallace River Hatchery Reiter Ponds Tokul Creek Hatchery 1 Unless otherwise noted, terms associated with analyses of water quantity (e.g., consumptive, dewater, benefit) are used in the EIS specifically for the purposes of the analysis, and are not intended to be synonymous with similar terms under Washington’s water law (e.g., “consumptive,” “beneficial uses”). 1  Four of the hatchery facilities use surface water exclusively (Dungeness River Hatchery, McKinnon  2  Pond, Wallace River Hatchery, and Reiter Ponds), and four of the hatchery facilities use both  3  groundwater and surface water (Kendall Creek Hatchery, Hurd Creek Hatchery, Whitehorse Ponds  4  Hatchery, and Tokul Creek Hatchery). The description of the existing conditions for water quantity  focuses on water quantity resources at these eight hatchery facilities where the action alternatives would  6  occur.  7  A water right permit from the Washington Department of Ecology (Ecology) is required for all surface  8  water and groundwater withdrawals except, in many cases, those supporting single-family homes.  All  9  waterwells used by hatchery facilities supporting the proposed early winter steelhead hatchery programs  are is permitted by Ecology. Water available for use under water rights permits are maximums. Water that  11  is chronically unused by a permit holder is relinquished, meaning that the quantity of the water right is  12  reduced.  13  Hatchery facilities are typically operated to vary water use throughout the year based on the fish species,  14  fish sizes, and numbers of fish being produced, as well as the volume of water associated with the rearing  facilities being used. Such variations are consistent with the terms of the applicable water rights permits.  16  Surface flows fluctuate seasonally, based on rainfall levels and snowmelt with flows generally highest in  17  winter and spring.  Surface water withdrawal Water needs for the hatchery programs also fluctuate  18  seasonally, with the highest hatchery water withdrawal needs occurring in the late winter and spring  19  months because that is when fish are at their largest size and need high rearing flows for fish health  maintenance.  Hatchery water withdrawal needs for fish rearing are lowest in the late summer months  21  when river flows are at their lowest level. This is because the fish being reared at that time are small and  22  require less water for fish health maintenance than they do during the winter and spring months.  23  Stream gauges are not operated at each facility available adjacent to hatchery points of diversion and  24  return, and thus, surface flow data are not available from each hatchery location.  For the analyses in this  EIS, surrogate surface water source flow data have been used.  Sources for surrogate flow data are from  26  U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) stream gauging stations nearest to each facility in the respective river  27  basins, and for which discharges are available for a time period spanning at least 5 years. These flow data  28  reflect the water in the streams at the locations of measurement. These water quantity data can also be  29  found in Table 4.  Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS 1 Table 4. Water use at the eight hatchery facilities that support five early winter steelhead programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, 2 Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins. Hatchery Facility  Max Ground Water Use (cfs)  Max Surface Water Use  (cfs)  Percent of Hatchery Facility Used to Rear Steelhead (%)1  Max Use of Water to Support Steelhead Programs (cfs)2  Surface Water Source  Annual Surface Water Flow (min/mean/max) (cfs)3  Max Percentage of Water Flow Diverted During Low Flow Conditions (%)4  Dungeness River Hatchery  NA  40.0  5  Surface: 2.0  Dungeness River  Min: 56 Mean: 397 Max: 3,310  3.6  NA  8.5  Surface: 0.4  Canyon Creek  Min: 2 Mean: 8 Max: 2,025  20.0  Hurd Creek Hatchery  5  1.4  19  Ground: 0.95 Surface: 0.26  Hurd Creek  Min: 2 Mean: 5 Max: 2,007  13.0  Kendall Creek Hatchery  27.2  23.8  28  Ground: 7.7 Surface: 6.7  Kendall Creek  Min: 522 Mean: 3,847 Max: 43,700  1.3  McKinnon Pond  NA  2.0  100 from December through February  Surface: 2.0  Peat Bog Creek  Min: 32 Mean: 520 Max: 8,650  0.3 (note that steelhead are not reared in McKinnon Pond during low flow conditions so this is the proportion used during average flow conditions)  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  1.1  5.6  42  Ground: 0.5 Surface: 2.4  Whitehorse Spring Creek  Min: 123 Mean: 1,908 Max: 36,800  1.2  Wallace River Hatchery  NA5  40.0  16  Surface: 6.4  Wallace River  Min: 303 Mean: 3,985 Max: 88,400  0.7  March 2016November 2015 43 Chapter 3 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table 4. Water use at the eight hatchery facilities that support five early winter steelhead programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins. (continued) Hatchery Facility  Max Ground Water Use (cfs)  Max Surface Water Use  (cfs)  Percent of Hatchery Facility Used to Rear Steelhead (%)1  Max Use of Water to Support Steelhead Programs (cfs)2  Surface Water Source  Annual Surface Water Flow (min/mean/max) (cfs)3  Max Percentage of Water Flow Diverted During Low Flow Conditions (%)4  NA  14.0  Surface: 2.2  May Creek  Min: 303 Mean: 3,985 Max: 88,400  1.6  Reiter Ponds  NA  10.0  49  Surface: 4.9  Austin Creek  Min: 303 Mean: 3,985 Max: 88,400  1.6  NA  10.0  Surface: 4.9  Hogarty Creek  Min: 303 Mean: 3,985 Max: 88,400  1.6  Tokul Creek Hatchery  NA  12.0  45  Surface: 5.4  Tokul Creek  Min: 303 Mean: 3,985 Max: 88,400  1.8  6.0  Surface: 2.7  Unnamed spring  0.9  1  Sources: Maximum ground and surface water use levels are from Table 4.1.1 in HGMPs WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e.  2  1 Percentages reflect the percent of the total production (in pounds) comprising steelhead, during times steelhead are reared at each facility.  3  2 Flows to support steelhead are derived from values in the table by multiplying the maximum water use by the percent used to rear steelhead.  4  3 Surface water source and flow data are from USGS stream gauging stations in the respective river basins nearest to each facility, and reporting discharge for a period of record greater than  5  5 years; mean of mean daily flow, minimum of mean daily flow, maximum of mean daily flow for all months. Flow gauging stations are not available at each hatchery facility site.  6  Information on each water source used is as follows. Dungeness River: October through September 5-year (2006-2011) mean, minimum, and maximum flow data for the lower Dungeness  7  River from Washington Department of Ecology (WDOE 2012a) Dungeness River Stream Flow Monitoring Station 18A050, accessible at:  8  https://fortress.wa.gov/ecy/wrx/wrx/flows/station.asp?wria=18#block2 Flow data collection reach is downstream of five irrigation withdrawal points on the river. Additional source of flow  9  data is Elwha Dungeness Planning Unit (EDPU 2005) available at: http://www.clallam.net/environment/elwhadungenesswria.html. Flows presented for the upper Dungeness River are the  10  estimated incremental average annual flows from EDPU (2005).  The Dungeness River Management Team recommended minimum instream flows for the lower Dungeness River at  11  seasonal flow levels recommended by the Dungeness Instream Flow Group (Wampler and Hiss 1991; Hiss 1993): November through March: 575 cfs; April through July: 475 cfs; and  12  August through October: 180 cfs. These minimum flows are not based on seasonal, historical Dungeness River flows, but represent flows required to maintain optimal potential fish habitat  13  area (EDPU 2005). Stream gauge locations by river mile (RM): Nooksack RM 30.9 and Middle Fork Nooksack RM 5.6; North Fork Stillaguamish RM 6.5; Skykomish RM 43.0. Gallons 14  per-minute to cubic-feet-per-second conversion factor: cfs = gpm/7.48/60.  15  4 Percentages are derived by dividing cfs values for maximum use of water for steelhead by the minimum surface water flows.  16  5 NA = not applicable  Chapter 3 44 March 2016November 2015 1  The analysis area for water quantity is the same as the project area (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis  2  Areas). The following sections summarize water withdrawals at the facilities that support the early winter  3  steelhead programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River  4  basins.  Dungeness River Basin: The Dungeness River Hatchery uses surface water exclusively,  6  withdrawn through three water intakes on the Dungeness River and one on Canyon Creek, an  7  adjacent tributary.  The Hurd Creek Hatchery facility uses a combination of groundwater  8  withdrawn from five wells, and surface water withdrawn from Hurd Creek as an emergency back 9  up source.  The Dungeness River Hatchery withdraws up to 2.0 cubic feet per second (cfs) of water from the  11  Dungeness River and up to 0.4 cfs from Canyon Creek to support the Dungeness River early  12  winter steelhead program (Table 4). All water (minus evaporation) is returned to the river after  13  circulating through the hatchery. Water quantity is only affected between the water intake and  14  discharge structures.  Water flows in the Dungeness River average 397 cfs with minimum flows  of 56 cfs. Because the early winter steelhead hatchery program diverts up to 2.0 cfs of water from  16  the Dungeness River, which is 3.6 percent of the water in the Dungeness River during low flow  17  conditions, effects of the water withdrawal are considered low under existing conditions. Water  18  flows in Canyon Creek average 8.0 cfs with minimum flows of 2.0 cfs. Because the early winter  19  steelhead hatchery program diverts up to 0.26 cfs of water, which is 20 percent of the water in  Canyon Creek during low flow conditions, the water withdrawal is assessed as a moderate  21  negative effect under existing conditions.   22  The Hurd Creek Hatchery withdraws up to 0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek and 0.95 cfs from five wells  23  to support the Dungeness River early winter steelhead program (Table 4). All water (minus  24  evaporation) is returned to the creek after circulating through the hatchery.  Water quantity is only  affected between the water intake and discharge structures.  Water flows in Hurd Creek average  26  5.0 cfs with minimum flows of 2.0 cfs.  Because the early winter steelhead hatchery program  27  diverts up to 0.26 cfs of water from Hurd Creek, which is 13 percent of the water in Hurd Creek  28  during low flow conditions, the water withdrawal is assessed as a moderate negative effect under  29  existing conditions.  In addition, the withdrawal of 0.95 cfs of the maximum of 5 cfs that is  permitted from five wells (Table 4) is assessed as a low negative effect on groundwater under  31  existing conditions.  32  Monitoring and measurement of water usage are reported by the applicant in monthly National  33  Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) reports to Ecology.  March 2016November 2015 45 Chapter 3  1  Nooksack River Basin: The Kendall Creek Hatchery uses well and surface water (when  2  available).  The McKinnon Pond uses gravity fed surface water from a stream locally known as  3  "Peat Bog Creek" (WRIA 01.0352).  4  The Kendall Creek Hatchery withdraws up to 6.7 cfs from Kendall Creek and 7.7 cfs from wells  to support the Kendall Creek early winter steelhead program (Table 4).  All water (minus  6  evaporation) is returned to the creek after circulating through the hatchery.  Water quantity is only  7  affected between the water intake and discharge structures.  Water flows in Kendall Creek  8  average 3,847 cfs with minimum flows of 522 cfs.  Because the early winter steelhead hatchery  9  program diverts up to 6.7 cfs of water from Kendall Creek, which is 1.3 percent of the water in  Kendall Creek during low flow conditions, the water withdrawal has a negligible negative effect  11  under existing conditions.  In addition, the withdrawal of 7.7 cfs of the maximum of 27.2 cfs that  12  is permitted (Table 4) is assessed as a low negative effect on groundwater under existing  13  conditions.  14  The McKinnon Pond may withdraw up to 2.0 cfs from Peat Bog Creek from December through  February to rear early winter steelhead (Table 4). Steelhead are not reared in McKinnon Pond  16  during the remainder of the year.  All water (minus evaporation) is returned to the creek after  17  circulating through the rearing pond.  Water quantity is only affected between the water intake  18  and discharge structures. Water flows in Peat Bog Creek average 520 cfs with minimum flows of  19  32 cfs. Because the early winter steelhead hatchery program diverts up to 2.0 cfs of water from  Peat Bog Creek, which is 0.3 percent of the water in Peat Bog Creek during average flow  21  conditions, the water withdrawal is assessed as a negligible negative effect under existing  22  conditions.   23  Monitoring and measurement of water usage are reported by the applicant in monthly NPDES  24  permit reports to Ecology.   Stillaguamish River Basin: Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery uses well and surface water.  The  26  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery withdraws up to 2.4 cfs from Whitehorse Springs Creek and up to  27  0.5 cfs from wells to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table 4).  All water  28  (minus evaporation) is returned to the creek after circulating through the hatchery.  Water  29  quantity is only affected between the water intake and discharge structures.  Water flows in  Whitehorse Springs Creek average 1,908 cfs with minimum flows of 123 cfs.  Because the early  31  winter steelhead hatchery program diverts up to 2.4 cfs of water from Whitehorse Springs Creek,  32  which is 1.2 percent of the water in Whitehorse Springs Creek during low flow conditions, the  33  water withdrawal has a negligible negative effect under existing conditions. In addition, the  Chapter 3 46 March 2016November 2015  1  withdrawal of 0.5 cfs of the maximum of 1.1 cfs that is permitted (Table 4) is assessed as a low  2  negative effect on groundwater under existing conditions.  3  Monitoring and measurement of water usage are reported by the applicant in monthly NPDES  4  permit reports to Ecology.  Skykomish River Basin: The Wallace River Hatchery uses only surface water. The Wallace  6  River Hatchery has two water intake structures, one on the Wallace River and one on May Creek.  7  The Wallace River Hatchery withdraws up to 6.4 cfs from Wallace River and up to 2.2 cfs from  8  May Creek to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table 4). All water (minus  9  evaporation) is returned to the river after circulating through the facilities. Water quantity is only  affected between the water intakes and discharge structures. Water flows in the Wallace River  11  average 3,985 cfs with minimum flows of 303 cfs. Because the early winter steelhead hatchery  12  program diverts up to 6.4 cfs of water from the Wallace River and 2.2 cfs from May Creek, which  13  is 0.7 percent of the water in the Wallace River and 1.6 percent of the water in May Creek during  14  low flow conditions, the water withdrawals are assessed as a negligible negative effect under  existing conditions.   16  Reiter Ponds also has two intakes structures (one on Austin Creek and one on Hogarty Creek).  17  Reiter Ponds withdraws up to 4.9 cfs from Austin Creek and up to 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek to  18  support the early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table 4). All water (minus evaporation) is  19  returned to the creeks after circulating through the facilities. Water quantity is only affected  between the water intakes and discharge structures. Water flows in Austin Creek and Hogarty  21  Creek average 3,985 cfs, with minimum flows of 303 cfs each. Because the Reiter Ponds early  22  winter steelhead hatchery program diverts up to 4.9 cfs of water from each creek, which is 1.6  23  percent of the water in from either Austin Creek and Hogarty Creek during low flow conditions,  24  the water withdrawal is assessed as a negligible negative effect under existing conditions.  Monitoring and measurement of water usage are reported by the applicant in monthly NPDES  26  reports to Ecology.  27  Snoqualmie River Basin: The Tokul Creek Hatchery uses surface water. The Tokul Creek  28  Hatchery withdraws up to 5.4 cfs from Tokul Creek and up to 2.7 cfs from a spring to support the  29  early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table 4).  All water (minus evaporation) is returned to  the creek after circulating through the hatchery.  Water quantity is only affected between the  31  water intake and discharge structures.  Water flows in Tokul Creek average 3,985 cfs with  32  minimum flows of 303 cfs.  Because the early winter steelhead hatchery program diverts up to  March 2016November 2015 47 Chapter 3  1  5.4 cfs of water from Tokul Creek, which is 1.8 percent of the water in Tokul Creek during low  2  flow conditions, the water withdrawal has a negligible negative effect under existing conditions.   3  In addition, the withdrawal of 0.9 cfs is assessed as a negligible negative effect on the spring  4  source under existing conditions.  Monitoring and measurement of water usage are reported by the applicant in monthly NPDES  6  reports to Ecology.  7  3.2 Salmon and Steelhead  8  This subsection describes existing conditions for salmon and steelhead that may be affected by the  9  alternatives, specifically, changes in release numbers and hatchery program type. Information is provided  on the general factors that affect the presence of these species, hatchery production in Puget Sound and its  11  general effects on these species, and existing salmon and steelhead hatchery programs in the river basins  12  associated with the proposed early winter steelhead hatchery programs. Additional information on salmon  13  and steelhead in the analysis area and effects associated with Puget Sound hatchery programs can be  14  found in Subsection 3.2, Fish, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  Since 1991, NMFS has identified two salmon ESUs (Puget Sound Chinook Salmon and Hood Canal  16  Summer Chum Salmon) and one steelhead DPS (Puget Sound Steelhead) in Puget Sound that require  17  protection under the ESA (64 Fed. Reg. 14308, March 24, 1999; 72 Fed. Reg. 26722, May 11, 2007; 76  18  Fed. Reg. 50488, August 5, 2011).  There are four additional non-listed salmon species in Puget Sound  19  (fall chum salmon, pink salmon, sockeye salmon, and coho salmon).  The analysis area for salmon and steelhead includes the geographic area where the Proposed Action  21  would occur (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas), and includes marine areas of Puget Sound  22  (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas). Table 5 summarizes which salmon and steelhead species  23  are found in the analysis area.  24  Critical habitat has been designated for Puget Sound Chinook salmon (70 Fed. Reg. 52630, September 2,  2005) and Hood Canal summer chum salmon (70 Fed. Reg. 52630).  NMFS has proposed designation of  26  critical habitat for Puget Sound steelhead (78 Fed. Reg.  2726, January 14, 2013).  Critical habitat has not  27  been designated for fall chum salmon, pink salmon, and coho salmon because these species are not listed  28  under the ESA.  The analysis area includes critical habitat for Puget Sound Chinook salmon and Hood  29  Canal summer chum salmon and proposed critical habitat for Puget Sound steelhead.  Table 5. A summary of natural-origin salmon and steelhead populations in the analysis area. Species or Stock  Listing Status under ESA  Dungeness River Basin  Nooksack River Basin  Stillaguamish River Basin  Snohomish River Basin  Occurrence in Puget Sound Marine Areas  Spring/Summer Chinook Salmon  Threatened  X  X  X  X  X  Fall Chinook Salmon  Threatened  X  X  X  X  Summer Chum Salmon  Threatened  X  X  Winter Steelhead1  Threatened  X  X  X  X  X  Summer Steelhead  Threatened  X  X  X  X  Fall Chum Salmon  Not listed  X  X  X  X  X  Pink Salmon  Not listed  X  X  X  X  X  Coho Salmon  Not listed  X  X  X  X  X  Sockeye Salmon  Not listed  X  X2  X2  X  2  1 Although populations of steelhead in the Puget Sound DPS include both summer and winter run life history types,  3  the DPS is composed primarily of winter run populations (Myers et al. 2015).  4  2 It is unknown whether the sockeye salmon in the Nooksack and Stillaguamish River basins are self-sustaining  5  riverine stocks or if they represent strays from adjacent watersheds where self-sustaining sockeye populations are  6  present.  7  8  3.2.1 General Factors that Affect the Presence and Abundance of Salmon and Steelhead  9  Although Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead, is focused on the effects of five early winter steelhead  10  hatchery programs on listed and non-listed salmon and steelhead in the analysis area, it is important to  11  recognize that these hatchery programs are but one of a variety of natural and human-caused changes that  12  have and will continue to affect these species.  Some of these changes are briefly described below. These  13  changes have affected the abundance, productivity, diversity, and distribution of salmon and steelhead in  14  Puget Sound. In addition to hatchery programs, previous NMFS salmon status reviews (Myers et al. 1998;  15  Good et al. 2005; Ford 2011; NWFSC 2015), recovery plans (72 Fed. Reg. 2493, January 19, 2007; 72  16  Fed. Reg. 29121, May 24, 2007), and other documents (WSCC 2005), describe a range of past and  17  current factors that have contributed to the decline of salmon and steelhead in Puget Sound, including:  18  Habitat: Freshwater and marine habitats have been modified from development and land use  19  practices related to agriculture, forestry, industry, and residential use.  In streams, these  20  modifications have altered stream hydrology and natural stream channels, reduced riparian cover  21  and large woody debris, increased sedimentation, and increased flooding. In marine areas, these  22  modifications have altered shorelines and reduced the physical and ecological complexity of  March 2016November 2015 49 Chapter 3  1  estuarine areas, therefore compromising areas used for salmon and steelhead feeding, migration,  2  and rearing.  3  Dams and Diversions: Construction of dams, water diversion structures, and hydroelectric  4  operations can block salmon and steelhead migration routes, entrain migrating juveniles, change  5  stream flow patterns, and alter natural water temperature regimes.  6  Predation: Direct and indirect2 predation by native and introduced aquatic, terrestrial, and avian  7  species result in salmon and steelhead mortality.  8  Oceanic Conditions: Broad-scale, cyclic changes in climatic and ocean conditions drive salmon  9  productivity (e.g., El Nio events), and may produce density-dependent3 effects that are important  10  to how and where populations of salmon are sustained over the short and long term (e.g., ISAB  11  2015; NWFSC 2015).  12  Climate Change: Changes in the climate can alter the abundance, productivity, and distribution  13  of salmon and steelhead through changes in water temperatures and seasonal stream flow  14  regimes, which then affect the type and extent of aquatic habitat that is suitable for viable salmon  15  and steelhead (NWFSC 2015).  16  These changes are described in more detail in Subsection 3.2.2, General Factors that Affect the Presence  17  and Abundance of Salmon and Steelhead, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  18  In a review of these and other factors, NMFS concluded that the impacts to salmon and steelhead habitat  19  continue to suppress prospects for recovery of listed natural-origin salmon and steelhead, including  20  current and continuing degradation and loss of habitat essential for their survival and productivity (NMFS  21  2011b). All of the past and current factors as described above have negatively affected salmon and  22  steelhead populations, distribution, and overall survival.  23  The most recent 5-year status review (NWFSC 2015) found that the biological risks faced by the Puget  24  Sound Steelhead DPS have not substantively changed since the listing in 2007, or since the last status  25  review (Ford 2011). NWFSC (2015) noted the recent years when temperatures of marine waters and  26  streams were especially warm and thus, unfavorable for high marine or freshwater survival. Using various  2 Direct predation occurs when a fish is directly consumed by a predator. Indirect predation occurs when a fish is  consumed due to attraction of predators to prey, and can result from hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead releases.  3 In population ecology, density-dependent processes occur when population growth rates are controlled by the  density of a population. Usually, the denser a population is, the greater its mortality. Most density-dependent factors  are biological in nature, such as predation and competition.  Chapter 3 50 March 2016November 2015  1  methods, NWFSC (2015) reviewed the viability (abundance, productivity, diversity, and spatial structure)  2  of the Puget Sound Steelhead DPS and its component population groups and individual populations, and  3  found that none of the natural-origin populations, including those in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  4  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, are currently viable.  3.2.2 Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs  6  3.2.2.1 General Effects of Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs  7  Hatchery programs for salmon and steelhead have the potential to negatively affect natural-origin salmon  8  and steelhead and their habitat through genetic risks, competition and predation, hatchery facility effects,  9  incidental fishing effects, and disease transfer.  The PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) and the Final  Environmental Impact Statement to Inform Columbia River Basin Hatchery Operations and the Funding  11  of Mitchell Act Hatchery Programs – herein referred to as the Mitchell Act Hatcheries FEIS (NMFS  12  2014c), describe in more detail these general mechanisms, and both are incorporated by reference  13  (Subsection 1.1.3, Related National Environmental Policy Act Reviews), to this EIS.   14  Based on a review of hatchery plans currently submitted to NMFS, the co-managers release a total of  about 160 million juvenile hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead into Puget Sound freshwater and marine  16  areas each year, including 47.4 million Chinook salmon, 14.9 million coho salmon, 50 million chum  17  salmon, 4.1 million pink salmon, 42.3 million sockeye salmon, and 1.2 million steelhead (Appendix A,  18  Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and Facilities). This total current release level is  19  similar to the total Puget Sound production level of 147 million salmon and steelhead that was analyzed  in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a). Thus, the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) provides a  21  useful reference describing effects of hatchery production under existing conditions. To the extent that  22  effects identified in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) are greater because the hatchery production  23  levels for some species analyzed were higher than current levels, then the existing conditions used in the  24  PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) support a risk-averse context from which to evaluate the alternatives  in this EIS.  26  The PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) described effects based on production levels of 45.3 million  27  Chinook salmon, 14.6 million coho salmon, 45 million fall chum salmon, 4.5 million pink salmon,  28  35.1 million sockeye salmon, and 2.5 million steelhead (Table 2.4-1 in PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS  29  2014a]). Since the publication of that DEIS, the co-managers have changed production levels in some  hatchery programs. Table Y, shows the differences in production levels between the PS Hatcheries DEIS  31  (NMFS 2014a) and this EIScurrent production levels (Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead  32  Hatchery Programs and Facilities).  1 Table Y. Annual juvenile salmon and steelhead hatchery production (in thousands) as described in the PS 2 Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) and in Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead 3 Hatchery Programs and Facilities, of this EIS. Species  Puget Sound Hatcheries DEIS (% of total)  Appendix A (% of total)  Chinook Salmon  45,317 (31)  47,497 (30)  Coho Salmon  14,592 (10)  14,922 (9)  Steelhead  2,468 (2)  1,243 (1)  Chum Salmon  44,995 (30)  50,025 (31)  Pink Salmon  4,500 (3)  4,100 (3)  Sockeye Salmon  35,125 (24)  42,340 (26)  Total  146,997 (100)  160,127 (100)  4  With only one two exceptions (chum salmon and sockeye salmon), current hatchery releases are lower  5  than (steelhead) or similar towithin the range of releases levels analyzed in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  6  (NMFS 2014a). Lower release levels for steelhead are due primarily to program terminations, whereby  7  the current release level of hatchery-origin steelhead has been reduced from the 2.5-million level analyzed  8  in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) to 1.2 million while still comprising a small percentage (1 to  9  2 percent) of the total salmon and steelhead production in Puget Sound. Current chum salmon release  10  levels are higher than those analyzed in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) because the number of  11  fish released from the Keta Creek hatchery program (Duwamish/Green River), Kendall Creek hatchery  12  program (North Fork Nooksack River), and McKernan hatchery program (Skokomish River) is greater  13  than the release levels analyzed in the PS Hatcheries DEIS. Current sockeye salmon release levels are  14  higher than those analyzed in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) because of increased releases in one  15  of the two sockeye salmon programs in the analysis area – Baker River. In Puget Sound, run size and  16  escapement monitoring indicate that for recent years, hatchery-origin fish make up 76 percent of total  17  adult returns of Chinook salmon, 47 percent of coho salmon, 29 percent of fall chum salmon, 30 percent  18  of sockeye salmon, 2 percent of pink salmon, and an unknown proportion of total steelhead returns (PS  19  Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]).  20  The general mechanisms through which hatchery programs can affect natural-origin salmon and steelhead  21  populations are described in Table 6 below.  These effects are also described in Chapter 3, Affected  Chapter 3  52  March 2016November 2015  1 Environment, and Appendix H, Steelhead Effects Analysis by Basin, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2 2014a). 3 Table 6. General mechanisms through which hatchery programs can affect natural-origin salmon and 4 steelhead populations. Effect Category  Description of Effect  Genetic Risks     Interbreeding with hatchery-origin fish can change the genetic character of the local salmon or steelhead populations. Interbreeding with hatchery-origin fish may reduce the reproductive performance of the local salmon or steelhead populations.  Competition and Predation     Hatchery-origin fish can increase competition for food and space. Hatchery-origin fish can increase predation on natural-origin salmon and steelhead.  Hatchery Facility Effects     Hatchery facilities can reduce water quantity or quality in adjacent streams through water withdrawal and discharge. Weirs for broodstock collection or to control the number of hatchery-origin fish on the spawning grounds can have the following unintentional consequences: o Isolation of formerly connected populations o Limiting or slowing movement of migrating fish species, which may enable poaching or increase predation o Alteration of stream flow o Alteration of streambed and riparian habitat o Alteration of the distribution of spawning within a population o Increased mortality or stress due to capture and handling o Impingement of downstream migrating fish o Forced downstream spawning by fish that do not pass through the weir o Increased straying due to either trapping adults that were not intending to spawn above the weir, or displacing adults into other tributaries  Masking    Hatchery-origin fish can increase the difficulty in determining the status of the natural-origin component of a salmon or steelhead population.  Incidental Fishing Effects    Fisheries targeting hatchery-origin fish have incidental impacts on natural-origin fish.  Disease Transfer    Concentrating salmon and steelhead for rearing in a hatchery facility can lead to an increased risk of carrying fish disease pathogens. When hatchery-origin fish are released from the hatchery facilities, they may increase the disease risk to natural-origin salmon and steelhead.  Mining    Use of natural-origin fish for broodstock can reduce the abundance and spatial structure of the natural-origin population.  Population Viability Benefits       Abundance: Preservation of, and possible increases in, the abundance of a natural-origin fish population resulting from implementation of a hatchery program. Spatial Structure: Preservation or expansion of the spatial structure of a natural-origin fish population resulting from implementation of a hatchery program. Genetic diversity: Retention of within-population genetic diversity of a natural-origin fish population resulting from implementation of a hatchery program. Productivity: Hatchery programs could increase the productivity of a natural-origin population if naturally spawning hatchery-origin fish match natural-origin fish in reproductive fitness and when the natural-origin population’s abundance is low enough to limit natural-origin productivity (i.e., they are having difficulty finding mates).  Nutrient Cycling    Returning hatchery-origin adults can increase the amount of marine-derived nutrients in freshwater systems.  1  3.2.2.2 Existing Conditions and Effects of Current Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs in  2  Puget Sound  3  This subsection provides a summary of the affected environment associated with effects of hatchery  4  programs described in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a). In the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS  2014a), the No-action Alternative identified potential effects to listed and non-listed salmon and steelhead  6  species in Puget Sound from the total number of salmon and winter-run and summer-run steelhead  7  released into the project area at the time of the analysis (Alternative 1 in Table S-4 in PS Hatcheries DEIS  8  [NMFS 2014a]). For the listed Puget Sound Steelhead DPS, that analysis found overall salmon and  9  steelhead production poses a moderate risk and low benefit (Table 3.2-16 in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  [NMFS 2014a]). For the steelhead DPS overall, the competition risk is moderate, genetic risk is low, and  11  hatchery facilities risk (including disease transfer) is low (PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]). Similarly,  12  total salmon and steelhead production poses a moderate risk and low benefit to the listed Puget Sound  13  Chinook salmon ESU. For that ESU overall, the competition risk in freshwater is moderate, predation risk  14  in freshwater (direct and indirect) is high, genetic risk is moderate, and hatchery facilities risk (including  disease transfer) is low (Table 3.2-10 in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]).  16  Updated information on genetic risks (e.g., gene flow) to natural-origin steelhead associated with past  17  practices (prior to the HGMPs associated with the Proposed Action) and as projected based on current  18  practices (current HGMPs) is found in Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks, and Appendix B, Genetic  19  Effects Analysis of Early Winter Steelhead Programs Proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington. Appendix B (see Table B-7) also  21  describes genetic risk from summer steelhead hatchery programs (reflecting past practices) as likely high  22  to natural-origin steelhead populations (for Stillaguamish River winter steelhead), and low to moderate to  23  Skykomish River winter steelhead. Natural-origin summer steelhead in the North Fork Skykomish River  24  and Tolt River are likely offspring of hatchery-origin summer steelhead. Genetic impacts to natural-origin  steelhead from past production of hatchery-origin summer-run steelhead have been measurable, but  26  practices have been recently modified to reduce this effect (Appendix B, Section 2.6).  27  For non-listed natural-origin salmon species (coho salmon, fall chum salmon, pink salmon, and sockeye  28  salmon) in the analysis area, the analyses in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) found overall salmon  29  and steelhead production poses competition, predation (direct and indirect), genetics, and hatchery  facilities and operation risks (Alternative 1 in Table S-4 in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]).  31  As described in Subsection 4.2.8.3, Risks and Benefits (Coho Salmon) in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS  32  2014a), yearling releases of coho salmon, Chinook salmon, and steelhead pose the greatest risk to coho  33  salmon in freshwater from competition and predation, and genetic risks occur when hatchery-origin coho  1  salmon that have been affected by hatchery-influenced selection stray into and spawn with natural-origin  2  coho salmon in natural spawning areas. Hatchery operations risks are not substantial.  3  As described in Subsection 4.2.9.3, Risks and Benefits (Fall Chum Salmon) in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  4  (NMFS 2014a), releases of pink salmon pose competition risks to fall-run chum salmon in marine areas  due to their similar size and spatial and temporal overlap. Predation risks to fall-run chum salmon are  6  greatest in freshwater (and are possible in marine waters) from the larger yearling hatchery-origin  7  Chinook and coho salmon when they overlap in space and time with the smaller fall-run chum. Hatchery  8  operations risks are not substantial.  9  As described in Subsection 4.2.10.3, Risks and Benefits (Pink Salmon) in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  (NMFS 2014a), risks to natural-origin pink salmon from hatchery-origin fish occur primarily from  11  competition with similar-sized hatchery-origin chum salmon in fresh water and adjacent marine waters,  12  and from predation by larger hatchery-origin steelhead, yearling coho salmon, and subyearling and  13  yearling Chinook salmon in freshwater and marine waters. Hatchery operations risks to pink salmon are  14  negligible, because there are few pink salmon hatchery programs in the analysis area.  As described in Subsection 4.2.11.3, Risks and Benefits (Sockeye Salmon) in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  16  (NMFS 2014a), releases of hatchery-origin coho salmon yearlings have the greatest potential to affect  17  similarly sized natural-origin sockeye salmon through competition in marine areas and in rivers and  18  streams below lakes used by juvenile sockeye salmon for migration to marine areas. In addition, releases  19  of larger hatchery-origin steelhead have the greatest potential to impact smaller natural-origin sockeye  salmon through predation in freshwater (in waters below lakes used by juvenile sockeye salmon for  21  migration to marine areas). Hatchery operations risks to sockeye salmon are negligible, because there are  22  only two sockeye salmon hatchery programs in the analysis area.  23  As described in Subsection 2.1.1.2, Competition – Estuarine and Marine Areas, and Subsection 2.1.2.2,  24  Predation – Estuarine and Marine Areas, in Appendix B of the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2104a),  competition and predation from hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead juveniles in estuarine and marine  26  areas can lead to negative impacts on natural-origin fish. Negative impacts on natural-origin fish from  27  competition would be expected to be greatest where preferred food may be limiting (SIWG 1984). In the  28  early marine life stages, when natural-origin fish enter marine waters and fish are concentrated in  29  relatively small areas, food may be in short supply, and competition is most likely to occur. This period is  of especially high concern when hatchery-origin chum salmon and pink salmon compete with natural 31  origin chum salmon and pink salmon for food resources.  1  Predation risks in marine waters were found to be greatest to natural-origin pink salmon, chum salmon,  2  and sockeye salmon from releases of yearling hatchery-origin coho salmon, Chinook salmon, and  3  steelhead (SIWG 1984). Of all the hatchery-origin fish released, the larger Chinook salmon, coho salmon,  4  and steelhead that are released at the yearling life stage have the greatest potential to be predators, and the  smaller natural-origin pink salmon, chum salmon, and sockeye salmon have the greatest potential to be  6  prey (Subsection 2.1.2.2, Predation – Estuarine and Marine Areas, in Appendix B of the PS Hatcheries  7  DEIS [NMFS 2104a]).  8  3.2.2.3 Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  9  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins  The river basins that support the five early winter steelhead programs are also where home to several  11  other hatchery programs are located.  WDFW and three Puget Sound treaty tribes operate 25 additional  12  salmon hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie  13  River basins.   14  Dungeness River Basin Hatchery Programs: There are three additional salmon hatchery  programs in the Dungeness River basin, as described in the Dungeness Hatcheries DEA (NMFS  16  2015b). WDFW, with some funding assistance from the Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, operates  17  three salmon hatchery programs in the Dungeness River basin. Two programs operate for  18  conservation-directed supplementation purposes, and one program produces coho salmon largely  19  to provide fish for harvest.  The Dungeness River hatchery programs are operated to conserve at- risk native salmon populations (Chinook salmon and pink salmon) and partially mitigate for lost  21  natural-origin fish production largely resulting from past and on-going loss and degradation of  22  natural fish habitat, and impending climate change  23  Nooksack River Basin Hatchery Programs: There are 12 additional salmon hatchery programs  24  operating in the Nooksack River basin, of which two are operated cooperatively by WDFW and  the Lummi Nation for stock conservation purposes, with the remainder implemented by WDFW  26  (five programs) and the Lummi Nation (five programs) to provide fish for harvest.  All of the  27  hatchery programs in the Nooksack River basin operate to partially offset natural-origin salmon  28  and steelhead population reductions resulting from past and on-going land-use practices,  29  including forestry and agriculture (SSPS 2005  Stillaguamish River Basin Hatchery Programs: There are four additional salmon hatchery  31  programs in the Stillaguamish River basin. WDFW operates one additional salmon hatchery  32  program (operated jointly with the Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians for conservation purposes), and  33  the Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians operates an additional three programs (one for stock  Chapter 3 56 March 2016November 2015  1  conservation and two for harvest augmentation). These hatchery programs operate in the  2  Stillaguamish River basin to offset existing severe constraints on natural-origin fish production  3  due to poor freshwater habitat conditions (Stillaguamish 2007). WDFW operates one program in  4  the Stillaguamish River basin that produces summer-run steelhead from broodstock that  originated in the Skamania River basin; this is an isolated program that produces fish for harvest.   6  Skykomish River Basin Hatchery Programs: There are six additional hatchery programs  7  operating in the Snohomish/Skykomish River basin. The Tulalip Tribes operate three programs  8  for harvest augmentation, and WDFW operates two programs and one net pen for harvest  9  augmentation. These hatchery programs operate in the Skykomish River basin to offset  constraints on natural-origin fish production due to poor habitat conditions (Tulalip 2012, 2013a,  11  2013b; WDFW 2013a, 2013b, 2013c).  There is one summer-run steelhead hatchery program  12  operated by WDFW in the Skykomish River basin. As with the summer-run program in the  13  Stillaguamish River basin, this program uses Skamania stock to provide fish for harvest.  14  Snoqualmie River Basin Hatchery Programs: No hatchery programs operate in the  Snoqualmie River basin other than the early winter steelhead program at the Tokul Creek  16  Hatchery.  17  Salmon and winter-run and summer-run steelhead hatchery programs and facilities operating throughout  18  the analysis area (including integrated winter-run programs in the Elwha River, Hood Canal, Green River,  19  White River), are described in Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and  Facilities, and their effects on the salmon and steelhead resource are described in Subsection 3.2.2.2,  21  Existing Conditions and Effects of Current Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound.  22  3.2.2.4 Background on Existing Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs  23  Steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound were initiated in the early 1900s to augment harvest  24  opportunity in their respective river basins.  Beginning in 1935 1945, steelhead returning to Chambers  Creek (trapped from February through April) were used to establish a hatchery stock that was  26  subsequently released throughout much of Puget Sound (Crawford 1979), including in the Nooksack  27  (Kendall Creek Hatchery beginning in 1998), Stillaguamish (Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery in 1964), and  28  Dungeness River basins (Dungeness River Hatchery in 1995), Snoqualmie River (Tokul Creek Hatchery  29  in 1951), and Skykomish River basins (Wallace River Hatchery in 1999) (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b;  WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e).  Advances in fish cultural techniques in the 1960s led to  31  further development of the Chambers Creek hatchery-origin stock (also known as the early winter  32  steelhead stock) through broodstock selection and accelerated rearing (Crawford 1979).  Currently, a total  1 of about 1.2 million hatchery-origin winter-run and summer-run steelhead are released into Puget Sound 2 rivers (Table 6; Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and Facilities). 3 The early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, 4 and Snoqualmie River basins are isolated4 hatchery programs that seek to minimize interactions between 5 hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish.  The programs are not designed to augment the abundance of 6 natural spawners and do not contribute to the population viability or recovery of listed steelhead; they are 7 designed to contribute to harvest in their respective river basins while minimizing negative impacts on 8 natural-origin populations. Since Puget Sound steelhead were listed under the ESA, several risk reduction 9 measures have been implemented in early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound (WDFW 10 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e). including: 11  Greater than 50 percent reduction in total number of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead 12 released in the Puget Sound tributaries 13  Greater than 65 percent reduction in the number of early winter steelhead release locations 14  Elimination of cross-basin transfers, off-station releases, and adult recycling 15  Volitional smolt releases to ensure the fish are ready to migrate out of the freshwater system, 16 thus minimizing the amount of time for ecological interactions between hatchery-origin and 17 natural-origin fish 18  Hatchery broodstock collection by January 31 to enhance separation between hatchery-origin 19 steelhead and the later-returning, native natural-origin steelhead populations 20  Genetic monitoring of steelhead 21  Hatchery traps now remain open through March 15 (or later as conditions allow) to provide 22 the opportunity for all adult hatchery-origin fish to return to the hatcheries to reduced straying 23  Eggs are only collected from fish that return to the hatchery to promote fidelity of homing to 24 the hatcheries 4 In an isolated hatchery program the hatchery-origin population is reproductively segregated from the natural-origin population, in particular by using only hatchery fish for broodstock, and other practices. These programs produce fish that are different from local populations. These programs do not contribute to conservation or recovery of populations included in an ESU or DPS. Isolated programs are also called segregated programs. 1  Because of changes such as these, the most recent 5-year status review concluded that the risk posed by  2  steelhead hatchery programs to the DPS has declined since the previous 5-year status review (NWFSC  3  2015).  4  3.2.3 Effects of Current Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs on Salmon and Steelhead  The affected environment associated with the past and current operation of the five early winter steelhead  6  hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins  7  is discussed in Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks, through Subsection 3.2.3.9, Nutrient Cycling.  8  3.2.3.1 Genetic Risks  9  Hatchery-origin steelhead do not interbreed with salmon species and, therefore, do not pose a genetic risk  to natural-origin salmon populations. Consequently, there are no genetic risks to salmon species from  11  early winter steelhead hatchery programs; therefore, genetic risks to salmon are not analyzed in this EIS.  12  Detailed information on genetic risks of early winter steelhead hatchery programs and early summer  13  steelhead (Skamania stock) hatchery programs to natural-origin steelhead can be found in Appendix B,  14  Genetic Effects Analysis of Early Winter Steelhead Programs Proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington. Additional information on genetic  16  risks of hatchery programs to salmon and steelhead can be found in Subsection 2.1.3, Genetics, in  17  Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and Methods, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  18  As described in Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead, the five Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  19  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie early winter steelhead hatchery programs operate as isolated hatchery  programs and produce fish that are derived from Chambers Creek steelhead, a non-local stock whose time  21  of return and spawning has been advanced through fish culture practices (i.e., hatchery-influenced  22  selection, sometimes called domestication).  Although the hatchery-origin steelhead from these five  23  isolated hatchery programs return and spawn earlier than the natural-origin steelhead in the Dungeness,  24  Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, and thus not at the optimal time for  successful reproduction, they may have some success spawning in the wild (e.g., Jones et al. 2015).  In  26  addition, there may be overlap in timing between the latest spawning early winter hatchery-origin  27  steelhead and the earliest spawning winter-run steelhead (Figure 1). For more detail on spawner overlap  28  see Appendix B, Genetic Effects Analysis of Early Winter Steelhead Programs Proposed for the  29  Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington;  Seamons et al. (2012); and McMillan (2015a, 2015b). This potential overlap creates the potential for  31  interbreeding between early winter hatchery-origin steelhead from the proposed five hatchery programs  32  and natural-origin steelhead found in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and  33  Snoqualmie River basins. The traits that are intentionally and inadvertently selected for in the hatchery  34  environment (e.g., early spawnrun timing) make early winter hatchery-origin steelhead ill-suited for  survival and productivity in the natural environment.  Therefore, any successful reproduction of early  March 2016November 2015 59 Chapter 3  1 winter steelhead, especially interbreeding between early winter hatchery-origin steelhead and natural2 origin steelhead, may have affected the genetic integrity and productivity of natural-origin steelhead 3 populations in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins. 5  Figure 1.  Schematic of temporal spawning overlap between early winter hatchery steelhead and  6  natural-origin winter steelhead.  Shape, sizes and placement of curves is conceptual and is not  7  meant to represent any specific situation (Scott and Gill 2008, Fig. 4-7).  1  As described in Subsection 3.2.2.2, Existing Conditions and Effects of Current Salmon and Steelhead  2  Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound, hatchery-origin summer-run steelhead are also released in two of the  3  watersheds where early winter steelhead are released (Stillaguamish and Skykomish River basins), and  4  gene flow from them into the natural-origin winter steelhead populations has occurred (Appendix B,  5  Genetic Effects Analysis of Early Winter Steelhead Programs Proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  6  Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington). Similar to the early winter  7  steelhead hatchery programs, these two summer-run programs produce steelhead solely for harvest, and  8  the broodstock was originally derived from the Skamania River basin.  9  NMFS considered available guidelines in analyzing genetic risks associated with the alternatives. In 2004,  10  the HSRG released its recommendations for hatchery reform (HSRG 2005).  While not addressing the  11  early winter steelhead hatchery programs specifically in their guidelines, the HSRG discussed risks posed  12  by highly diverged hatchery stocks and concluded that “. . . if non-harvested fish spawn naturally, then  13  these isolated programs can impose significant genetic risks to naturally spawning populations. Indeed,  14  any natural spawning by fish from these broodstocks may be considered unacceptable because of the  15  potential genetic impacts on natural populations . . . to minimize these risks, isolated hatchery programs  16  need to be located in areas where virtually all returning adults can be harvested or recaptured, or where  17  natural spawning or ecological interactions with natural-origin fish are considered minimal or  18  inconsequential” (HSRG 2005).  In 2009, the HSRG recommended that primary populations (those of  19  high conservation concern) affected by isolated hatchery programs have a proportion of hatchery-origin  20  spawners (pHOS) of no more than 5 percent (HSRG 2009)5 .  The HSRG recommended that integrated6  21  hatchery programs affecting primary populations have a Proportionate Natural Influence (PNI)7 of 0.67  22  (HSRG 2009). More recently, the HSRG suggested that perhaps pHOS levels should be lower than  5 pHOS is the proportion of natural spawners that consist of hatchery-origin fish, and is a surrogate measure for gene  flow. WDFW has developed two additional methods for directly measuring for gene flow: (1) the Warheit method,  which uses genetic data to estimate proportionate effective hatchery contribution (PEHC) (Warheit 2014a) and (2) a  demographic method, referred to as demographic gene flow (DGF) using the Scott-Gill method (Scott and Gill  2008).  6 The intent of an integrated hatchery program is for the natural environment to drive the adaptation and fitness of a  composite population of fish that spawns both in a hatchery and in the natural environment. Differences between  hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish are minimized, and hatchery-origin fish are integrated with the local  populations included in an ESU or DPS.  7 PNI is a measure of hatchery influence on natural populations that is a function of both the proportion of hatchery- origin spawners spawning in the natural environment (pHOS) and the percent of natural-origin broodstock  incorporated into a hatchery program (pNOB). PNI can also be thought of as a percentage of time all the genes of a  population collectively have spent in the natural environment.  March 2016November 2015 61 Chapter 3  1  5 percent for isolated programs and suggested that an effective pHOS level of 2 percent would be more  2  appropriate for some programs based on their modeling (HSRG 2014).  The distinction between census  3  pHOS (pHOS solely based on the numbers of fish on the spawning grounds) and effective pHOS is that  4  effective pHOS is corrected for the lower reproductive success of hatchery-origin versus natural-origin  fish, so is a better measure of potential gene flow from hatchery programs.  Ideally, effective pHOS  6  equals gene flow. However, because of the unique nature of the early winter steelhead programs, this  7  assumption likely overestimates the effects of gene flow.  Ultimately, the concern with gene flow is that it  8  can reduce the fitness of HxN progeny and the affected naturally spawning population generally. To  9  address the relationship of gene flow to fitness, specifically for the early winter steelhead programs,  NMFS modeled the potential effect of gene flow on the fitness of natural-origin steelhead populations as  11  described in Appendix B, Section 2.1. As a result, based on available information Based on this exercise,  12  NMFS concludes that early winter steelhead isolated programs with a pHOS gene flow of less than 2  13  percent pose a low genetic risk to the fitness of natural-origin steelhead populations (Appendix B, Genetic  14  Effects Analysis of Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs Proposed for the Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington). and iIntegrated  16  programs for steelhead with a PNI of greater than 0.67 are also likely to pose a low genetic risk to natural 17  origin populations. WDFW’s current statewide steelhead management plan is consistent with the HSRG’s  18  recommendations NMFS’ findings for early winter steelhead isolated hatchery programs and states that  19  isolated programs will result in average gene flow levels of less than 2 percent (WDFW 2008) (note that  pHOS is a surrogate metric for gene flow).  This conclusion The target gene flow level in WDFW’s  21  management plan was based on analysis of early winter steelhead programs that used the Ford (2002)  22  model, the same model used to establish the HSRG guidelines.  23  Assessments of steelhead spawning (and pHOS) are difficult because high spring flows and associated  24  turbidity hamper detection of spawners and redds.  Available genetic information has documented  introgression from hatchery-origin to natural-origin steelhead populations in Puget Sound in the past (e.g.,  26  Phelps et al. 1997; Winans et al. 2008; Pflug et al. 2013).  However, currently it appears, based on genetic  27  data (proportionate effective hatchery contribution [PEHC] Warheit Method), that gene flow into the  28  Nooksack, Stillaguamish, and Skykomish basins is under 2 percent (Table 7).  Using another method  29  (demographic gene flow [DGF], referred to as the Scott Gill Method in the draft EIS), based on  demographic information, gene flow into these two three basins and the Dungeness River basin is also  31  estimated to be under 2 percent (Table 7; Table B-6 in Appendix B, Genetic Effects Analysis of Early  32  Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs Proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish,  33  and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington). Using both methods, based on recent past practices (e.g.,  34  the last 5-10 years), gene flow into the Snoqualmie River basin is above 2 percent but below 5 percent.  Therefore, there is a low negative effect to natural-origin steelhead population from early winter steelhead  Chapter 3 62 March 2016November 2015  1  hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, and Skykomish River basins, and a low to  2  moderate negative effect to the natural-origin population in the Snoqualmie River basin.  3  Table 7.  Summary of analyses of gene flow from five Puget Sound early winter steelhead hatchery  4  programs into listed steelhead populations, based on recent past practices (e.g., the last 5-10  5  years).  River Basin  Listed Population1  PEHCWarheit Method (PEHC) (%)  DGFScott_Gill Method (Gene Flow) (%)  Nooksack  Nooksack (W)  10 (0-42)  0.3757 (1.46) - SF Nooksack (S)  0 (0-72)  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish (W)  0 (0-7)  0.501.05 (3.07) -- Deer Creek (S)  0 (0-31)  Canyon Creek (S)  0 (0-52)  Dungeness  Dungeness (S/W)  - 0.3450 (0.82)  Snohomish/Skykomish  Pilchuck (W)  1 (0-162)  0.0 1.211.70 (4.62) - Skykomish (W)  0 (0-20)  North Fork Skykomish (S)  1 (1-3)  Snoqualmie  Snoqualmie (W)  4 (0-12)  3.982.93 (14.91) - Tolt (S)  1 (0-3)  6  Sources: Appendix B; Warheit 2014a; Warheit 2014b; Scott and Gill 2008; Hoffman 2015a; Hoffman 2015b.  7  1 W = winter-run; S = summer-run.  8  3.2.3.2  Competition and Predation  9  Competition and predation between hatchery-origin fish and natural-origin fish may occur in both  10  freshwater and marine areas, as well as between juveniles and adults and between different species of  11  salmon and steelhead. Detailed information on competition and predation risks of hatchery programs to  12  natural-origin salmon and steelhead can be found in Subsection 2.1.1, Competition, and Subsection 2.1.2,  13  Predation, in Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and Methods, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  14  The five Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basin early winter  15  steelhead hatchery programs release steelhead at the yearling smolt stage, and they have the potential to  16  compete with or predate on other salmon and steelhead (Table 8).  1 Table 8. Ecological relationship between hatchery-origin steelhead and natural-origin salmon and 2 steelhead in the analysis area. Species  Ecological Relationship with Hatchery-origin Steelhead  Location of Ecological Interaction  Predator of Hatchery-Origin Steelhead  Competitor with Hatchery-Origin Steelhead  Prey of Hatchery-Origin Steelhead  Freshwater  Estuary  Marine  Spring Chinook Salmon  X  X  X  Fall Chinook Salmon  X  X  X  Unknown  Summer Chum Salmon1  Winter Steelhead  X  X  X  Summer Steelhead  X  X  X  Fall Chum Salmon  X  X  X  Unknown  Pink Salmon  X  X  X  Unknown  Coho Salmon  X  X  X  Sockeye Salmon  X  X  X  Unknown  3  1 No relationships because Dungeness Hatchery steelhead are released after any natural-origin summer chum have emigrated  4  seaward. Summer chum are not present in the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins.  5  When space and/or food are limited, hHatchery-origin steelhead smolts likely compete with natural-origin  6  steelhead, Chinook salmon, and coho salmon smolts in the freshwater and estuary areas (Table 8),  7  because they are a similar size and would likely eat similar prey.  Competition between hatchery-origin  8  steelhead smolts and natural-origin salmon and steelhead smolts is not expected to occur in the marine  9  areas because, once steelhead smolts enter the marine environment, the fish tend to move directly  10  offshore into areas where steelhead are dispersed and not present in numbers that would contribute to  11  density-dependent effects (Hartt and Dell 1986; Light et al. 1989). Recent information indicates steelhead  12  smolts out-migrate promptly through Puget Sound (e.g., Moore et al. 2015).  13  Hatchery-origin steelhead smolts may directly prey upon juvenile natural-origin salmonids at several  14  stages of their life history.  Newly released hatchery-origin smolts have the potential to consume naturally  Chapter 3  64  March 2016November 2015  1  produced fry and fingerlings that are encountered in freshwater during downstream migration.  Some  2  reports suggest that hatchery-origin fish can prey on fish that are up to one half of their length (Pearsons  3  and Fritts 1999; HSRG 2005), but other studies have concluded that salmonid predators prey on fish one  4  third or less of their length (Horner 1978; Hillman and Mullan 1989; Beauchamp 1990; Cannamela 1992;  CBFWA 1996).  Hatchery-origin steelhead that do not emigrate and instead take upstream residence near  6  the point of release (residuals) have the potential to prey on rearing natural-origin juvenile fish over a  7  more prolonged period.  Effects to natural-origin salmon and steelhead from indirect predation may occur  8  when predators are attracted to concentrations of more abundant hatchery-origin fish and consume the  9  less abundant natural-origin fish that are intermingled with the hatchery-origin fish. Due to the relatively  small size and disbursed nature of early winter steelhead smolt releases, the risk of indirect predation to  11  salmon and steelhead from the releases is likely negligible.  12  Therefore, the risk of hatchery-origin steelhead predation on natural-origin juvenile fish in freshwater and  13  the estuary is dependent upon three factors: (1) the hatchery-origin steelheadfish and their potential  14  natural-origin prey must overlap temporally; (2) the hatchery-origin steelheadfish and their prey must  overlap spatially; and (3) the prey should be less than one third of the length of the predatory  16  steelheadfish.  Based on comparative fish sizes and timings, early winter steelhead smolts that would be  17  released through the hatchery programs would have spatial and temporal overlap in freshwater and the  18  estuary with smaller subyearling Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon fry, pink salmon fry, and potentially  19  sockeye salmon fry.  When combined with spatial and temporal overlap, the large average size of the  early winter steelhead smolts poses a risk of predator-prey interactions in freshwater and the estuary for  21  these species and life stages.  It is unknown whether these predation risks continue after the species have  22  emigrated from fresh water and dispersed in marine areas.  The few diet studies that have been conducted  23  in Puget Sound indicate that the predation risk posed by larger hatchery-origin fish to juvenile salmon is  24  low (Buckley 1999; WDFW 2013a). Sharpe et al. (2008) and Naman and Sharpe (2012) found that  hatchery-origin steelhead prey on other juvenile salmonid to a very low degree during their migration  26  seaward. Further, the risks of predation effects are temporary because hatchery-origin steelhead disperse  27  seaward within a few weeks after their release. In summary, pPredation may be low for the following  28  reasons: (1) due to rapid growth, natural-origin salmon are better able to elude predators and are  29  accessible to a smaller proportion of predators due to size alone; (2) because juvenile salmon disperse  soon after entering seawater, they are present in low densities relative to other fish species (e.g., herring);  31  and (3) there has either been learning or selection for some predator avoidance (Cardwell and Fresh  32  1979).  1  3.2.3.3 Hatchery Facility Risks  2  Operating hatchery facilities can impact instream fish habitat in the following ways: (1) reduction in  3  available fish habitat from water withdrawals, (2) operation of instream structures (e.g., water intake  4  structures, fish ladders, and weirs), or (3) maintenance of instream structures (e.g., protecting banks from  erosion or clearing debris from water intake structures).  6  Water withdrawals may affect instream fish habitat if they reduce the amount of water in a river between  7  the hatchery’s water intake and discharge structures.  A full discussion of the effects of water withdrawal  8  can be found in Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity. More detailed information on the risks of salmon and  9  steelhead hatchery facilities on natural-origin salmon and steelhead can be found in Subsection 2.1.4,  Hatchery Facilities and Operations, in Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and Methods, in the PS Hatcheries  11  DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  12  The five early winter steelhead programs (and 25 hatchery programs for salmon, Subsection 3.2.2.3,  13  Salmon Hatchery Programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie  14  River Basins) in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins use  hatchery facilities that have several instream structures such as water intakes, fish ladders, and weirs.  All  16  hatchery intakes on salmon and steelhead streams are screened to prevent fish injury from impingement  17  or permanent removal from streams. NMFS’s screening criteria for water withdrawal devices set forth  18  conservative standards that help minimize the biological risk of harming naturally produced salmonids  19  and other aquatic fauna (NMFS 2011a).  NMFS periodically updates its screening criteria based on best  available science and technology.  Consequently, some hatcheries have water intake screens that do not  21  meet NMFS’s most current screening criteria, although they meet the screening criteria that were in place  22  when the water intake was installed.  Hatchery facilities upgrade their water intake screens as funding  23  becomes available.  24  McKinnon Pond and Tokul Creek Hatchery water intakes are screened consistent with NMFS’s 2011  screening criteria (Table 9).  Hurd Creek Hatchery, Kendall Creek Hatchery, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery,  26  Wallace Hatchery, and Reiter Ponds are screened consistent with older NMFS screening criteria.   27  Screening for the Dungeness River Hatchery’s water intake structures (one on the Dungeness River and  28  one on Canyon Creek) are in compliance with NMFS’s 2011 screening criteria, but are not in compliance  29  with NMFS’s fish passage criteria. The Canyon Creek water intake to the Dungeness River Hatchery is  adjacent to a small dam that until recently completely blocked access to upstream salmon spawning  31  habitat.  WDFW is in the process of correcting fish passage problems at the location of the Dungeness  32  River structure, with plans to complete work in 2017.  The current three structures used to withdraw water  33  from the Dungeness River will be reduced to one structure, which will be passable to upstream and  Chapter 3 66 March 2016November 2015  1  downstream migrating fish (WDFW 2013a).  The water intakes at Dungeness River Hatchery and Hurd  2  Creek Hatchery will be screened and made passable to fish consistent with NMFS’s 2011 criteria by the  3  summer of 2017.  The Kendall Creek Hatchery screens have been identified for replacement but are a  4  lower priority than at other hatcheries, as listed fish do not utilize habitat upstream of the rack on Kendall  5  Creek (WDFW 2014b).  The Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery screen has not been identified for replacement.   6  However, listed fish do not utilize habitat upstream of the water intake structure (WDFW 2014c).  7  Table 9.  Compliance of instream structures at hatchery facilities used for five Puget Sound early  8  winter steelhead hatchery programs with NMFS's screening and fish passage criteria.  Facility  Criteria  Do Water Intake Screens Meet NMFS’ Current Screening Criteria? (NMFS 2011a)  Do Water Intake Screens Meet Older NMFS’ Screening Criteria?  Does the Hatchery Facility Operate Any Weirs?  Are Weirs Compliant with NMFS’ Current Fish passage Criteria? (NMFS 2011a)  Are All Water Intake Structures Compliant With NMFS’ Fish Passage Criteria? (NMFS 2011a)  Dungeness River Hatchery  Yes  NoYes  Yes  Yes  No  Hurd Creek Hatchery  No  Yes  No  N/A  No  Kendall Creek Hatchery  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  McKinnon Pond  Yes  Yes  No  N/A  Yes  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Wallace River Hatchery  No  Yes  Yes  No  No  Reiter Ponds  No  Yes  No  NA  NA  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  No  9  Sources:  WDFW 2013a; WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e.  10  A retrofitted intake at the Wallace River Hatchery has been identified as a high priority and design funds  11  have been secured, but project completion depends on the availability of capital funds (WDFW 2014d).  12  Listed species are not associated with the two water supply streams at Reiter Ponds, so the intake  13  structures do not pose a risk to listed species. The water intake at the Tokul Creek Hatchery poses an  14  upstream migration barrier and does not meet NMFS’s 2011 fish passage criteria. Specific passage  15  improvements in Tokul Creek are aimed at improving passage for adult Chinook salmon above the  16  diversion dam into about 0.55 mile of potential habitat, and to improve fish screening at the water intake.  17  Fish passage improvements are currently in the permitting phase (WDFW 2014e). The U.S. Army Corps  March 2016November 2015  67  Chapter 3  1 of Engineers is the lead agency responsible for NEPA analyses of the potential improvements under the 2 Clean Water Act. 3 The early winter steelhead and salmon hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, 4 Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins use several weirs to collect broodstock and/or manage adult returns.  With the exception of the Tokul Creek Hatchery, all weirs are compliant with NMFS’s 2011 6 criteria for fish passage (Table 9).  A weir is a barrierUnless fish passage is provided, weirs can be 7 barriers to fish movement. The biological risks associated with weirs include the following: 8  Isolation of formerly connected populations 9  Limiting or slowing movement of non-target fish species  Alteration of stream flow 11  Alteration of streambed and riparian habitat 12  Alteration of the distribution of spawning within a population 13  Increased mortality or stress due to capture and handling 14  Impingement of downstream migrating fish  Forced downstream spawning by fish that do not pass through the weir 16  Increased straying due to either trapping adults that were not intending to spawn above the weir, 17 or displacing adults into other tributaries 18 By blocking migration and concentrating salmon and steelhead into a confined area, weirs may also 19 increase predation efficiency of mammalian predators (RIST 2009).  The following summarizes the use of weirs at hatchery facilities that rear early winter steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, 21 Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins. 22 Dungeness River Hatchery: The weir and trap used to collect early winter steelhead as 23 broodstock for the Dungeness River Hatchery program does not present any biological risks to 24 natural fish populations.  Steelhead broodstock are collected as volunteers to Dungeness River Hatchery.  The facility is located away from listed natural-origin salmon and steelhead migration 26 and rearing areas. 27 Hurd Creek Hatchery: No weir operates in conjunction with the early winter steelhead program. 28 Kendall Creek Hatchery: The weirs and trap for adult steelhead broodstock collection at 29 Kendall Creek Hatchery do not affect migration or spatial distribution of natural-origin juvenile and adult Chinook salmon, steelhead, fall chum salmon, and pink salmon because the weirs are 31 removed from migration and rearing areas for these fish species.  Natural-origin coho salmon and 32 sea-run cutthroat trout are encountered at the Kendall Creek weirs. Measures are applied to 1  ensure that any coho salmon and cutthroat trout reaching the first weir and entering the adult  2  collection pond are passed upstream above the second weir without delay to allow the fish to  3  spawn naturally.  Due to large picket spacing that allows unimpeded passage for juvenile fish, the  4  Kendall Creek Hatchery weirs pose no risks to downstream migrating juvenile coho salmon or  5  cutthroat trout.    6  McKinnon Pond: No weir operates in conjunction with the early winter steelhead program.  7  Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery: The weir for adult steelhead broodstock collection at Whitehorse  8  Ponds Hatchery does not affect any natural-origin juvenile and adult salmon and steelhead  9  because it is located in a small, off-channel creek, which is located away from natural-origin  10  salmon and steelhead migration and rearing areas.  11  Wallace River Hatchery: The Wallace River Hatchery uses two water intakes, one in May  12  Creek and another on the Wallace River. An instream trap is located in May Creek, and a weir  13  placed across the Wallace River in early June each year, are used to obtain early winter steelhead  14  broodstock. The weir in the Wallace River is removed around October 1 each year. Chinook  15  salmon are not passed above the May Creek weir, but they are passed above the Wallace River  16  intake and weir.  17  Reiter Ponds: No weir operates in conjunction with the early winter steelhead program.  18  Tokul Creek Hatchery: No weirs are operated in conjunction with the Tokul Creek Hatchery. A  19  trap is used to collect early winter hatchery-origin steelhead broodstock that volunteer to the  20  Tokul Creek Hatchery and does not present any biological risks to natural fish populations.  21  Instream maintenance may include clearing of debris and bedload from hatchery intake screens and fish  22  ladders or protecting banks from erosion.  Instream maintenance such as clearing of debris and bedload  23  from hatchery intake screens and fish ladders or protecting banks from erosion may increase stream  24  sedimentation, but maintenance activities are usually small in scale and duration, and return conditions to  25  what they were when structures were first constructed.  26  3.2.3.4 Masking  27  As described in Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks, although there is some overlap in spawn timing, the  28  spawning time of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead substantially precedes the spawning time of  29  natural-origin winter steelhead (Myers et al. 2015). Historically, it is believed that natural-origin early  30  returning and later returning steelhead spawned in Puget Sound river basins, but the natural-origin early  31  returning component is minimally present currently. Return timing is an aspect of the life history diversity  March 2016November 2015 69 Chapter 3  1  within species that can be important for the long term adaptability and survival in a changing environment  2  (e.g., McElhany et al. 2000; Moore et al. 2014). Spawn timing is another important factor that is related to  3  the overlap between hatchery-origin and natural origin spawners. However, in a In a recent unpublished  4  reports on fish spawning in Skagit River tributaries, McMillan (2015a, 2015b) suggests that overlap may  be greater than indicated by the literature. However, for the purposes of this analysisNMFS carefully  6  reviewed that work and concluded that, due to the separation in spawning timing, NMFS concludes that  7  the negative effect of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead on determining the status of natural-origin  8  steelhead is negligible. The conclusions in McMillan (2015a, 2015b) are based on (1) extrapolations  9  from observations of very limited numbers of fish (e.g., only six natural-origin steelhead during the entire  5-year survey period, with only one unmarked steelhead prior to March), (2) results that are not likely  11  representative of the entire steelhead population, (3) likely errors in redd assignments to species (likely  12  coho salmon and not steelhead), (4) available information from WDFW surveys in the Skagit River basin,  13  and (5) the overlap analysis of Hoffman (2014).  14  3.2.3.5 Incidental Fishing Effects  Fisheries (recreational and tribal) targeting hatchery-origin fish may have incidental impacts on natural 16  origin fish. As described further below, this is because the fisheries targeting hatchery-origin steelhead  17  occur when early returning natural-origin winter steelhead or other salmon species may be present.  18  Information on the risks to natural-origin fish from harvest can be found in Subsection 2.1.5, Harvest  19  Management, in Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and Methods, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  Implementation of mark-selective fishing rules for steelhead began in Puget Sound in the 1990s.   21  Under selective fishing rules, anglers have only been able to retain steelhead with a clipped  22  adipose fin.  One hundred percent of the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead are mass-marked  23  by having their adipose fins removed prior to their release (adipose clipped). This allows for  24  identification of hatchery-origin fish during the fishery and prompt return of natural-origin fish  to the water. Due to use of non-selective gear types (e.g., nets), tribal fisheries have less  26  flexibility than recreational fisheries with respect to minimizing impacts on early returning  27  natural-origin winter steelhead. The fisheries targeting early winter hatchery-origin steelhead  28  generally start in November and end by late February. Cool water temperatures during those  29  months minimize incidental mortality on listed (early returning) natural-origin steelhead that are  caught and released8 . In addition, because the steelhead fisheries targeting early winter hatchery 8 Direct studies on hook and releases mortality of steelhead have not been done in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins. Nelson et al. (2005) showed catch and release mortalities of 1.4 percent to 5.8  percent in 1999 and 2000 respectively on steelhead caught in recreational fisheries on the Chilliwack River in British Columbia.  Chapter 3 70 March 2016November 2015  1  origin steelhead close before most of the natural-origin steelhead arrive, the number of natural 2  origin steelhead that are caught and released would be is low. As discussed in Subsection 3.2.3.4,  3  Masking, there are differences of opinion regarding the extent to which early returning natural 4  origin fish overlap with hatchery-origin early winter steelhead. NMFS feels the overlap is  5  negligible for the reasons discussed previously. However, in recent unpublished reports  6  describing fish spawning in Skagit River tributaries, McMillan (2015) suggests that overlap may  7  be greater. Because of their earlier freshwater migration timing, natural-origin summer steelhead  8  in the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie/Tolt Rivers may be subject to catch and release  9  effects to a greater extent than winter run steelhead9 .  Effects would remain low, however,  10  because of the tendency for summer steelhead to migrate into and hold in upstream areas and  11  tributaries of the watershed where they would be less susceptible to harvest in fisheries targeting  12  early winter steelhead.  13  As described in the PS Hatcheries DEIS, Subsection 3.2.3, General Risks and Benefits of Hatchery  14  Programs to Fish (NMFS 2014a), the effects of fisheries in Puget Sound and its tributaries on listed  15  Chinook salmon, summer-run chum salmon, and steelhead, as well as other listed species are disclosed in  16  the PS Harvest FEIS (NMFS 2004), which is a separate EIS analysis from the PS Hatcheries DEIS  17  (2014a). The impacts are also evaluated in ESA section 7 biological opinions and 4(d) Rule evaluations  18  (e.g., NMFS 2015a), specifically addressing the effects of the fisheries, as opposed to the hatchery  19  programs. NMFS has determined that tribal and state harvest actions in Puget Sound in 2015 would not  20  jeopardize the Puget Sound Steelhead DPS (NMFS 2015a).  Because harvest impacts were previously  21  evaluated in the PS Harvest FEIS (NMFS 2004), the effects of harvest on listed steelhead were not  22  analyzed in further detail in the PS Hatcheries DEIS, or in this early winter steelhead EIS.  23  Prior to the 1990s, hatchery-origin steelhead were not mass-marked with an adipose clip.  Therefore,  24  anglers could not easily differentiate between natural-origin and hatchery-origin steelhead.  During those  This study also showed no indication of increased mortality on fish that had been caught and released multiple times. A hook and-line mortality study conducted in the Samish River on winter-run steelhead also showed similar results, although it indicated  that there may be a negative relationship between a fish being caught in a sport fishery and their survival to out-migration as kelts  (Ashbrook et al. in press). Taylor and Barnhart (1999) determined that summer steelhead caught and released in the Mad and  Trinity Rivers of California had a 9.5 percent mortality rate, with 83 percent of the mortalities occurring at water temperatures of  21°C or greater. Based on best available information, hooking mortality associated with recreational harvest is generally believed  to be less than 10 percent of fish hooked and released.  9 Adults from extant populations of winter steelhead return from December to May, and peak spawning occurs in March through  May. Summer steelhead adults return from May through October and peak spawning occurs the following January to May (Hard  et al. 2007).  March 2016November 2015 71 Chapter 3  1  years, recreational and tribal fisheriesFish managers tried to minimize harvest impacts on natural-origin  2  winter-run steelhead by closing the managing fisheries that targeted earlier arriving hatchery-origin  3  steelhead before the natural-origin winter-run populations arrived.  However, fishermen may have  4  inadvertently harvested the earliest-returning natural-origin steelhead, which may have changed the  overall run timing of the population (i.e., evidence suggests that, historically, the natural-origin winter-run  6  steelhead population had a larger proportion of adult fish returning prior to February [Myers et al. 2015];  7  see also McMillan 2015).  8  Where the status of a natural-origin salmon or steelhead population is healthy enough, catch and release  9  or harvest fishing opportunities for those natural-origin fish may be developed and approved even for  natural-origin populations that are listed as threatened under the ESA. For example, such recreational  11  fisheries have been approved for listed natural-origin coho salmon (NMFS 2009). However, no such  12  circumstances or targeted fisheries currently exist for natural-origin steelhead in Puget Sound, although  13  some interests promote that approach in some cases (e.g., catch and release fishing for natural-origin  14  Skagit River steelhead). Although fisheries managers may consider harvest opportunities for natural- origin steelhead, alternative fishery management scenarios for Puget Sound steelhead are beyond the  16  scope of this EIS and are not analyzed.  17  3.2.3.6 Risk of Disease Transfer  18  Interactions between hatchery-origin fish and natural-origin fish in the environment may result in the  19  transmission of pathogens if either the hatchery-origin or the natural-origin fish are harboring fish disease  (Table 10). This impact may occur in tributary areas where hatchery-origin fish are released and  21  throughout the migration corridor where hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish may interact. As the  22  pathogens responsible for fish diseases are present in both hatchery-origin and natural-origin populations,  23  there is some uncertainty associated with determining the source of the pathogen (Williams and Amend  24  1976; Hastein and Lindstad 1991). Hatchery-origin fish may have an increased risk of carrying fish  disease pathogens because of relatively high rearing densities that increase stress and can lead to greater  26  manifestation and spread of disease within the hatchery-origin population. Consequently, it is possible  27  that the release of hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead may lead to an increase of disease in  28  natural-origin salmon and steelhead populations.  29  Table 10.  Common fish pathogens found in hatchery facilities. Pathogen  Disease  Species Affected  Renibacterium salmoninarum  Bacterial Kidney Disease (BKD)  Chinook salmon, chum salmon, coho salmon, steelhead, and sockeye salmon  Ceratomyxa shasta  Ceratomyxosis  Chinook salmon, steelhead, coho salmon, and chum salmon  Flavobacterium psychrophilum  Coldwater Disease  Chinook salmon, chum salmon, coho salmon, steelhead, and sockeye salmon  Flavobacterium columnare  Columnaris  Chinook salmon, chum salmon, coho salmon, steelhead, and sockeye salmon  Yersinia ruckeri  Enteric Redmouth  Chinook salmon, chum salmon, steelhead, and sockeye salmon  Aermonas salmonicida  Furunculosis  Chinook salmon, chum salmon, coho salmon, steelhead, and sockeye salmon  Infectious hematopoetic necrosis  IHN  Chinook salmon, steelhead, chum salmon, and sockeye salmon  Saprolegnia parasitica  Saprolegniasis  Chinook salmon, coho salmon, steelhead, chum salmon, and sockeye salmon  2  Sources:  IHN database http://gis.nacse.org/ihnv/ ;  3  http://www.nwr.noaa.gov/Salmon-HarvestHatcheries/Hatcheries/Hatchery-Genetic-Mngmnt-Plans.cfm.  4  WDFW’s hatchery facilities are operated in compliance with all applicable fish health guidelines (Pacific  5  Northwest Fish Health Protection Committee 1989; IHOT 1995; WDFW and WWTIT 1998, updated  6  2006).  These fish health guidelines ensure that fish health is monitored, sanitation practices are applied,  7  and hatchery-origin fish are reared and released in healthy conditions.  Pathologists from WDFW’s Fish  8  Health Section monitor hatchery programs monthly (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c;  9  WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e).  Exams performed at each life stage may include tests for virus, bacteria,  10  parasites, or pathological changes.  11  3.2.3.7  Risk of “Mining” Natural-origin Salmon and Steelhead  12  Incorporating natural-origin fish into a hatchery broodstock can reduce the abundance and spatial  13  structure of the natural-origin population, which is commonly referred to as “mining.”  Under existing  14  conditions, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  15  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, there is no risk of “mining,” because the programs do not  16  “mine” the natural-origin populations by incorporating natural-origin fish into their broodstock  17  (Table 11). This risk only applies to hatchery programs that use natural-origin fish for broodstock.  1 Table 11.  Broodstock needs and natural-origin abundance information for five early winter steelhead 2 hatchery programs Puget Sound. River Basin of Hatchery Program  Broodstock Needs  Percentage of Natural-origin Steelhead in Broodstock (%)  Percentage of Hatchery-origin Steelhead in Broodstock (%)  Average Abundance of Natural-origin Winter Steelhead Population  TRT Interim Viable Abundance Target  Dungeness  Up to 30 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  100  487a530a  1,232  Nooksack  Up to 100 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  100  1,760b  11,023  Stillaguami sh  Up to 120 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  100  1,852c  9,559  Skykomish  Up to 300 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  100  1,683d  10,695  Snoqualmi e  Up to 100 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  100  955d  8,370  3  Sources:  WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e; Hard et al. (2015).  4  aAbundance based on average abundance in 2011, and 2013, and 2015. Surveys in 2010, and particularly in 2012,  5  were cut short due to high water levels associated with spring rain and snow runoff; however escapement estimates  6  can be obtained through the use of timing curves from other comparable river systems. The Jamestown S’Klallam  7  Tribe has completed estimates of spawners for the entire season for 2011 and 2013. An estimated 410 fish spawned  8  in 2011, and an estimated 564 fish spawned in 2013 after March 10; and 615 fish spawned in 2015. Prior to 2010,  9  the last escapement estimate for Dungeness winter steelhead was in the 2000/2001 season with an estimated  10  escapement of 183 based on index areas.  11  b Average escapement 2004 through 2012.  12  c Average abundance 2001 through 2012.  13  d Average abundance 2001 through 2013.  14  15  3.2.3.8 Population Viability Benefits  16  Some salmon and steelhead hatchery programs can contribute to the viability of natural-origin  17  populations in terms of their abundance, spatial structure, diversity, and productivity. Hatchery programs  18  may also have negative effects on population viability via mechanisms discussed in Subsection 3.2,  19  Salmon and Steelhead (especially Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks; and Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition  20  and Predation). There are two basic types of hatchery programs (integrated or isolated). Hatchery  21  programs that (1) are reproductively connected (i.e., integrated) with a natural-origin population (if one  22  still exists), (2) promote natural selection over hatchery selection, and (3) contain genetic resources that  23  represent the ecological and genetic diversity of a species, are then included in an ESU or DPS. Only  24  integrated hatchery programs can benefit viability; isolated programs do not benefit viability and may  25  present risks to viability. Detailed information on the population viability benefits of hatchery programs  26  to natural-origin salmon and steelhead can be found in Subsection 2.2.2, Benefits – Viability, in Appendix  27  B, Hatchery Effects and Methods, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  1  3.2.3.9 Nutrient Cycling  2  Hatchery-origin adults that return and spawn naturally can contribute to the amount of marine derived  3  nutrients in freshwater systems. For a review of marine-derived nutrients contributed by salmon and  4  steelhead Puget Sound watersheds, see Subsection 3.2.3.7, Benefits – Marine-derived Nutrients, in the PS  Hatcheries DEIS NMFS (2014a). Compared to other species, the contribution of hatchery-origin steelhead  6  to marine-derived nutrients is negligible, and will not be considered further in this EIS. Information on the  7  marine-derived nutrient benefits of hatchery programs on natural-origin salmon and steelhead can be  8  found in Subsection 2.2.3, Benefits – Marine-derived Nutrients, in Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and  9  Methods, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  3.3 Other Fish Species  11  This subsection describes existing conditions for fish species other than salmon and steelhead that may be  12  affected by the alternatives, specifically, how changes in steelhead release numbers and hatchery program  13  type may affect other fish species. Additional information on other fish species in the analysis area and  14  effects associated with Puget Sound hatchery programs can be found in Subsection 3.2, Fish, in the PS  Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  16  Many fish species other than salmon and steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  17  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins and other adjacent nearshore marine areas have a relationship  18  with steelhead as prey, predators, or competitors (Table 12).  The analysis area for other fish species  19  includes the geographic area where the Proposed Action would occur (Subsection 1.4, Project and  Analysis Areas), and includes marine areas in Puget Sound (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas).  21  The analysis area is not considered as one of the geographical areas occupied by the ESA-listed southern  22  DPS of Pacific eulachon (76 Fed. Reg. 65324, October 20, 2011). Therefore, risks to the species will not  23  be considered further in the EIS.  24  Pacific lamprey and Western brook lamprey are Federal “species of concern” and are Washington State  “monitored species.” In marine areas, several species of rockfish are listed as threatened under the ESA  26  (Table 12).  Pacific herring (a forage fish for salmon and steelhead) is a Federal species of concern and a  27  State candidate species.  All of these species have a range that includes the Dungeness, Nooksack,  28  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins or nearby marine areas.  However, none of these  29  species is located exclusively in these areas, and these areas are generally a very small part of their total  range (e.g., Subsection 3.2, Fish, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]). Therefore, risks to these  31  species from early winter steelhead hatchery programs will not be considered further in the EIS.  32  1 Table 12. Range and status of other fish species that may be affected by five early winter steelhead 2 hatchery programs in Puget Sound. Species  Federal/State Listing Status  Type of Interaction with Salmon and Steelhead1  Bull trout  Federally listed as threatened   Freshwater predator on salmon and steelhead eggs and juveniles   May compete with salmon and steelhead for food  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients  Rainbow trout  Not listed   Predator of salmon and steelhead eggs and fry  Potential prey item for adult salmon and steelhead  May compete with salmon and steelhead for food and space  May interbreed with steelhead  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  Coastal cutthroat trout  Not listed   Predator of salmon and steelhead eggs and fry  Potential prey item for adult salmon and steelhead  May compete with salmon and steelhead for food and space  May interbreed with steelhead  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  Pacific, river, and brook lamprey  Not listed.  Pacific lamprey and river lamprey are federal species of concern, river lamprey is a Washington State candidate species,   Potential prey item for adult salmon and steelhead  May compete with salmon and steelhead for food and space  May be a parasite on salmon and steelhead while in marine waters  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  White sturgeon  Not federally listed   May compete with salmon and steelhead for food  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  Table 12. Range and status of other fish species that may be affected by five early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound. (continued) Species  Federal/State Listing Status  Type of Interaction with Salmon and Steelhead1  Margined  sculpin  WDFW species of concern   Predator on salmon and steelhead eggs and fry  Potential prey item for adult salmon and steelhead  May compete with salmon and steelhead for food and space  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  Umatilla and leopard  dace  Not federally listed, Washington State candidate species   May compete with salmon and steelhead for food  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  Mountain sucker  Not federally listed, Washington State species of concern   Occurs in similar freshwater habitats, but is a bottom feeder and has a different ecological niche  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients provided by hatchery-origin fish  Northern pikeminnow  Not listed   Freshwater predator on salmon and steelhead eggs and juveniles   May compete with salmon and steelhead for food  May benefit from additional marine-derived nutrients  Rockfish  Several species are federally listed as threatened and/or have State Candidate listing 2 status  Predators of juvenile salmon and steelhead  Juveniles are prey for juvenile and adult salmon  May compete with salmon and steelhead for food  Forage fish  Pacific herring is a federal species of concern and a Washington State candidate species   Prey for juvenile and adult salmon and steelhead  May compete with salmon and steelhead for food  1  Sources: Finger 1982; Horner 1978; Krohn 1968; Maret et al 1997; Polacek et al 2006; WDFW 2013b; Beamish 1980.  2  1 Data on interactions specifically between other fish species and hatchery-origin steelhead is limited. Therefore, this table  3  identifies interactions between other fish species and salmon and steelhead in general. In addition, for the purposes of this EIS,  4  the interactions of other fish with hatchery-origin early winter steelhead are assumed to be similar to interactions between other  5  fish and natural-origin steelhead.  6  2 Georgia Basin bocaccio DPS (Sebastes paucispinis) -Federally listed as endangered and state candidate species; Georgia Basin  7  yelloweye rockfish DPS (S. ruberrimus) -Federally listed as threatened and state candidate species; Georgia Basin canary  8  rockfish DPS (S. pinniger) -Federally listed as threatened and state candidate species; Black, brown, China, copper, green 9  striped, quillback, red-stripe, tiger, and widow rockfish are state candidate species.  March 2016November 2015  77  Chapter 3  1  In addition to Chinook salmon and steelhead, bull trout in the project area are also listed as a threatened  2  fish species under the ESA.  Bull trout in the five river basins are comprised of populations that are  3  included as part of the “core areas” for the listed Puget Sound/Washington Coastal bull trout DPS:  4  Dungeness River, Snohomish/Skykomish River, Stillaguamish River, and Nooksack River (USFWS  2004).   6  Under existing conditions, bull trout may be affected by the early winter steelhead hatchery programs  7  primarily through facility operations (water intakes) (Subsection 3.2.8, Washington Coastal-Puget Sound  8  Bull Trout DPS in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a], and Subsection 3.4, Washington Coastal 9  Puget Sound Bull Trout in Appendix B of the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]).  Adverse effects on  the listed Puget Sound/Washington Coastal bull trout DPS or its four component populations in the  11  analysis area are negligible to low under existing conditions, for the following reasons: (1) bull trout  12  would largely benefit from hatchery-origin steelhead releases because they may eat juvenile steelhead;  13  (2) few bull trout would be expected to be intercepted at hatchery weirs and during in-river broodstock  14  collection activities because primary spawning and rearing habitat for bull trout is well away from  hatchery operations; and (3) bull trout in some areas (e.g., Snohomish River basin) are lake dwellers.  16  Overall, as described in other environmental analyses of Puget Sound hatchery programs (e.g,,  17  Subsection 3.2, Fish, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]; and Dungeness Hatcheries DEA [NMFS  18  2015b]), under existing conditions the effects of steelhead on other fish species (freshwater species,  19  including bull trout) in the analysis area are considered low or negligible.  3.4 Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale  21  This subsection describes existing conditions for wildlife.  It is narrowed to a discussion of Southern  22  Resident killer whales that may be affected by the alternatives (Subsection 3, Affected Environment  23  [introduction]), specifically, how changes in steelhead release numbers and hatchery program type may  24  affect this species. Additional information on other wildlife species in the analysis area and effects  associated with Puget Sound hatchery programs can be found in Subsection 3.5, Wildlife, in the PS  26  Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a), which reviewed extensive information on other wildlife species in the  27  analysis area and effects associated with Puget Sound hatchery programs and found that effects on most  28  wildlife species were not substantial.  29  Hatchery operations have the potential to affect wildlife by changing the total abundance of salmon and  steelhead prey or predators in aquatic and marine environments. Many wildlife species consume salmon  31  and steelhead, which may benefit their survival and productivity through the nourishment provided.  Chapter 3 78 March 2016November 2015  1  Increases or decreases in the abundance of juvenile and adult steelhead in the river basins associated with  2  the early winter steelhead hatchery operations may, therefore, affect the viability of wildlife species that  3  prey on these steelhead. In general, hatcheries could affect wildlife through transfer of toxic contaminants  4  from hatchery-origin fish to wildlife, the operation of weirs (which could block or entrap wildlife, or  conversely, make salmon and steelhead easier to catch through their corralling effect), or predator control  6  programs (which may harass or kill wildlife preying on juvenile salmon at hatchery facilities).   7  The analysis area for wildlife resources includes the geographic area where the Proposed Action would  8  occur (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas), including marine areas in Puget Sound  9  (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas). The analysis area supports a variety of birds, large and  small mammals, amphibians, marine mammals, and freshwater and marine invertebrates that may eat or  11  be eaten by steelhead as described in Subsection 3.5, Wildlife, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a).  12  The PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) found that effects of salmon and steelhead hatchery programs on  13  wildlife species are generally negligible, and wildlife species in the analysis area would continue to  14  occupy their existing habitats in similar abundances and feed on a variety of prey, including salmon and  steelhead.  16  Six wildlife species occur in the analysis area that are federally listed as endangered or threatened under  17  the ESA. Four of the species (spotted owl, Canada lynx, grizzly bear, and humpback whale) have little to  18  no relationship with salmon and steelhead in the wildlife analysis area, or with salmon and steelhead  19  hatcheries and for whom impacts associated with the alternatives would be negligible (Subsection 3.5.3.1,  ESA-listed Species, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]). Of the remaining listed species  21  (Southern Resident killer whale and marbled murrelet), effects of salmon and steelhead hatchery  22  programs would be expected to be negligible. However, although effects on Southern Resident killer  23  whales are expected to be negligible (Subsection 3.5, Wildlife, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS  24  2014a]) in the wildlife analysis area and, they are analyzed in this EIS because of their special interest to  the public.  26  The Southern Resident killer whale is listed under the ESA as endangered and is present in marine areas  27  in the analysis area. As described in Subsection 3.5.3.1.1, Killer Whale, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  28  (NMFS 2014a) and references therein, Southern Resident killer whales’ primary prey in inland marine  29  waters during the summer months is Chinook salmon (e.g., Ford et al. 2016), even when other salmon  species are more abundant. Chum salmon are more important in their diet in inland waters in the fall.  31  There is no evidence that Southern Resident killer whales distinguish between hatchery-origin and  1  natural-origin salmon. Adults from hatchery releases have partially compensated for declines in natural 2  origin salmon and may have benefited Southern Resident killer whales.  3  Other salmon and steelhead are also prey items during specific times of the year, but at much less  4  frequency than would be expected based on their relative abundances. Early winter steelhead likely have a  negligible positive effect on the diet of Southern Resident killer whales under existing conditions because  6  early winter hatchery-origin steelhead comprise a very small part of the food base provided by total  7  number of juvenile and adult hatchery-origin and natural-origin salmon (especially Chinook salmon) and  8  steelhead available from throughout the greater Puget Sound, the Strait of Georgia, and Pacific Coast area  9  (Subsection 3.5.3.1.1, Killer Whale, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]).  3.5 Socioeconomics  11  Socioeconomics is the study of the relationship between economics and social interactions with affected  12  regions, communities, and user groups.  In addition to providing fish for harvest, hatchery programs  13  directly affect socioeconomic conditions in regions where the hatchery facilities operate.  Hatchery  14  facilities generate economic activity (personal income and jobs) by providing employment opportunities  and through local procurement of goods and services for hatchery operations (e.g., fish food). Described  16  in this subsection are socioeconomic conditions associated with early winter steelhead hatchery programs  17  located in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins (Table 1),  18  including hatchery employment, program costs and expenditures; regional economic values associated  19  with recreational fisheries supported by the hatchery programs (determined by angling effort and harvest);  and communities affected by hatchery operations and steelhead fisheries.  21  Recreational fishing for steelhead in the State of Washington is very popular. Since the early 1990s,  22  recreational harvest of steelhead in Puget Sound rivers has been confined to hatchery-origin steelhead,  23  resulting from the implementation of conservation measures to protect natural-origin steelhead by  24  allowing retention of only hatchery-origin steelhead. As described in Subsection 3.3.2.6, Steelhead  Fisheries, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a), steelhead fisheries in Puget Sound target hatchery  26  production, which includes (primarily early winter steelhead), with the exception of hatchery-origin  27  summer-run steelhead and, in the Stillaguamish River and Snohomish River systems, also includes  28  hatchery-origin summer run steelhead. As described in Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental Fishing Effects, the  29  run timing of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead tends to be earlier than natural-origin winter  steelhead, enabling fisheries to target hatchery-origin fish with low incidental mortality to natural-origin  31  winter steelhead. Recreational fishing for steelhead also involves anglers that prefer to catch and release  1 fish, rather than to retain them, but estimates of the level of this activity are not available for Puget Sound, 2 and would not be expected to change under the alternatives. 3 The analysis area for socioeconomics includes the geographic area where the Proposed Action would 4 occur (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas), and includes Clallam, Whatcom, Snohomish, and King Counties. These are the counties containing the communities that are primarily affected by fisheries 6 targeting early winter steelhead produced in the five hatchery programs.  Additional information on the 7 socioeconomic methods can be found in Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods. 8 3.5.1 Hatchery Operations 9 The contribution of the five hatchery programs to local and regional economies includes direct employment, operation and maintenance costs, and direct hatchery expenditures. The total number of full11 time equivalent (FTE) jobs associated with the eight hatchery facilities used to support the five early 12 winter steelhead programs is 19.3 (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c;WDFW 2014d; 13 WDFW 2014e). The number of FTEs associated with the five early winter steelhead programs by 14 hatchery facility is: Dungeness River Program 16  Dungeness River Hatchery: 3.0 FTEs 17  Hurd Creek Hatchery: 2.5 FTEs 18 Kendall Creek Program 19  Kendall Creek Hatchery and McKinnon Pond: 4.3 FTEs Whitehorse Ponds Program 21  Whitehorse Ponds: 2.1 FTEs 22 Snohomish/Skykomish Program 23  Wallace Hatchery: 3.5 FTEs 24  Reiter Ponds: 1.5 FTEs Tokul Creek Program 26  Tokul Creek Hatchery: 2.4 FTEs 27 Annual operations and maintenance expenditures for the eight facilities are estimated to cost a total of 28 $2.02 million (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e).  These 29 expenditures provide economic benefits to local economies, particularly small communities with commercial businesses in close proximity to the hatcheries. The economies of the following small communities in the analysis area are believed to be particularly affected by early winter steelhead 2 hatchery operations in each basin: 3  Dungeness River basin: 4  Nooksack River basin:  Stillaguamish River basin: 6 7  Snohomish/Skykomish River basin: 8  Snoqualmie River basin: 9 Sequim (Clallam County) Bellingham and Ferndale (Whatcom County) Stanwood, Arlington, and Darrington  (Snohomish County) Snohomish, Monroe, and Sultan (Snohomish County) Monroe, Duvall, Carnation, and Fall City (King County) Direct hatchery-related expenditures for labor and procurement of supplies also generate economic  11  activity, both locally (near where the hatcheries operate) and in more distant areas where more goods and  12  services are available.  Personal income directly and indirectly attributable to hatchery operations at the  13  eight hatchery facilities currently totals about $1.77 million annually. Of this total personal income, early  14  winter steelhead hatchery programs account for $496,000, or 28 percent of the total, representing a low  positive impact in the analysis area. This personal income not only affects the communities identified  16  above, but other communities in the analysis area as well.  17  The expenditures to produce hatchery-origin juveniles that are released from early winter steelhead  18  hatchery programs account for the costs of production, but do not describe the extent to which fish from  19  each program contribute as fish that return as adults for harvest purposes. Producing fish that contribute to  harvest is the goal of the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs (Subsection 3.2.2.4, Background  21  on Existing Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs). Survival of juveniles to the adult return stage  22  may vary for each program. Based on the numbers of hatchery-origin adults that return from the five  23  hatchery programs, WDFW (2009) estimated the cost of each adult fish to be $84 per fish for the  24  Dungeness program (releases from Dungeness Hatchery and Hurd Creek Hatchery), $286 per fish for the  Nooksack program (releases from Kendall Creek Hatchery), $92 per fish for the Stillaguamish program  26  (releases from Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery), $40 per fish for the Skykomish program (releases from  27  Wallace River Hatchery), $18 per fish for releases from Reiter Ponds, and $53 per fish for the  28  Snoqualmie program (releases from Tokul Creek Hatchery). However, because these costs per adult  29  values would be the same under the alternatives, this information is not analyzed further in the EIS.  3.5.2 Fisheries  31  In addition to the economic benefits of hatchery operations to local and regional economies, steelhead  32  produced from the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs contribute to recreational, and tribal  Chapter 3 82 March 2016November 2015  1  commercial and ceremonial and subsistence fisheries in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  2  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins. The Skykomish River and Snoqualmie River are major  3  tributaries in the Snohomish River basin, and releases of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead from the  4  hatchery programs in the Skykomish and Snoqualmie River basins also contribute to harvest and related  5  benefits of downstream fisheries in the Snohomish River. In total, hatchery programs in the five river  6  basins produce about 50 percent of the hatchery-origin winter and summer steelhead released into Puget  7  Sound rivers annually for the purposes of augmenting fisheries harvests10, including recreational fisheries  8  and tribal commercial and ceremonial and subsistence fisheries. There is no non-tribal commercial  9  harvest of steelhead.  10  Based on estimates of harvest from the 2004 to 2005 through 2013 to 2014 steelhead fishing seasons from  11  the WDFW Sport Catch Reports (Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods), production of early winter  12  steelhead from the five programs is estimated to support, on average, an annual recreational harvest of  13  4,412 adult hatchery-origin fish.  Of this total, average harvest includes 42 fish in the Dungeness River  14  basin, 143 fish in the Nooksack River basin, 404 fish in the Stillaguamish River basin, 2,226 fish in the  15  Skykomish River basin, and 1,597 fish in the Snoqualmie River basin (Appendix C, Socioeconomics  16  Methods). As indicated above, early winter steelhead hatchery production also supports limited tribal  17  fisheries, providing a small number of steelhead for commercial and ceremonial and subsistence harvests.   18  Tribes that benefit from this production include the Lummi Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe  19  of Indians Tribe, Tulalip Tribes, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower  20  Elwha Klallam Tribe.  21  Fisheries supported by the five hatchery programs contribute to local economies through the purchase of  22  goods and supplies associated with fishing, and by the retention of local services such as outfitter and  23  guiding services.  For example, supplies needed for fishing include fishing gear and camping equipment;  24  the purchase of travel-related goods and services includes food and drinks, fuel, and miscellaneous retail  25  goods at local businesses.  Angler expenditures on fishing-related goods and services would be expected  26  to contribute to both local and non-local businesses (from expenditures by out-of-area visitors); however,  10 The early winter steelhead programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins produce up to 620,000 fish annually for harvest augmentation purposes. The total number of steelhead released for harvest augmentation purposes in all Puget Sound tributaries is about 1,243,000 (including early winter steelhead, summer steelhead, and integrated winter steelhead) (Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs and Facilities). 1  it is uncertain how dependent these businesses are on fishing-related expenditures, specifically those  2  related to steelhead fishing.   3  Recreational fishing effort for early winter hatchery-origin steelhead in the five river basins is estimated  4  at about 78,400 angler trips. This estimate is based on an average catch per unit of effort of 17.77 trips per  fish caught (Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods).  Based on an average regional economic impact  6  factor of $67.30 per angler trip, current production from early winter steelhead hatchery programs is  7  estimated to generate about $5.3 million annually in regional economic income.  8  Salmon (and steelhead) fishing has been a focus for tribal economies, cultures, lifestyles, and identities  9  for over 1,000 years many millennia (Gunther 1950; Stein 2000).  Beyond generating jobs and income for  contemporary commercial tribal fishers, salmon and steelhead are regularly eaten by individuals and  11  families, and are served at gatherings of elders at traditional dinners and other ceremonies.  To Native  12  American tribes, salmon and steelhead are a core symbol of tribal and individual identity (Stay 2012;  13  NWIFC 2013).  The survival and well-being of salmon and steelhead are seen as extricable linked to the  14  survival and well-being of Indian people and their cultures (Meyer Resources Inc. 1999).  Salmon and  steelhead evoke sharing, gifts from nature, responsibility to the resource, and connection to land and  16  water.   17  Puget Sound treaty tribes use salmon and steelhead in various ways, including personal and family  18  consumption, informal and formal distribution and community sharing, and ceremonial uses (Amoss  19  1987). As noted in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a) tribal commercial incidental steelhead harvest  averaged 604 fish from 2002 to 2006 (range 260 to 787 fish). Most tribal steelhead fisheries occur in  21  freshwater areas. Tribal fishers also harvest some steelhead in commercial, ceremonial, and subsistence  22  fisheries (primarily using set nets). Therefore, for the purposes of this analysis, early winter steelhead  23  hatchery programs are assumed to have a moderate positive effect on affected tribes.  24  Overall, considering the socioeconomic values from hatchery operations and fishing activities associated  with the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs, for the purposes of this analysis NMFS concludes  26  the hatchery programs have a moderate positive effect on socioeconomic conditions in the analysis area.  27  This is because the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs support an estimated 78,400 angler trips  28  and are estimated to generate a total $5.8 million ($496,000 in income from hatchery operations, and  29  $5.3 million from recreational fishing) to persons and businesses in the analysis area annually. Most of  the personal income benefits would be expected to occur in or near the 13 communities within the four  31  counties identified in Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations, where most of the affected fisheries occur  1 and where the hatchery facilities are located. The positive effects of angler spending and hatchery 2 operations occur throughout Clallam, Whatcom, Snohomish, and King Counties where the hatchery 3 facilities and fisheries are located, but are likely most substantial in Snohomish County where 41 percent 4 of the production of early winter steelhead occurs (a total of 256,000 of 620,000 fish produced at Wallace 5 Hatchery and Reiter Ponds). 6 3.6 Environmental Justice 7 This subsection was prepared in compliance with Presidential Executive Order 12898, Federal Actions to 8 Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations (EO 12898), dated 9 February 11, 1994, and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 10 Executive Order 12898 (see 59 Fed. Reg. 7629, February 16, 1994) states that Federal agencies shall 11 identify and address, as appropriate “…disproportionately high and adverse human health or 12 environmental effects of [their] programs, policies and activities on minority populations and low-income 13 populations….” While there are many economic, social, and cultural elements that influence the viability 14 and location of such populations and their communities, certainly the development, implementation and 15 enforcement of environmental laws, regulations and policies can have impacts. Therefore, Federal 16 agencies, including NMFS, must ensure fair treatment, equal protection, and meaningful involvement for 17 minority populations and low-income populations as they develop and apply the laws under their 18 jurisdiction. 19 Both EO 12898 and Title VI address persons belonging to the following target populations: 20  Minority – all people of the following origins: Black, Asian, American Indian and Alaskan 21 Native, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and Hispanic11 22  Low income – persons whose household income is at or below the U.S. Department of Health 23 and Human Services poverty guidelines. 24 Definitions of minority and low income areas were established on the basis of the Council on 25 Environmental Quality’s (CEQ’s) Environmental Justice Guidance under the National Environmental 26 Policy Act of December 10, 1997.  CEQ’s Guidance states that “minority populations should be identified 27 where either (a) the minority population of the affected area exceeds 50 percent or (b) the population 28 percentage of the affected area is meaningfully greater than the minority population percentage in the 11 Hispanic is an ethnic and cultural identity and is not the same as race. 1  general population or other appropriate unit of geographical analysis.” The CEQ further adds that  2  “[t]he selection of the appropriate unit of geographical analysis may be a governing body’s jurisdiction, a  3  neighborhood, a census tract, or other similar unit that is chosen so as not to artificially dilute or inflate  4  the affected minority population.”  The CEQ guidelines do not specifically state the percentage considered meaningful in the case of low 6  income populations. For this EIS, the assumptions set forth in the CEQ guidelines for identifying and  7  evaluating impacts on minority populations are used to identify and evaluate impacts on low-income  8  populations. More specifically, potential environmental justice impacts are assumed to occur in an area if  9  the percentages of minorities and percentage below poverty level are markedly greater than the  percentages of minorities and percentage below poverty level in their state as a whole (i.e., Washington).  11  Similarly, potential environmental justice impacts are assumed to occur in an area if the per capita income  12  is markedly less than the per capita income for the state as a whole.  13  The analysis area for environmental justice is the same as for socioeconomics and includes the geographic  14  area where the Proposed Action would occur (Subsection 1.4, Project and Analysis Areas), including the  geographic areas of Clallam, Whatcom, Snohomish, and King Counties. The early winter steelhead  16  hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins  17  raise and release fish in Clallam, Whatcom, Snohomish, and King Counties. These are also the counties  18  that are primarily affected by fisheries targeting early winter steelhead produced in these hatchery  19  programs.  Clallam and Whatcom Counties are environmental justice communities of concern because 5.5 percent of  21  the population of Clallam County and 3.1 percent of the population of Whatcom County is American  22  Indian/Alaskan Native compared to 1.8 percent for the state as a whole (Table 13). In addition, the per  23  capita income is $25,865 for Clallam County and $26,530 for Whatcom County, which is meaningfully  24  less than the per capita income of $30,742 for the state as a whole (Table 13). Whatcom County’s poverty  level (16.4 percent of the population) also meaningfully exceeds the poverty level of the state as a whole  26  (13.4 percent of the population) (Table 13).  27  1 Table 13. Population size, percent minority, per capita income, and percent below poverty level in 2 Clallam, Whatcom, Snohomish, and King Counties and Washington State. Indicator  Clallam County  Whatcom County  Snohomish County  King County  Washington State  Population (2013)  72,350  205,800  730,500  1,981,900  6,882,400  Percent Black (%)  0.9  1.1  2.7  6.5  3.8  Percent American Indian/Alaskan Native (%)  5.5  3.1  1.6  1.0  1.8  Percent Asian and Pacific Islanders (%)  1.6  4.0  9.7  15.9  8.1  Percent Hispanic (%)  5.3  8.2  9.3  9.4  11.7  Per Capita Income ($)  25,865  26,530  31,349  39,911  30,742  Percent of persons below poverty level, 2009-2013 (%)  14.6  16.4  10.4  11.5  13.4  3  Shading of cells represents values that meaningfully exceeded (by 10 percent or greater) those of the reference population  4  (Washington State), making them environmental justice communities of concern.  5  Sources: Population statistics: 2013 Washington State Data Book. Washington Office of Financial Management. 2014. Available  6  at : http://www.ofm.wa.gov/localdata/default.asp  7  Economic statistics: U.S. Bureau of Census. 2013. State/County QuickFacts. Available at:  8  http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/53/53009.html  9  Both accessed July 29, 2015  10  Based on per capita income and poverty level, Snohomish County and King County are not environmental  11  justice communities of concern (Table 13). However, the percentage of the King County population that  12  is Black (6.5 percent of the population), and the percentages of the King County and Snohomish County  13  populations that are Asian and Pacific Islander are meaningfully greater than the state as a whole (3.8  14  percent and 8.1 percent, respectively), so Snohomish County and King County can also be considered  15  environmental justice communities of concern.  16  All counties in the analysis area are similarly affected by the early winter steelhead hatchery programs  17  and fishing opportunities they present as described in Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics, and early winter  18  steelhead hatchery programs result in low positive environmental justice impacts. The most substantial  19  impacts occur in Clallam County and Whatcom County because per capita income and the percentage of  20  persons below the poverty level are the highest.  21  The EPA guidance regarding environmental justice extends beyond statistical threshold analyses to  22  consider explicit environmental justice effects on Native American tribes (EPA 1998).  Federal duties  23  under the Environmental Justice Executive Order, the presidential directive on  24  government-to-government relations, and the trust responsibility to Indian tribes may merge when the  1  action proposed by another federal agency or the EPA potentially affects the natural or physical  2  environment of a tribe.  The natural or physical environment of a tribe may include resources reserved by  3  treaty or lands held in trust; sites of special cultural, religious, or archaeological importance, such as sites  4  protected under the National Historic Preservation Act or the Native American Graves Protection and  5  Repatriation Act; and other areas reserved for hunting, fishing, and gathering (usual and accustomed  6  areas, which may include “ceded” lands that are not within reservation boundaries).  Potential effects of  7  concern may include ecological, cultural, human health, economic, or social impacts when those impacts  8  are interrelated to impacts on the natural or physical environment (EPA 1998).  9  As described in Subsection 3.5 (Socioeconomics), salmon fishing has been a focus for tribal economies,  10  cultures, lifestyles, and identities for over 1,000 yearsmany millennia (Gunther 1950).   These activities  11  continue to be important today, both economically and for subsistence and ceremonial purposes (Stay  12  2012; NWIFC 2013).  Returning early winter hatchery-origin steelhead adults provide for limited tribal  13  commercial and subsistence use, affording moderate positive effects. The following tribes or their  14  representatives work with WDFW to develop fishing plans that target early winter hatchery-origin  15  steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins: Lummi  16  Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Tribe, Tulalip Tribes, Port Gamble S’Klallam  17  Tribe, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe.  2  4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES  3  Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences, evaluates potential effects of the alternatives (including the  4  Proposed Action) on the biological, physical, and human resources described in Chapter 3, Affected  5  Environment.  NMFS has defined the No-action Alternative as not making a determination under the 4(d)  6  Rule, leading to termination of the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  7  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 1).  All of the  8  hatchery facilities that support the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  9  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would continue to operate under Alternative 1  10  because they also raise fish for hatchery programs that are not part of the Proposed Action or its  11  alternatives.  12  As discussed in Chapter 2, Alternatives Including the Proposed Action, the existing early winter steelhead  13  hatchery programs would be terminated under Alternative 1 (No-action Alternative). The effects of  14  Alternative 1 are described relative to the effects of existing winter steelhead hatchery programs that are  15  ongoing within the project area, including release of smolts1 (Chapter 3, Affected Environment). As  16  described in the analyses below, program implementation under Alternative 2 would be similar to  17  operations under existing conditions that are described in Chapter 3, Affected Environment. However,  18  there are some difference between Alternative 2 and existing conditions (regarding recent past hatchery  19  practices), this is addressed in the discussion of effects under Alternative 2.     20  The effects of Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) through Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) Alternative 5  21  (Preferred Alternative) are described relative to Alternative 1 (No Action).  In addition, the effects of  1 As noted in Chapter 3, Affected Environment, WDFW did not release early winter steelhead hatchery-origin  smolts in 2014 or 2015 consistent with the Consent Decree in Wild Fish Conservancy v. Anderson (W.D. Wash.).  However, Chapter 3, Affected Environment, describes the full effects of the existing early winter steelhead hatchery  programs including the effects of releases from those programs, because these are longstanding programs, and the  effects of smolt releases on the environment have been present for decades.   1 Alternative 1 (No Action) through Alternative 4 Alternative 5 are described relative to existing 2 conditions, which would be similar to Alternative 2 (Proposed Action), except where specifically noted.  3 The relative magnitude and direction of impacts is described using the following terms: 4  Undetectable:  The impact would not be detectable.  Negligible:  The impact would be at the lower levels of detection, and could be either  6  positive or negative.  7  Low:  The impact would be slight, but detectable, and could be either positive or  8  negative.  9  Moderate:  The impact would be readily apparent, and could be either positive or negative.  High:  The impact would be greatly positive or severely negative.  11  4.1 Water Quantity  12  Hatchery facility use of surface water and groundwater is both consumptive and non-consumptive as  13  described in Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity. Loss of water from existing sources may include water  14  diversions from an adjacent stream to allow water flow through the hatchery facility or pond system and  evaporation. Surface water used in hatchery facilities is then returned to its source at some location  16  downstream of its diversion point; however, some portion of the water source (the stream bypass reach)  17  may be dewatered (has less water between the point of diversion and discharge return to the river). Effects  18  to existing sources include alteration of stream flow and changes in water quantity (Subsection 3.1, Water  19  Quantity).  4.1.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule  21  Under Alternative 1, the early winter steelhead programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  22  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be terminated immediately (Subsection 2.2.1,  23  Alternative 1).  All of the hatchery facilities that support these hatchery programs would continue to  24  operate since they support hatchery programs that are not part of the Proposed Action. However,  Although the hatchery facilities would be raising 620,000 fewer early winter hatchery-origin steelhead.   26  Therefore, short-and long-term water use would not be less under Alternative 1 than under existing  27  conditions (Table 14), because the facilities would be used to rear other species.  Less water use would  28  positively affect low flow conditions by decreasing the percent of hatchery program water withdrawals  29  (Table 14), and positively affect ground water supplies where ground water is used, relative to existing  conditions. There would be no change in compliance with water permits or water rights at any of the  31  hatchery facilities under Alternative 1 because less water would be used at the hatchery facilities relative  32  to existing conditions or the permits, or water rights would no longer be necessary or applicable  33  (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  Analyses of the site-specific effects of Alternative 1 is provided below.  1  Dungeness River Basin: The Dungeness River Hatchery uses surface water exclusively,  2  withdrawn through three water intakes on the Dungeness River and one on Canyon Creek, an  3  adjacent tributary.  All water diverted from Dungeness River and Canyon Creek (minus  4  evaporation) is returned after it circulates through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water  Quantity).  Under existing conditions, the Dungeness River Hatchery uses approximately 2.0 cfs  6  of surface water from the Dungeness River and 0.4 cfs of water from Canyon Creek to support  7  the early winter steelhead program (Table 14).  Water quantity is only affected between the water  8  intake and discharge structures.  9  Under Alternative 1, surface water would not be temporarily diverted into the hatchery to support  the early winter steelhead hatchery program, but would continue to be diverted and used to rear  11  other species, which would result in a low negative positive effect on water quantity in the  12  Dungeness River, and moderate negative positive effect on water quantity in Canyon Creek  13  between the water intake and discharge structures, which is the same as under existing conditions  14  (Table 14)because more water would remain in the Dungeness River and Canyon Creek relative  to existing conditions (Table 14).   16  The Hurd Creek Hatchery facility uses a combination of groundwater withdrawn from five wells  17  and surface water withdrawn from Hurd Creek.  All water diverted from Hurd Creek (minus  18  evaporation) is returned to the creek after it circulates through the hatchery facility  19  (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity). Under existing conditions, the Hurd Creek Hatchery withdraws  up to 0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek and 0.95 cfs from five wells to support the early winter steelhead  21  program in the Dungeness River basin (Table 14).  Water quantity is only affected between the  22  water intake and discharge structures.  23  Under Alternative 1, 0.26 cfs of surface water would continue to not be temporarily diverted into  24  the hatchery, but would be used to rear other species, which would result in a moderate  negativepositive effect on water quantity in Hurd Creek between the water intake and discharge  26  structures, the same as under existing conditions (Table 14) because more water would remain in  27  Hurd Creek relative to existing conditions (Table 14). Under Alternative 1, 0.95 cfs of  28  groundwater would not be used to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program, but would  29  continue to be used to rear other species, and may lead to a low negativepositive effect on  groundwater supply, which is the same as under existing conditionsbecause an additional 0.95 cfs  31  of water would remain in the aquifer for other water users relative to existing conditions.  32  33  March 2016November 2015 91 Chapter 4  1 Table 14.  Water diverted to support five early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Dungeness, 2 Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins. Facility  Maximum Use of Water to Support Steelhead Programs Under Existing Conditions (cfs)  Maximum Percentage of Minimum Flows Diverted Under Existing Conditions (%)  Alternative 1 (No Action)  Alternative 2 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Dungeness  Surface: 2.0  3.6 of  Surface:  Surface: 2.0  Surface: 21.0  Surface: 2.0  Surface: 2.0  River  cfs from  Dungeness  02.0 cfs  cfs from  cfs from  cfs from  cfs from  Hatchery  Dungeness River Surface: 0.4 cfs from Canyon Creek  River 20.0 from Canyon Creek  from Dungeness River Surface: 0.4 cfs from Canyon Creek  Dungeness River Surface: 0.4 cfs from Canyon Creek  Dungeness River Surface: 0.42 cfs from Canyon Creek  Dungeness River Surface: 0.4 cfs from Canyon Creek  Dungeness River Surface: 0.4 cfs from Canyon Creek  Hurd Creek  Surface:  13.0 from  Surface:  Surface:  Surface:  Surface: 0.26  Surface:  Hatchery  0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek Ground: 0.95 cfs  Hurd Creek  0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek Ground: 0.95 cfs  0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek Ground: 0.95 cfs  0.2613 cfs from Hurd Creek Ground: 0.9548 cfs  cfs from Hurd Creek Ground: 0.95 cfs  0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek Ground: 0.95 cfs  Kendall  Surface: 6.7  1.3 from  Surface: 0  Surface: 6.7  Surface:6.7  Surface: 6.7  Surface: 6.7  Creek  cfs from  Kendall  6.7 cfs from  cfs from  3.4 cfs from  cfs from  cfs from  Hatchery  Kendall Creek Ground: 7.7 cfs  Creek  Kendall Creek Ground: 07.7 cfs  Kendall Creek Ground: 7.7 cfs  Kendall Creek Ground: 7.73.9 cfs  Kendall Creek Ground: 7.7 cfs  Kendall Creek Ground: 7.7 cfs  McKinnon  Surface: 2.0  0.3 from  Surface: 0  Surface: 2.0  Surface: 21.0  Surface: 2.0  Surface: 2.0  Pond  cfs from Peat Bog Creek  Peat Bog Creek (note that steelhead are not reared in McKinnon Pond during low flow conditions so this is the proportion used during average flow conditions)  2.0 cfs from Peat Bog Creek  cfs from Peat Bog Creek  cfs from Peat Bog Creek  cfs from Peat Bog Creek  cfs from Peat Bog Creek  Table 14.  Water diverted to support five early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins (continued). Facility  Maximum Use of Water to Support Steelhead Programs Under Existing Conditions (cfs)  Maximum Percentage of Minimum Flows Diverted Under Existing Conditions (%)  Alternative 1 (No Action)  Alternative 2 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative)  Whitehorse  Surface: 2.4  1.2 from  Surface:  Surface: 2.4  Surface: 1.2  Surface: 2.4  Surface: 2.4  Ponds  cfs from  Whitehorse  02.4 cfs  cfs from  2.4cfs from  cfs from  cfs from  Hatchery  Whitehorse Springs Creek Ground: 0.5 cfs  Springs Creek  from Whitehorse Springs Creek Ground: 0.5 cfs  Whitehorse Springs Creek Ground: 0.5 cfs  Whitehorse Springs Creek Ground: 0.53 cfs  Whitehorse Springs Creek Ground: 0.5 cfs  Whitehorse Springs Creek Ground: 0.5 cfs  Wallace  Surface: 6.4  2.1 from  Surface: 0  Surface: 6.4  Surface: 3.2  Surface: 6.4  Surface: 6.4  River  cfs from  Wallace  6.4 cfs from  cfs from  6.4 cfs from  cfs from  cfs from  Hatchery  Wallace River Surface: 2.2 cfs from May Creek  River 0.7 from May Creek  Wallace River Surface: 02.2 cfs from May Creek  Wallace River Surface: 2.2 cfs from May Creek  Wallace River Surface: 1.1 2.2 cfs from May Creek  Wallace River Surface: 2.2 cfs from May Creek  Wallace River Surface: 2.2 cfs from May Creek  Reiter  Surface: 4.9  1.6 from  Surface:  Surface: 4.9  Surface: 2.5  Surface: 4.9  Surface: 4.9  Ponds  cfs from Austin Creek Surface: 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek  Austin Creek 1.6 from Hogarty Creek  04.9 cfs from Austin Creek Surface: 04.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek  cfs from Austin Creek Surface: 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek  4.9 cfs from Austin Creek Surface: 2.5 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek  cfs from Austin Creek Surface: 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek  cfs from Austin Creek Surface: 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek  Tokul  Surface: 5.4  0.8 from  Surface:  Surface: 5.4  Surface: 2.7  Surface: 5.4  Surface: 5.4  Creek  cfs from  Tokul Creek  05.4 cfs  cfs from  5.4 cfs from  cfs from  cfs from  Hatchery  Tokul Creek Surface: 2.7 cfs from unnamed spring  0.9 from unnamed spring  from Tokul Creek Surface: 02.7 cfs from unnamed spring  Tokul Creek Surface: 2.7 cfs from unnamed spring  Tokul Creek Surface: 1.4 2.7 cfs from unnamed spring  Tokul Creek Surface: 2.7 cfs from unnamed spring  Tokul Creek Surface: 2.7 cfs from unnamed spring  1 Source: Existing conditions are found in Table 4. 2 1  Nooksack River Basin: The Kendall Creek Hatchery uses well and surface water  2  (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  All water diverted from Kendall Creek (minus evaporation) is  3  returned to the creek after it circulates through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water  4  Quantity).  Under existing conditions, the Kendall Creek Hatchery uses approximately 6.7 cfs of  surface water from Kendall Creek and 7.7 cfs of groundwater to support the early winter  6  steelhead program (Table 14).  Water quantity is only affected between the water intake and  7  discharge structures.  8  Under Alternative 1, 6.7 cfs of water would continue to not be temporarily diverted from Kendall  9  Creek into the hatchery, but would be used to support production of other species.  This, which  would result in a negligible negative positive effect on water quantity between the water intake  11  and discharge structures, which is the same as under existing conditions (Table 14)because more  12  water would remain in Kendall Creek relative to existing conditions (Table 14).  Under  13  Alternative 1, 7.7 cfs of groundwater would not be used to support the early winter steelhead  14  hatchery program, but would continue to be used to rear other species, and may lead to a low  negative positive effect on groundwater supply, which is the same as under existing conditions  16  because an additional 7.7 cfs of water would remain in the aquifer for other water users relative to  17  existing conditions.  18  McKinnon Pond uses surface water exclusively (Subsection 3.1, Water Quality).  All water  19  diverted from Peat Bog Creek (minus evaporation) is returned after it circulates through the  rearing pond (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  Under existing conditions, McKinnon Pond uses  21  approximately 2.0 cfs of surface water from Peat Bog Creek from December through February  22  (Table 14).   23  Under Alternative 1, this water would continue to not be temporarily diverted into the rearing  24  pond, which would result in a negative positive negligible effect on water quantity in Peat Bog  Creek between the water intake and discharge structures, which is the same as under existing  26  conditions (Table 14)because more, but likely only a small amount more, water would remain in  27  the Peat Bog Creek relative to existing conditions (Table 14).   28  Stillaguamish River Basin: The Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery uses well and surface water  29  (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  All water diverted from Whitehorse Springs Creek (minus  evaporation) is returned to Whitehorse Springs Creek after it circulates through the hatchery  31  facility (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  Under existing conditions, the Whitehorse Ponds  32  Hatchery uses approximately 2.4 cfs of surface water from Whitehorse Ponds Creek and 0.5 cfs  33  of groundwater to support their early winter steelhead program (Table 14). Under Alternative 1,  Chapter 4 94 March 2016November 2015  1  2.4 cfs of water would continue to not be temporarily diverted from Whitehorse Springs Creek  2  into the hatchery, which would result in a negligible negative positive effect on water quantity in  3  Whitehorse Springs Creek, which is the same as under existing conditions (Table 14) because  4  more, though likely just somewhat more, water would remain in Whitehorse Springs Creek  relative to existing conditions (Table 14).  Under Alternative 1, 0.5 cfs of groundwater would not  6  be used to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program, but would continue to be used to  7  rear other species, and may lead to a low negativepositive effect on groundwater supply, which is  8  the same as under existing conditionsbecause an additional 0.5 cfs of water would remain in the  9  aquifer for other water users relative to existing conditions.  Skykomish River Basin: The Wallace River Hatchery uses surface water exclusively  11  (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity). All water is returned to the Wallace River and May Creek  12  (minus evaporation) after circulating through the facilities (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  13  Under existing conditions, the Wallace River Hatchery withdraws up to 6.4 cfs from Wallace  14  River and up to 2.2 cfs from May Creek to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program  (Table 14). Water quantity is only affected between the water intakes and discharge structures.  16  Under Alternative 1, up to 6.4 cfs would not be withdrawn from the Wallace River and 2.2 cfs  17  would not be withdrawn from May Creek to support the early winter steelhead hatchery  18  programs, but would continue to be used to rear other species, which would lead to a negligible  19  negativepositive effect, which is the same as under existing conditions because more of the water  would be left in the Wallace River and May Creek relative to existing conditions.  21  Under existing conditions, Reiter Ponds withdraws up to 4.9 cfs from Austin Creek and up to  22  4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity). All water is returned to the creeks  23  (minus evaporation) after circulating through the facilities. Under Alternative 1, 4.9 cfs would not  24  be temporarily withdrawn from the Austin Creek or from Hogarty Creek to support the early  winter steelhead hatchery programs, but would continue to be used to rear other species, which  26  may lead to a negligible negativepositive effect, which is the same as under existing  27  conditionsbecause up to 4.9 cfs would be left in Austin Creek and in Hogarty Creek relative to  28  existing conditions. Water quantity is only affected between the water intakes and discharge  29  structures.  Snoqualmie River Basin: The Tokul Creek Hatchery uses surface water (Subsection 3.1, Water  31  Quantity). The Tokul Creek Hatchery withdraws up to 5.4 cfs from Tokul Creek and up to 2.7 cfs  32  from a spring to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table 14). All water is  33  returned to the creek after circulating through the hatchery. Water quantity is only affected  34  between the water intake and discharge structures.  March 2016November 2015 95 Chapter 4  1  Under Alternative 1, up to 5.4 cfs of water would not be temporarily withdrawn from Tokul  2  Creek and up to 2.7 cfs would not be withdrawn from the spring to support the early winter  3  steelhead hatchery programs, but this amount of water would continue to be withdrawn for  4  rearing other species, which may lead to a negligible negativepositive effect, which is the same as  under existing conditionsbecause more of the water would be left in Tokul Creek and in the  6  spring relative to existing conditions.  7  4.1.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet  8  the Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  9  Under Alternative 2, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would operate as proposed in submitted HGMPs  11  (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 2). As described above, WDFW has stated that if the early winter  12  steelhead programs were discontinued, water use at the hatcheries would remain the same, because the  13  water would be used to support production of other species. Consequently, short-and long-term water  14  use and effects would be greater underthe same under Alternative 2 relative toas under Alternative 1 and  the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  More water use would  16  negatively affect low flow conditions by increasing the percent of hatchery program water withdrawals  17  (Table 14), and by decreasing ground water supplies where ground water is used, relative to Alternative 1.  18  As under Alternative 1, there would be no change in compliance with water permits or water rights at any  19  of the hatchery facilities under Alternative 2 because the hatchery programs have existing permits and  water rights to divert water as proposed in the submitted HGMPs.  Analyses of the site-specific effects of  21  Alternative 2 are provided below.  22  Dungeness River Basin: The Dungeness River Hatchery uses surface water exclusively, withdrawn  23  through three water intakes on the Dungeness River and one on Canyon Creek, an adjacent tributary.  All  24  water diverted from Dungeness River and Canyon Creek (minus evaporation) is returned after it circulates  through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).   26  Under Alternative 2, the Dungeness River Hatchery would use approximately 2.0 cfs of surface water  27  from the Dungeness River and 0.4 cfs of water from Canyon Creek to support their early winter steelhead  28  program (Table 14).  Alternative 2 would result in a moderate negative effect on water quantity in the  29  Dungeness River and in Canyon Creek between the water intake and discharge structures relative to  Alternative 1.  31  The Hurd Creek Hatchery facility uses a combination of groundwater withdrawn from five wells, and  32  surface water withdrawn from Hurd Creek.  All water diverted from Hurd Creek (minus evaporation) is  33  returned after it circulates through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).   Chapter 4 96 March 2016November 2015  1  Under Alternative 2, the Hurd Creek Hatchery may withdraw up to 0.26 cfs from Hurd Creek to support  2  the early winter steelhead program in the Dungeness River basin (Table 14).  Because this water would  3  not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would have a moderate negative effect on water  4  quantity in Hurd Creek between the water intake and discharge structures relative to Alternative 1.  Under Alternative 2, the Hurd Creek Hatchery may withdraw up to 0.95 cfs from wells to support the  6  early winter steelhead hatchery program relative to Alternative 1.  This withdrawal may lead to a low  7  negative effect on groundwater supply because 0.95 cfs of water would not remain in the aquifer for other  8  water users in contrast to Alternative 1.  9  Nooksack River Basin: The Kendall Creek Hatchery uses well and surface water (Subsection 3.1, Water  Quantity).  All water diverted from Kendall Creek (minus evaporation) is returned to the creek after it  11  circulates through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).   12  Under Alternative 2, the Kendall Creek Hatchery would use approximately 6.7 cfs of surface water from  13  Kendall Creek to support the early winter steelhead program (Table 14).  Because this water would not be  14  withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would result in a low negative effect on water quantity in  Kendall Creek relative to Alternative 1.   16  Under Alternative 2, 7.7 cfs of groundwater would be used to support the early winter steelhead hatchery  17  program.  Because this water would not be used under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 may lead to a low  18  negative effect on groundwater supply relative to Alternative 1.  19  McKinnon Pond uses surface water exclusively (Subsection 3.1, Water Quality).  All water diverted from  Peat Bog Creek (minus evaporation) is returned after it circulates through the rearing pond (Subsection  21  3.1, Water Quantity).  Under Alternative 2, McKinnon Pond would use approximately 2.0 cfs of surface  22  water from Peat Bog Creek from December through February (Table 14).  These are the only months that  23  steelhead are reared at McKinnon Pond and are the months when many streams and rivers experience  24  higher than average flows.  Because this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2  would lead to a negligible negative effect on water quantity in Peat Bog Creek between the water intake  26  and discharge structures relative to Alternative 1.   27  Stillaguamish River Basin: The Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery uses well and surface water (Subsection  28  3.1, Water Quantity).  All water diverted from Whitehorse Springs Creek (minus evaporation) is returned  29  to Whitehorse Springs Creek after it circulates through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water  Quantity).   1  Under Alternative 2, the Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery would use approximately 2.4 cfs of surface water  2  from Whitehorse Ponds Creek to support the early winter steelhead program (Table 14).  Because this  3  water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would lead to a negative negligible  4  effect on water quantity in Whitehorse Springs Creek relative to Alternative 1.   Under Alternative 2, 0.5 cfs of groundwater would be used to support the early winter steelhead hatchery  6  program.  Because this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 may lead to a  7  negative negligible effect on groundwater supply because 0.5 cfs of water would not remain in the aquifer  8  for other water users in contrast to Alternative 1.  9  Skykomish River Basin: The Wallace River Hatchery uses surface water exclusively (Subsection 3.1,  Water Quantity). All water is returned to the Wallace River and May Creek (minus evaporation) after  11  circulating through the facilities (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  12  Under Alternative 2, the Wallace River Hatchery would withdraw up to 6.4 cfs from Wallace River and  13  up to 2.2 cfs from May Creek to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table 14). Because  14  this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would lead to a negligible negative  effect on water quantity in the Wallace River and May Creek relative to Alternative 1. Water quantity  16  would only be affected between the water intakes and discharge structures.  17  Reiter Ponds withdraws up to 4.9 cfs from Austin Creek and 4.9 cfs from Hogarty Creek (Subsection 3.1,  18  Water Quantity). All water is returned to the river (minus evaporation) after circulating through the  19  facilities. Under Alternative 2, Reiter Ponds would withdraw up to 4.9 cfs from Austin Creek and 4.9 cfs  from Hogarty Creek, to support the early winter steelhead hatchery programs (Table 14). Because this  21  water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would lead to a moderate negative effect  22  on water quantity relative to Alternative 1. Water quantity would only be affected between the water  23  intakes and discharge structures.  24  Snoqualmie River Basin: The Tokul Creek Hatchery uses surface water (Subsection 3.1, Water  Quantity). Under Alternative 2, the Tokul Creek Hatchery would temporarily withdraw up to 2.7 cfs from  26  Tokul Creek and up to 5.4 cfs from a spring to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program (Table  27  14). Because this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would lead to a  28  negligible negative effect because more of the water would remain in Tokul Creek and in the spring  29  relative to Alternative 1. All water would be returned to the creek after circulating through the hatchery.  Water quantity would only be affected between the water intake and discharge structures.  1  4.1.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  2  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  3  Under Alternative 3, WDFW would reduce proposed production levels by 50 percent, and water use  4  would be reduced by 50 percent relative to Alternative 2. However, relative to Alternative 1, under which  the programs would be terminated, both  6  Under Alternative 3, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  7  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be reduced by 50 percent, but water  8  would continue to be used to rear other species. Consequently, short-and long-term water use and effects  9  would be the same as under existing conditions and under the other alternatives. short-and long-term  water use would be greater under Alternative 3.  More water use would negatively affect low flow  11  conditions by increasing the percent of hatchery program water withdrawals (Table 14), and by  12  decreasing ground water supplies where ground water is used, relative to Alternative 1. However, there  13  would be a positive change in effect compared to existing conditions because half of the water withdrawn  14  under existing conditions would be withdrawn under Alternative 3.  All hatchery facilities would remain in compliance with water permits or water rights under Alternative 3  16  because less water would be used at the hatchery facilities relative to existing conditions, and all hatchery  17  facilities would comply with required water permits or water rights described under existing conditions  18  (Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity).  Analyses of the site-specific effects of Alternative 3 are provided  19  below.  Dungeness River Basin: The Dungeness River Hatchery uses surface water exclusively,  21  withdrawn through three water intakes on the Dungeness River and one on Canyon Creek, an  22  adjacent tributary.  All water diverted from Dungeness River and Canyon Creek (minus  23  evaporation) is returned after it circulates through the hatchery facility (Subsection 3.1, Water  24  Quantity).  Under Alternative 3, the Dungeness River Hatchery would use approximately 1.0 cfs  of surface water from the Dungeness River and 0.2 cfs of water from Canyon Creek to support  26  the early winter steelhead program (Table 14).  Because this water would not be withdrawn under  27  Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would result in a moderate negative effect on water quantity in the  28  Dungeness River and in Canyon Creek between the water intake and discharge structures relative  29  to Alternative 1.   Under Alternative 3, the Hurd Creek Hatchery may withdraw up to 0.13 cfs from Hurd Creek to  31  support the early winter steelhead program (Table 14).  Because this water would not be  32  withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would have a moderate negative effect on water  1  quantity in Hurd Creek between the water intake and discharge structures relative to  2  Alternative 1.  3  Under Alternative 3, 0.48 cfs more groundwater would be used to support the early winter  4  steelhead hatchery program relative to Alternative 1, which may lead to a low negative effect on  groundwater supply relative to Alternative 1.  6  Nooksack River Basin: Under Alternative 3, the Kendall Creek Hatchery would use  7  approximately 3.4 cfs of surface water from Kendall Creek to support the early winter steelhead  8  program (Table 14).  Because this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1,  9  Alternative 3 may result in a low negative effect on water quantity in Kendall Creek relative to  Alternative 1.   11  Under Alternative 3, 3.9 cfs of groundwater would be used to support the early winter steelhead  12  hatchery program, and because this water would not be used under Alternative 1, Alternative 3  13  may lead to a low negative effect on groundwater supply relative to Alternative 1.  14  Under Alternative 3, McKinnon Pond would use approximately 1.0 cfs of surface water from Peat  Bog Creek from December through February (Table 14).  Because this water would not be  16  withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would lead to a negligible negative effect on water  17  quantity in Peat Bog Creek between the water intake and discharge structures relative to  18  Alternative 1.   19  Stillaguamish River Basin: Under Alternative 3, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery would use  approximately 1.2 cfs from Whitehorse Springs Creek.  Because this water would not be  21  withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would have a negligible negative effect on water  22  quantity in Whitehorse Springs Creek relative to Alternative 1.  Under Alternative 3, 0.3 cfs of  23  groundwater would be used to support the early winter steelhead hatchery program.  Because this  24  water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would lead to a negligible  negative effect on groundwater supply relative to Alternative 1.   26  Skykomish River Basin: Under Alternative 3, the Wallace River Hatchery would withdraw up to  27  3.2 cfs from Wallace River and up to 1.1 cfs from May Creek to support the early winter  28  steelhead hatchery program (Table 14). Because this water would not be withdrawn under  29  Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would lead to a negligible negative effect on water quantity in the  Wallace River and May Creek relative to Alternative 1. Water quantity would only be affected  31  between the water intakes and discharge structures.  1  Under Alternative 3, Reiter Ponds would withdraw up to 2.5 cfs from Austin Creek and 2.5 cfs  2  from Hogarty Creek, to support the early winter steelhead hatchery programs (Table 14). Because  3  this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would lead to a low  4  negative effect on water quantity relative to Alternative 1. Water quantity would only be affected  between the water intakes and discharge structures.  6  Snoqualmie River Basin: The Tokul Creek Hatchery uses surface water (Subsection 3.1, Water  7  Quantity). Under Alternative 3, the Tokul Creek Hatchery would withdraw up to 1.4 cfs from  8  Tokul Creek and up to 2.7 cfs from a spring to support the early winter steelhead hatchery  9  program (Table 14). Because this water would not be withdrawn under Alternative 1,  Alternative 3 would lead to a negligible negative effect because more of the water would be left  11  in Tokul Creek and in the spring relative to existing conditions. All water would be returned to  12  the creek after circulating through the hatchery. Water quantity would only be affected between  13  the water intake and discharge structures.  14  Relative to the Alternative 2 and to existing conditions, Alternative 3 would reduce water use at the eight  hatchery facilities that support the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  16  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by the following amounts:  17  Dungeness River basin: 1.0 cfs from Dungeness River, 0.2 cfs from Canyon Creek,  18  0.13 cfs from Hurd Creek, and 0.95 cfs from wells (Table 14)  19  Nooksack River basin: 3.4 cfs from Kendall Creek, 1.0 cfs from Peat Bog Creek, and  3.9 cfs from wells (Table 14)  21  Stillaguamish River basin: 1.2 cfs from Whitehorse Springs Creek and 0.3 cfs from wells  22  (Table 14)  23  Skykomish River basin: 3.2 cfs from Wallace River, 1.1 cfs from May Creek,  2.5 cfs  24  from Austin Creek, and 2.5 cfs from Hogarty Creek  (Table 14)  26  Snoqualmie River basin: 1.4 cfs from unnamed spring and 2.7 cfs from Tokul Creek  27  (Table 14).  28  Because water use would be reduced by 50 percent at the eight hatchery facilities under Alternative 3,  29  effects on surface and groundwater quantity would be low to negligible, localized, and positive, since less  water would be used to support the hatchery programs compared to Alternative 2.  1 4.1.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that 2 Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) 3 Rule 4 Under Alternative 4, WDFW would produce the same number of hatchery-origin winter steelhead would be produced as under the Alternative 2, but the broodstock source would change from the early winter 6 Chambers Creek stock to native steelhead broodstocks that are local to the river basins.  Relative to 7 existing conditions, Alternative 1, and Alternative 2, effects on water quantity would be the same as under 8 Alternative 2 because the change in broodstock would not affect water quantity (i.e., the same amount of 9 water would be used in the facilities). 4.1.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a 11 Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Level in Skykomish River Basin Meet 12 Requirements of the 4(d) Rule 13 Under Alternative 5, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, 14 Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be the same as under Alternative 2, and the production level for the Skykomish River program would be reduced from 256,000 smolts to 167,600 smolts. 16 Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 5 would increase the number of early winter steelhead released into 17 the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by 531,600 smolts, 18 Because water would continue to be used to rear other species, short-and long-term water use and effects 19 would be the same as under existing conditions and Alternative 1 through Alternative 4. 4.2 Salmon and Steelhead 21 The salmon and steelhead analyses address effects of early winter steelhead hatchery programs proposed 22 under each alternative on existing conditions described in Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead. when 23 combined with effects anticipated under each alternative. The analysis focuses on natural-origin fish 24 populations that are self-sustaining in the natural environment and are dependent on aquatic habitat for migration, spawning, rearing, and food. This subsection describes effects on salmon and steelhead 26 associated with the alternatives for the effect categories described in Subsection 3.2.2.1, General Effects 27 of Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs as listed below: 28  Genetic Risks 29  Competition and Predation  Hatchery Facility Effects 31  Masking 32  Incidental Fishing Effects 33  Disease Transfer 34  Mining 1  Population viability benefits 2  Nutrient Cycling 3 In addition to hatchery-related effects, decreases in the quality and extent of salmon and steelhead habitat, 4 harvest, the presence of dams and diversions, and changes in oceanic conditions and climate have all contributed to impacting salmon and steelhead in the analysis area (Subsection 3.2.1, General Factors that 6 Affect the Presence and Abundance of Salmon and Steelhead). Analysis of fish resources in 7 Subsection 4.2, Salmon and Steelhead, is focused on the effects under the alternatives associated with 8 early winter steelhead hatchery production, which is one of the general factors affecting salmon and 9 steelhead in the analysis area (Subsection 3.2.1, General Factors that Affect the Presence and Abundance of Salmon and Steelhead). The effects to salmon and steelhead from other general factors (e.g., habitat, 11 climate change) are described in Chapter 5, Cumulative Effects. 12 As described in Subsection 1.5.3, NMFS’s Determination as to Compliance with the 4(d) Rule, NMFS 13 will require monitoring and evaluation as a condition of its approval under the 4(d) Rule. Further, as 14 described in Subsection 1.6.6, Future Public Review and Comment, additional NEPA and/or ESA review may be needed in the future in response to new information or if different actions are proposed. 16 Monitoring and evaluation under the HGMPs would address performance of the hatchery programs in 17 meeting and adaptively managing their objectives. Subsection 1.2, Description of the Proposed Action, 18 identifies monitoring activities. Monitoring activities would include, but not be limited to, obtaining 19 information on smolt-to-adult survival, fishery contribution, natural-origin and hatchery-origin spawning abundance, juvenile out-migrant abundance and diversity, genetics (DNA) and gene flow (e.g., Anderson 21 et al. 2014), and juvenile and adult fish health when the fish are in the hatchery. These activities would be 22 the same under the action alternatives, and are not discussed further. 23 4.2.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule 24 Under Alternative 1, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be terminated immediately 26 (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 1), and 620,000 fewer early winter steelhead would be produced by 27 hatcheries in the analysis area relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead). 28 Therefore, all risks to listed ESUs and DPSs, non-listed salmon species, and designated critical habitat 29 associated with these ongoing hatchery programs would be eliminated (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead). Relative to existing conditions, Alternative 1 would result in the following effects: 31  Gene flow from early winter hatchery-origin steelhead to natural-origin steelhead would be 32 reduced from less than 2 percent or less than 5 percent (depending on the population) under 33 existing conditions to zero (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks), which would result in a low 1 positive effect on natural-origin steelhead populations in the Dungeness, Nooksack, 2 Stillaguamish, and Skykomish River basins, and a low to moderate positive effect in the 3 Snoqualmie River basin, relative to existing conditions. This reduction in gene flow would 4 likely result in a low to moderate (depending on the population) positive effect to the fitness 5 of the populations. 6  The risk of predation (direct and indirect) from early winter hatchery-origin steelhead on 7 juvenile fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon, pink salmon, and sockeye salmon would be 8 reduced (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), which would result in a low 9 positive effect on natural-origin populations of these species. 10  The risk of competition between hatchery-origin early winter hatchery-origin steelhead and 11 natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon would be reduced 12 (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), which would result in a low positive effect 13 on natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon populations. 14  Hatchery facility risks would remain the same as under existing conditions 15 (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks), since all hatchery facilities would continue to 16 operate for other species under Alternative 1. All instream structures (including weirs) would 17 continue to be used and maintained.  There would be no change in the hatchery facility 18 compliances with NMFS screening criteria at the Dungeness River Hatchery, Hurd Creek 19 Hatchery, McKinnon Pond, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery, Wallace River Hatchery, Reiter 20 Ponds, and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks).  WDFW 21 would be expected to complete its already planned upgrade to the water intake screen at 22 Kendall Creek Hatchery and Wallace River Hatchery, and improve fish passage at the 23 Dungeness River Hatchery and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility 24 Risks). 25  The risk that the status of natural steelhead would be masked by early winter hatchery-origin 26 steelhead would be reduced from existing conditions to 0 (Subsection 3.2.3.4, Masking), 27 which would result in a negligible positive effect on natural-origin steelhead populations. 28  There would be no recreational or tribal steelhead fisheries in the Dungeness, Nooksack, 29 Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins targeting early winter hatchery30 origin steelhead.  Therefore, incidental fishing effects (Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental Fishing 31 Effects) would be eliminated, which would provide a low positive effect on natural-origin 32 steelhead populations. Early-timed returns of natural-origin winter steelhead would no longer 1 be at risk of interception by fisheries targeting early winter steelhead. The co-managers may 2 consider fisheries for natural-origin steelhead when natural-origin populations are recovered 3 or large enough to support fishing. 4  There would be no expected change in the risk of disease transfer since all of the hatchery 5 facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout), which can 6 harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.6, Risk of Disease Transfer) 7 (Table 10); thus, the risk would be the same as under existing conditions. 8  There would be no change in the risk of “mining” natural-origin populations through the 9 collection of broodstock because no natural-origin fish would be incorporated into 10 broodstocks under existing conditions, and there would be no broodstock under Alternative 1 11 (i.e., the programs would be terminated) (Subsection 3.2.3.7, Risk of “Mining” Natural-origin 12 Salmon andSteelhead) (Table 15). Therefore, there would be no risk to natural-origin 13 steelhead from “mining.” 14  There would be no change in population viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead 15 populations because early winter hatchery-origin steelhead provide no viability benefits under 16 existing conditions, and there would be no early winter steelhead hatchery programs under 17 Alternative 1 (i.e., the programs would be terminated) (Subsection 3.2.3.8, Population 18 Viability Benefits). 19  There would be no changea negligible change in the contribution of hatchery-origin steelhead 20 to marine-derived nutrients because hatchery-origin steelhead contributions to nutrients are 21 negligible under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.9, Nutrient Cycling), and would not be 22 impacted under any alternative. 23 1 Table 15.  Number of natural-origin winter steelhead in the hatchery broodstock by alternative in five 2 early winter steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound. River Basin  Average Natural-origin Winter Run1  TRT Interim Viable Abundance Target  Number of Natural-origin Winter Steelhead in Broodstock  Existing Conditions  Alt. 12  Alt. 2  Alt. 3  Alt. 4  Alt. 5  Dungeness  530487  1,232  0  N/A  0  0  Up to 30 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  Nooksack  1,760  11,023  0  N/A  0  0  Up to 100 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  Stillaguamish  1,852  9,559  0  N/A  0  0  Up to 120 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  Snohomish-Skykomish  1,.683  10,695  0  N/A  0  0  Up to 300 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  Snohomish-Snoqualmie  955  8,370  0  N/A  0  0  Up to 100 with a 1:1 sex ratio  0  3  1 Source: Table 11.  4  2 The hatchery programs would be terminated under Alternative 1, so no broodstock would be needed.  5  6  4.2.2  Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet  7  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  8  Under Alternative 2, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  9  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would operate as proposed in submitted HGMPs  10  (Subsection 2.2.2, Alternative 2), and release levels (total of 620,000 steelhead) would be the same as  11  under existing conditions (Chapter 3, Affected Environment).  Relative to Alternative 1 under which the  12  hatchery programs would be terminated, Alternative 2 would result in the following effects:  13    Gene flow from early winter hatchery-origin steelhead would increase from zero under  14  Alternative 1 to less than 2 percent (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks), in the Dungeness,  15  Nooksack, Stillaguamish, and Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, which would result  16  in a low, negative effect on natural-origin steelhead populations., which is the same as under  17  existing conditions. Gene flow would increase from zero to under 5 percent in the  18  Snoqualmie River basins, which would result in a low to moderate negative effect on the  19  natural-origin steelhead population, the same as under existing conditions (Subsection  Chapter 4  106  March 2016November 2015  1  3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks). These gene flow levels would likely result in a low negative effect to  2  the fitness of the populations, relative to Alternative 1. Effects of gene flow under Alternative  3  2 would be less than under existing conditions, because under Alternative 2, gene flow for the  4  Snoqualmie River basin would be reduced from between 2 to 5 percent (low to moderate  negative effect) to under 2 percent (low negative effect) (Appendix B, Table B-6).  This  6  decrease is primarily related to a reduction in pHOS under Alternative 2, relative to existing  7  conditions (Appendix B, Table B-4).  8    The risk of predation (direct and indirect) on juvenile fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon,  9  pink salmon, and sockeye salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1  (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize  11  competitive interactions by releasing the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead when they are  12  fully smolted and, thus, actively migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b;  13  WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e). Therefore, Alternative 2 would result in a  14  low, negative effect on predation of natural-origin fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon,  pink salmon, and sockeye salmon, which would be the same as under existing conditions  16  (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation).  17    The risk of competition between early winter hatchery-origin steelhead and natural-origin  18  steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1  19  (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize  competitive interactions by releasing the hatchery-origin steelhead when they are fully  21  smolted and thus, actively migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b;  22  WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e). Therefore, Alternative 2 would result in a  23  low, negative effect on competition with natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook salmon,  24  and coho salmon populations, which would be the same as under existing conditions  (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation).  26    Hatchery facility risks would remain the same as under existing conditions  27  (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks), since all hatchery facilities would continue to  28  operate under both Alternative 1 and Alternative 2, and all instream structures (including  29  weirs) would continue to be used and maintained.  There would be no change in the hatchery  facilities’ compliance with NMFS screening criteria at Dungeness River Hatchery, Hurd  31  Creek Hatchery, McKinnon Pond, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery, Wallace River Hatchery,  32  Reiter Ponds, and Tokul Creek hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks).  As  33  under Alternative 1, WDFW would be expected to complete its already planned upgrade to  34  the water intake screen at Kendall Creek Hatchery and Wallace River Hatchery, and improve  March 2016November 2015  107  Chapter 4  1 fish passage at the Dungeness River Hatchery and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, 2 Hatchery Facility Risks). 3  The risk that the status of natural-origin steelhead would be masked by early winter hatchery4 origin steelhead would increase as compared to Alternative 1, but would still result in a negligible negative effect because of differences in return timing, which would be the same as 6 under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.4, Masking). 7  Unlike under Alternative 1, there would be harvest-oriented recreational steelhead fisheries in 8 the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, and 9 tribal fisheries for early winter hatchery-origin steelhead in terminal areas. Therefore, negative incidental fishing effects from recreational and tribal fisheries would be greater than 11 under Alternative 1.  However, similar to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental 12 Fishing Effects), the negative incidental fishing impacts on the natural-origin populations 13 (including potential re-expression of early-timed returns of natural-origin winter steelhead) 14 would be low, because (1) 100 percent of the hatchery-origin fish would be marked and recreational fisheries would be mark-selective, so impacts to unmarked natural-origin fish 16 would be limited to hook-and-release mortalities associated with fish that are legally caught 17 and then released back into the water, (2) the run timing of the early winter hatchery-origin 18 and natural-origin steelhead populations is sufficiently separate, allowing harvest managers to 19 continue to design and implement fisheries to avoid most effects on natural-origin fish (although there would be an increase in the vulnerability to harvest of early-timed returns of 21 natural-origin winter steelhead relative to Alternative 1) , and (3) cool water temperatures 22 during the months when the recreational steelhead fishery is open would minimize incidental 23 hook-and-release mortality of natural-origin steelhead (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; 24 WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e).  There would be no expected change in the risk of disease transfer since all of the hatchery 26 facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout), as under 27 Alternative 1, which harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.6, Risk 28 of Disease Transfer) (Table 10); therefore, the risk would be the same as under existing 29 conditions.  There would be no change in the risk of “mining” natural-origin populations through the 31 collection of broodstock because no natural-origin fish would be incorporated into the 32 broodstock under Alternative 1 or Alternative 2, or under existing conditions 1  (Subsection 3.2.3.7, Risk of “Mining” Natural-origin Salmon and Steelhead) (Table 15).  2  Therefore, there would be no risk to natural-origin steelhead from “mining.”  3    There would be no change in population viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead  4  populations because early winter hatchery-origin steelhead provide no viability benefits under  Alternative 1 or under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.8, Population Viability Benefits),  6  and releases of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead under Alternative 2 would provide no  7  population viability benefits to natural origin-steelhead.  8  4.2.3  Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  9  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  Under Alternative 3, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  11  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be reduced by 50 percent (to a total of  12  315,000 steelhead) relative to the proposed hatchery programs (Subsection 2.2.3, Alternative 3), which  13  would be 50 percent less than under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).  Relative  14  to Alternative 1 under which the hatchery programs would be terminated, Alternative 3 would result in  the following effects:  16    Gene flow from early winter hatchery-origin steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks),  17  would increase from zero under Alternative 1 to less than 2 percent which would result in a  18  low negative effect on natural-origin steelhead populations in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  19  Stillaguamish, and Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins.  Gene flow would increase  from zero to under 5 percent in the Snoqualmie River basins, which would result in a low to  21  moderate a low negative effect on the natural-origin steelhead population. This gene flow  22  would likely result in a low negative effect to the fitness of the populations, relative to  23  Alternative 1.  24    The risk of predation (direct and indirect) on juvenile fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon,  pink salmon, and sockeye salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1 (Subsection  26  3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize competitive  27  interactions by releasing the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead when they are fully  28  smolted, and, thus, actively migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b;  29  WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e). Therefore, Alternative 3 would result in a  low, negative effect on predation of natural-origin fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon,  31  pink salmon, and sockeye salmon.  32  1    The risk of competition between hatchery-origin steelhead and natural-origin steelhead,  2  spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1  3  (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize  4  competitive interactions by releasing the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead when they are  fully smolted, and, thus, actively migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b;  6  WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e). Therefore, Alternative 3 would result in a  7  low, negative effect on competition with natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook salmon,  8  and coho salmon populations.  9    Hatchery facility risks would be the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.3,  Hatchery Facility Risks) and Alternative 1, since all hatchery facilities would continue to  11  operate under both Alternative 1 and Alternative 3, and all instream structures (including  12  weirs) would continue to be used and maintained.  There would be no change in the hatchery  13  facilities’ compliance with NMFS screening criteria at Dungeness River Hatchery, Hurd  14  Creek Hatchery, McKinnon Pond, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery, Wallace River Hatchery,  Reiter Ponds, and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks).  As  16  under Alternative 1, WDFW would be expected to complete its already planned upgrade to  17  the water intake screen at Kendall Creek Hatchery and Wallace River Hatchery, and improve  18  fish passage at the Dungeness River Hatchery and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3,  19  Hatchery Facility Risks).    The risk that the status of natural-origin steelhead would be masked by early winter hatchery 21  origin steelhead would increase relative to Alternative 1, but would still result in a negligible  22  negative effect because of differences in run timing between the hatchery and natural-origin  23  populations, which would be the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.4,  24  Masking).    Unlike under Alternative 1, there would be harvest-oriented recreational steelhead fisheries in  26  the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, and  27  tribal fisheries for early winter hatchery-origin steelhead in terminal areas. Therefore,  28  negative incidental fishing effects from recreational and tribal fisheries would be greater than  29  under Alternative 1.  However, similar to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental  Fishing Effects), the negative incidental fishing impacts on the natural-origin population  31  (including potential re-expression of early-timed returns of natural-origin winter steelhead)  32  would be low, because (1) 100 percent of the hatchery-origin fish would be marked and  33  recreational fisheries would be mark-selective, so impacts to unmarked natural-origin fish  34  would be limited to hook-and-release mortalities associated with fish that are legally caught  Chapter 4  110 March 2016November 2015  1 and then released back into the water, (2) the adult return timing for the early winter 2 hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead populations is sufficiently separate, allowing 3 harvest managers to design and implement fisheries to avoid most effects on natural-origin 4 fish (although there would be an increase in the vulnerability to harvest of early-timed returns natural-origin winter steelhead relative to Alternative 1), and (3) cool water temperatures 6 during the months when the recreational steelhead fishery is open would minimize incidental 7 hook-and-release mortality of natural-origin steelhead (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; 8 WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 2014e). 9  There would be no expected change in the risk of disease transfer since all of the hatchery facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout) as under 11 Alternative 1, which harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.6, Risk 12 of Disease Transfer) (Table 10); therefore the risk would be the same as under existing 13 conditions. 14  There would be no change in the risk of “mining” the natural-origin population through the collection of broodstock because no natural-origin fish would be incorporated into the 16 broodstock under Alternative 1 or Alternative 3, or under existing conditions (Subsection 17 3.2.3.7, Risk of “Mining” Natural-origin Steelhead) (Table 15). Therefore, there would be no 18 risk to natural-origin steelhead from “mining.” 19  There would be no change in population viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead populations because early winter hatchery-origin steelhead provide no viability benefits under 21 Alternative 1 or under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.8, Population Viability Benefits), 22 and releases of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead under Alternative 3 would provide no 23 population viability benefits to natural origin-steelhead. 24 Relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions, Alternative 3 would result the following effects:  Less gene flow, competition and predation risks, and incidental fishing effects because fewer 26 hatchery-origin fish would be released under Alternative 3 relative to Alternative 2 and 27 existing conditions.  However, these risks would be low under both alternatives for reasons 28 discussed above. 29  The same hatchery facility risks as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, because the hatchery facilities would continue to operate under both alternatives. 1  The same risk of masking as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, although fewer 2 hatchery-origin fish would be released under Alternative 3 relative to Alternative 2. However, 3 these negative risks would be negligible under both alternatives because of differences in 4 return timing between hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead.  The same risk of disease transfer as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, since all of 6 the hatchery facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout), 7 which harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead. 8  The same lack of risk of “mining” the natural-origin population through the collection of 9 broodstock as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, because no natural-origin fish would be incorporated into the broodstock under either alternative. 11  The same lack of population viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead populations as 12 under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, because early winter hatchery-origin steelhead 13 provide no viability benefits, and early winter hatchery-origin steelhead would be released 14 under Alternative 2 and Alternative 3. 4.2.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that 16 Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d) 17 Rule 18 Under Alternative 4, WDFW would produce over time, the same number of hatchery-origin winter 19 steelhead would be produced as under Alternative 2 (total of 620,000 steelhead) and under existing conditions, but the broodstock source would change from the early winter Chambers Creek stock to native 21 steelhead broodstocks that are local to the respective river basins (Subsection 2.2.4, Alternative 4). The 22 programs would be intended to provide conservation benefits, as well as potential harvest benefits once 23 the depressed natural-origin steelhead populations become large enough. A considerable transition period 24 may be necessary to achieve harvest objectives. Relative to Alternative 1 under which the hatchery programs would be terminated, Alternative 4 would result in the following effects: 26  Gene flow from hatchery-origin steelhead to natural-origin steelhead would increase from 27 zero under Alternative 1 to up to 10 percent under Alternative 4 (Subsection 2.4.4, 28 Alternative 4). Higher gene flow is intended in hatchery programs using native broodstock 29 (integrated hatchery programs) so that the genetic characteristics of the hatchery-origin fish are similar to those of the natural-origin fish. Even though the gene flow between natural31 origin steelhead populations and hatchery-origin steelhead would be higher than under 32 Alternative 2, Alternative 3, and existing conditions, the higher gene flow levels would have 33 a low risk of harmful genetic effects on natural-origin steelhead populations in the 1  Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins because the  2  broodstock would be derived from the local native populations (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic  3  Risks) (HSRG 2009).   4    Predation (direct and indirect) on juvenile fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon, pink  salmon, and sockeye salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1 (Subsection 3.2.3.2,  6  Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize competitive interactions  7  by releasing the hatchery-origin steelhead when they are fully smolted, and, thus, actively  8  migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d;  9  WDFW 2014e). Therefore, Alternative 4 would result in a low, negative effect on predation  of natural-origin fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon, pink salmon, and sockeye salmon,  11  which would be the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and  12  Predation).  13    Competition between hatchery-origin steelhead and natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook  14  salmon, and coho salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1 (Subsection 3.2.3.2,  Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize competitive interactions  16  by releasing the hatchery-origin steelhead when they are fully smolted, and, thus, actively  17  migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d;  18  WDFWe).  Therefore, Alternative 4 would result in a low, negative effect on competition  19  with natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon populations, which  would be the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and  21  Predation).  22    Hatchery facility risks would remain the same as under existing conditions  23  (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks) and Alternative 1 since all hatchery facilities  24  would continue to operate under both Alternative 1 and Alternative 4, and all instream  structures (including weirs) would continue to be used and maintained.  There would be no  26  change in the hatchery facilities’ compliance with NMFS screening criteria at Dungeness  27  River Hatchery, Hurd Creek Hatchery, McKinnon Pond, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery,  28  Wallace River Hatchery, Reiter Ponds, and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3,  29  Hatchery Facility Risks).  As under Alternative 1, WDFW would be expected to complete its  already planned upgrade to the water intake screen at Kendall Creek Hatchery and Wallace  31  River Hatchery, and improve fish passage at the Dungeness River Hatchery and Tokul Creek  32  Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks).  1  The risk that the status of natural-origin steelhead would be masked by hatchery-origin 2 steelhead would increase as compared to Alternative 1 and existing conditions, because the 3 adult return and spawn timing of the hatchery-origin fish would be similar to natural-origin 4 steelhead. However, masking would have a low negative effect because all hatchery-origin fish would be marked as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.4, Masking). 6  Unlike under Alternative 1, under Alternative 4, when returns of natural-origin winter 7 steelhead are large enough, there would be recreational steelhead fisheries in the Dungeness, 8 Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, and tribal fisheries 9 targeting hatchery-origin fish.  In addition, compared to Alternative 1, due to the similarity in adult return timing of hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead under Alternative 4, and 11 greater encounter rates with natural-origin steelhead, negative incidental fishing effects would 12 be greater than under Alternative 1, especially for tribal fisheries that typically use non13 selective fishing gear (e.g., nets).  However, similar to existing conditions 14 (Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental Fishing Effects), the overall negative incidental fishing impacts on the natural-origin population would be low because (1) 100 percent of the 16 hatchery-origin fish would be marked and recreational fisheries would be mark-selective, so 17 impacts to unmarked natural-origin fish would be limited to hook-and-release mortalities 18 associated with fish that are legally caught and then released back into the water, 19 (2) recreational and tribal harvest managers would design fisheries to focus effort on hatchery-origin fish, and (3) cool water temperatures during the months when the recreational 21 steelhead fishery is open would minimize incidental hook-and-release mortality of natural22 origin steelhead (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014d; WDFW 23 2014e). 24  There would be no expected change in the risk of disease transfer since all of the hatchery facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout), as under 26 Alternative 1, which harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.6, Risk 27 of Disease Transfer) (Table 10), which would be the same as under existing conditions. 28  While there is generally a risk of “mining” the natural-origin population through the 29 collection of broodstock when a hatchery program incorporates natural-origin fish into the broodstock (Subsection 3.2.3.7, Risk of“Mining” Natural-origin Salmon andSteelhead), and 31 natural-origin steelhead populations are depressed in the Dungeness, Nooksack, 32 Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins (Table 15), in this case, the risk 33 would be low under Alternative 4, because broodstock collection would be contingent upon 34 availability of natural-origin fish, ensuring that an appropriate minimum number of fish 1 would be able to spawn naturally; and only after that threshold is ensured would a proportion 2 of additional returns be taken into the hatchery facilities. 3  In contrast to Alternative 1, Alternative 2, Alternative 3, and under existing conditions, where 4 no viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead would occur, it is possible that the viability of natural-origin steelhead would benefit under Alternative 4 (Subsection 3.2.3.8, Population 6 Viability Benefits), primarily through use of local, native broodstocks whose returns would 7 increase population abundance (including potential early-timed returns of natural-origin 8 winter steelhead), and could help to conserve genetic diversity and productivity of the 9 depressed natural-origin populations. Relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions, Alternative 4 would result in the following effects: 11  Alternative 4 would result in higher levels of gene flow because hatchery-origin steelhead 12 derived from local, native steelhead populations would have a more similar return and spawn 13 timing, compared to the hatchery-origin steelhead derived from Chambers Creek early winter 14 steelhead lineage (Figure 1).  However, because the hatchery-origin fish would be derived from the local, native steelhead populations, these higher levels of gene flow would provide a 16 similar genetic effect from gene flow on fitness (low negative) as the less than 2 percent gene 17 flow under Alternative 2 and under existing conditions. 18  Alternative 4 would result in the same levels of competition and predation risks (low, 19 negative) as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, because the same number of hatchery-origin fish would be released under both alternatives. 21  Hatchery facility risks would remain the same as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions 22 because all hatchery facilities would continue to operate under both Alternative 2 and 23 Alternative 4, and all instream structures (including weirs) would continue to be used and 24 maintained.   The risk that the status of natural-origin steelhead would be masked by hatchery-origin 26 steelhead would increase under Alternative 4 relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions, 27 because the adult return and spawn timing of the hatchery-origin fish would be more similar 28 to natural-origin steelhead. However, Alternative 4 would still result in a low negative effect 29 because all hatchery-origin steelhead would be marked, similar to Alternative 2 and under existing conditions. 31  Incidental fishing effects may be greater under Alternative 4 relative to Alternative 2 and 32 existing conditions, because the hatchery-origin fish derived from local, native broodstocks 1 would have the same run timing as natural-origin steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, 2 Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, the ability to design fisheries to 3 avoid natural-origin fish may be reduced, and so more natural-origin steelhead would be 4 subjected to incidental capture and release.  There would be no expected change in the risk of disease transfer under Alternative 4, 6 Alternative 2, and existing conditions since all of the hatchery facilities would continue to 7 propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout), which harbor many of the same diseases 8 as steelhead. 9  While there is generally a risk of “mining” the natural-origin population through the collection of broodstock when a hatchery program incorporates natural-origin fish into the 11 broodstock, and natural-origin steelhead populations are depressed in the Dungeness, 12 Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins (Table 15). In this case, 13 the risk would be negligible under Alternative 4, because broodstock collection would be 14 contingent upon availability of natural-origin fish, ensuring that an appropriate minimum number of fish would be able to spawn naturally; and only after that threshold is ensured 16 would a proportion of additional returns be taken into the hatchery facilities. 17  In contrast to Alternative 1, Alternative 2, and under existing conditions, where no viability 18 benefits to natural-origin steelhead would occur from releases of early winter hatchery-origin 19 steelhead, it is possible that the viability of natural-origin steelhead would benefit under Alternative 4, primarily through use of local, native broodstocks whose returns would 21 increase population abundance, and could help to conserve genetic diversity and productivity 22 of the depressed natural-origin populations. 23 4.2.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a 24 Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule 26 Under Alternative 5, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack, 27 Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be the same as under Alternative 2, and the production 28 level for the Skykomish River program would be reduced from 256,000 smolts to 167,600 smolts 29 (Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5), relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).  This would lead to relatively small and localized short-and long-term changes in effects relative to 31 existing conditions and the other alternatives. Relative to Alternative 1, under which the hatchery 32 programs would be terminated, Alternative 5 would increase the number of early winter steelhead 33 released into the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by 34 531,600 smolts. Alternative 5 would result in the following effects: 1  Gene flow from early winter hatchery-origin steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks), 2 would increase from zero under Alternative 1 to less than 2 percent, which would result in a 3 low negative effect on natural-origin steelhead populations in all basins. This gene flow 4 would likely result in a low negative effect to the fitness of all populations.  The risk of predation (direct and indirect) on juvenile fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon, 6 pink salmon, and sockeye salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1 7 (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize 8 interactions by releasing the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead when they are fully 9 smolted, and, thus, actively migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014e; WDFW 2016).  Therefore, Alternative 5 would result in a 11 low negative effect on predation of natural-origin fall Chinook salmon, fall chum salmon, 12 pink salmon, and sockeye salmon. 13  The risk of competition between hatchery-origin steelhead and natural-origin steelhead, 14 spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon would increase relative to Alternative 1 (Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation), but hatchery managers would minimize 16 competitive interactions by releasing the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead when they are 17 fully smolted, and, thus, actively migrating to marine waters (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b; 18 WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014e; WDFW 2016).  Therefore, Alternative 5 would result in a 19 low negative effect on competition with natural-origin steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon populations. 21  Hatchery facility risks would be the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.3, 22 Hatchery Facility Risks) and Alternative 1, since all hatchery facilities would continue to 23 operate under both Alternative 1 and Alternative 5, and all instream structures (including 24 weirs) would continue to be used and maintained.  There would be no change in the hatchery facilities’ compliance with NMFS screening criteria at Dungeness River Hatchery, Hurd 26 Creek Hatchery, McKinnon Pond, Whitehorse Ponds Hatchery, Wallace River Hatchery, 27 Reiter Ponds, and Tokul Creek Hatchery (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks).  As 28 under Alternative 1, WDFW would be expected to complete its already planned upgrade to 29 the water intake screens at Kendall Creek Hatchery and Wallace River Hatchery, and improve fish passage at the Dungeness River Hatchery and Tokul Creek Hatchery 31 (Subsection 3.2.3.3, Hatchery Facility Risks). 32  The risk that the status of natural-origin steelhead would be masked by early winter hatchery33 origin steelhead would increase relative to Alternative 1, but would still result in a negligible 1  negative effect because of differences in run timing between the hatchery-origin and natural 2  origin populations, which would be the same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.4,  3  Masking).  4    Unlike under Alternative 1, there would be harvest-oriented recreational steelhead fisheries in  the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, and  6  tribal fisheries for early winter hatchery-origin steelhead in terminal areas. Therefore,  7  negative incidental fishing effects from recreational and tribal fisheries would be greater than  8  under Alternative 1.  However, similar to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental  9  Fishing Effects), the negative incidental fishing impacts on the natural-origin population  (including potential re-expression of early-timed returns of natural-origin winter steelhead)  11  would be low, because (1) 100 percent of the hatchery-origin fish would be marked and  12  recreational fisheries would be mark-selective, so impacts to unmarked natural-origin fish  13  would be limited to hook-and-release mortalities associated with fish that are legally caught  14  and then released back into the water, (2) the adult return timing for the early winter  hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead populations is sufficiently separate, allowing  16  harvest managers to design and implement fisheries to avoid most effects on natural-origin  17  fish (although there would be an increase in the vulnerability to harvest of early-returning  18  natural-origin winter steelhead relative to Alternative 1), and (3) cool water temperatures  19  during the months when the recreational steelhead fishery is open would minimize incidental  hook-and-release mortality of natural-origin steelhead (WDFW 2014a; WDFW 2014b;  21  WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2014e: WDFW 2016).  22    There would be no expected change in the risk of disease transfer since all of the hatchery  23  facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon or trout) as under  24  Alternative 1, which harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead (Subsection 3.2.3.6, Risk  of Disease Transfer) (Table 10).  Therefore the risk would be the same as under existing  26  conditions.  27    There would be no change in the risk of “mining” the natural-origin population through the  28  collection of broodstock because no natural-origin fish would be incorporated into the  29  broodstock under Alternative 1 or Alternative 5, or under existing conditions  (Subsection 3.2.3.7, Risk of “Mining” Natural-origin Steelhead) (Table 15). Therefore, there  31  would be no risk to natural-origin steelhead from “mining.”  32    There would be no change in population viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead  33  populations because early winter hatchery-origin steelhead provide no viability benefits under  Chapter 4  118 March 2016November 2015  1 Alternative 1 or under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2.3.8, Population Viability Benefits), 2 and releases of early winter hatchery-origin steelhead under Alternative 5 would provide no 3 population viability benefits to natural origin-steelhead. 4 Relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions, Alternative 5 would result the following effects:  Under Alternative 5, 88,400 fewer steelhead would be released into the Skykomish River 6 basin. This would result in corresponding decreases in low gene flow, competition and 7 predation risk, and incidental fishing effects under Alternative 5 relative to Alternative 2 and 8 existing conditions.  Decreases in effects would be relatively small and localized compared to 9 Alternative 2. The decrease in numbers of steelhead released under Alternative 5 would result in improved confidence in evaluations of gene flow effects relative to Alternative 2. 11  Hatchery facility risks would be the same as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, 12 because the hatchery facilities would continue to operate under both alternatives. 13  The risk of masking would be the same as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, 14 although fewer hatchery-origin fish would be released under Alternative 5 relative to Alternative 2. However, these negative risks would be negligible under both alternatives 16 because of differences in return timing between hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead. 17  The risk of disease transfer would be the same as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, 18 since all of the hatchery facilities would continue to propagate other fish species (e.g., salmon 19 or trout), which harbor many of the same diseases as steelhead.  The lack of risk of “mining” the natural-origin population through the collection of 21 broodstock would be the same as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, because no 22 natural-origin fish would be incorporated into the broodstock under either alternative. 23  The lack of population viability benefits to natural-origin steelhead populations would be the 24 same as under Alternative 2 and existing conditions, because early winter hatchery-origin steelhead provide no viability benefits, and early winter hatchery-origin steelhead would be 26 released under Alternative 2 and Alternative 5. 27 4.3 Other Fish Species 28 The analyses of other fish species address effects of early winter steelhead hatchery programs proposed 29 under each alternative on existing conditions for other fish species described in Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species, when combined with effects anticipated under each alternative. The analysis focuses on natural-1  origin fish populations that are self-sustaining in the natural environment and are dependent on aquatic  2  habitat for migration, spawning, rearing, and food.  3  4.3.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule  4  Under Alternative 1, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be terminated immediately  6  (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 1), and 620,000 fewer steelhead would be produced by hatcheries in the  7  analysis area relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).  The reduction in  8  early winter hatchery-origin steelhead in the river basins would result in a short-and long-term reduction  9  in competition for space and food among freshwater species relative to existing conditions  (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  There would also be a reduction in predation risk by hatchery 11  origin steelhead on other fish species, and a potentially measurable reduction in the number of prey eaten  12  by hatchery-origin steelhead in the analysis area, relative to existing conditions.   13  However, because (1) the analysis area is only a small portion of each species’ range and (2) hatchery 14  origin steelhead are not exclusive predators or prey for any of the fish species, including bull trout,  Alternative 1 would be expected to have a negligible effect on other fish species (positive for some  16  species and negative for others) relative to existing conditions.  Consequently, Alternative 1 would not be  17  expected to change any short-or long-term risks to other fish species, or state or Federal species  18  designations relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  19  4.3.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  21  Under Alternative 2, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  22  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would operate as proposed in submitted HGMPs  23  (Subsection 2.2.2, Alternative 2).  Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would increase the number of  24  hatchery-origin steelhead produced in the analysis area by 620,000 smolts, which would be the same as  under existing conditions (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species). Therefore, there would be a short-and  26  long-term increase in risk of competition for space and food among freshwater species relative to  27  Alternative 1.  There would also be an increase in the risk of predation by hatchery-origin steelhead on  28  other fish species, and a potentially measurable increase in the number of prey eaten by steelhead in the  29  analysis area relative to Alternative 1, which would be similar to existing conditions.   However, because (1) the analysis area is only a small portion of each species’ range, and (2) steelhead  31  are not exclusive predators or prey for any of the fish species, including bull trout, Alternative 2 would be  32  expected to have negligible effects (positive for fish that eat steelhead and negative for other fish that are  33  eaten by steelhead) relative to Alternative 1.  Consequently, Alternative 2 would not be expected to  Chapter 4 120 March 2016November 2015  1  change any short-or long-term risks to other fish species or State or Federal species designations relative  2  to Alternative 1 or to existing conditions (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  3  4.3.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  4  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  Under Alternative 3, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  6  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be reduced by 50 percent relative to  7  Alternative 2 (Subsection 2.2.3, Alternative 3).  Relative to Alternative 1 under which the hatchery  8  programs would be terminated, Alternative 3 would increase the number of juvenile steelhead released  9  into the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by 310,000  smolts, which would lead to a short-and long-term increase in the risk of competition for space and food  11  among freshwater species relative to Alternative 1.  There would also be an increase in the risk of  12  predation by steelhead on other fish species, and a potentially measurable increase in the number of prey  13  eaten by steelhead in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1.   14  However, because (1) the analysis area is only a small portion of each species’ range, and (2) steelhead  are not exclusive predators or prey for any of the fish species, Alternative 3 would also be expected to  16  have negligible effects (positive for fish that eat steelhead and negative for fish that are eaten by  17  steelhead), including bull trout, relative to Alternative 1.  Consequently, Alternative 3 would not be  18  expected to change any short-or long-term risks to other fish species or State or Federal species  19  designations relative to Alternative 1 (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  Relative to existing conditions and to Alternative 2, Alternative 3 would release 310,000 fewer steelhead  21  into the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, which would  22  lead to a short-and long-term reduction in the risk of competition for space and food among freshwater  23  species relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions.  There would also be a reduction in the risk of  24  predation by steelhead on other fish species, and a potentially measurable reduction in the number of prey  eaten by steelhead in the analysis area relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions.   26  However, because (1) the analysis area is only a small portion of each species’ range, and (2) steelhead  27  are not exclusive predators or prey for any of the fish species, Alternative 3 would also be expected to  28  have a negligible effect on other fish species (positive for fish that are eaten by steelhead and negative for  29  fish that eat steelhead), including bull trout, relative to Alternative 2.  Consequently, Alternative 3 would  not be expected to change any State or Federal species designations relative to Alternative 2 and existing  31  conditions (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  1  4.3.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that  2  Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d)  3  Rule  4  Under Alternative 4, relative to Alternative 1, the same number of hatchery-origin winter steelhead would  be produced as under Alternative 2 and under existing conditions, but the broodstock source would  6  change from the early winter Chambers Creek stock to native steelhead broodstocks that are local to the  7  respective river basins (Subsection 2.2.4, Alternative 4).  Effects on other fish species, including bull  8  trout, would be identical to those under Alternative 2 (negligible) and existing conditions (Subsection 3.3,  9  Other Fish Species), because a change in broodstock would not affect ecological interactions between  hatchery-origin steelhead and other fish species.  11  4.3.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including  12  Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet  13  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  14  Under Alternative 5, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be the same as under Alternative 2, and the production  16  level for the Skykomish River program would be reduced from 256,000 smolts to 167,600 smolts  17  (Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5), relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).   18  Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 5 would increase the number of early winter steelhead released into  19  the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by 531,600 smolts,  which would lead to a short-and long-term increase in the risk of competition for space and food among  21  freshwater species relative to Alternative 1.  There would also be an increase in the risk of predation by  22  steelhead on other fish species, and a potentially measurable increase in the number of prey eaten by  23  steelhead in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1.   24  However, because (1) the analysis area is only a small portion of each species’ range, and (2) steelhead  are not exclusive predators or prey for any of the fish species, Alternative 5 would also be expected to  26  have negligible effects (positive for fish that eat steelhead and negative for fish that are eaten by  27  steelhead), including bull trout, relative to Alternative 1.  Consequently, Alternative 5 would not be  28  expected to change any short-or long-term risks to other fish species or State or Federal species  29  designations relative to Alternative 1 (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  Relative to existing conditions and to Alternative 2, under Alternative 5, 88,400 fewer steelhead would be  31  released into the Skykomish River basin, which would lead to a relatively small and localized short-and  32  long-term reduction in the risk of competition for space and food among freshwater species. There would  33  also be a small and localized reduction in the risk of predation by steelhead on other fish species, and a  34  potentially measurable reduction in the number of prey eaten by steelhead in the analysis area relative to  Alternative 2 and existing conditions.   Chapter 4 122 March 2016November 2015  1  However, because (1) the analysis area is only a small portion of each species’ range, and (2) steelhead  2  are not exclusive predators or prey for any of the fish species, Alternative 5 would be expected to have a  3  negligible effect on other fish species (positive for fish that are eaten by steelhead and negative for fish  4  that eat steelhead), including bull trout, relative to Alternative 2.  Consequently, Alternative 5 would not  be expected to change any State or Federal species designations relative to Alternative 2 and existing  6  conditions (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species).  7  4.4 Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale  8  The analysis of wildlife resources addresses effects of early winter steelhead hatchery programs on  9  Southern Resident killer whales. As described in Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer  Whale, effects of salmon and steelhead hatchery programs on wildlife species would be expected to be  11  generally negligible, and wildlife species in the analysis area would continue to occupy their existing  12  habitats in similar abundances and feed on a variety of prey, including salmon and steelhead, as under  13  existing conditions. Therefore, wildlife species in the analysis area are not analyzed in this EIS, with the  14  exception of Southern Resident killer whales (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer  Whale).  16  4.4.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule  17  Under Alternative 1, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  18  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be terminated immediately  19  (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 1), and fewer steelhead (juvenile and adult) would be available as a food  source for Southern Resident killer whales (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale).   21  Because (1) Alternative 1 would only lead to a small reduction in the total number of steelhead in the  22  Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins or in the analysis area,  23  and (2) Southern Resident killer whales do not feed exclusively on steelhead, Alternative 1 would be  24  expected to have a negligible negative effect on the diet, survival, distribution and listing status of the  species relative to the negligible positive effect under existing conditions (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife –  26  Southern Resident Killer Whale).  27  4.4.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet  28  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  29  Under Alternative 2, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would operate as proposed in the submitted  31  HGMPs (Subsection 2.2.2, Alternative 2). Consequently, relative to Alternative 1, more steelhead  32  (juveniles and adults) would be available as a food source for Southern Resident killer whales  33  (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale).  Because (1) Alternative 2 would only lead  34  to a small increase in the total number of steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  March 2016November 2015 123 Chapter 4  1  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins or in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1, and  2  (2) Southern Resident killer whales do not feed exclusively on steelhead, Alternative 2 would be expected  3  to have a negligible positive effect on the diet, survival, distribution and listing status of the species  4  relative to Alternative 1, similar to effects under existing conditions (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife-Southern  Resident Killer Whale).  6  4.4.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  7  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  8  Under Alternative 3, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  9  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be reduced by 50 percent relative to the  proposed hatchery programs (Subsection 2.2.3, Alternative 3).  Relative to Alternative 1 under which the  11  hatchery programs would be terminated, Alternative 3 would increase the number of juvenile steelhead in  12  the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins, and more steelhead  13  (juveniles and adults) would be available as a food source for Southern Resident killer whales  14  (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale).  Because (1) Alternative 3 would only lead  to a small increase in the total number of salmon and steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  16  Stillaguamish River, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie basins or in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1,  17  and (2) Southern Resident killer whales do not feed exclusively on steelhead, Alternative 3 would be  18  expected to have negligible positive effects on the diet, survival, distribution, and listing status of the  19  species relative to Alternative 1, and effects would be similar to the negligible positive effects under  existing conditions (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale).  21  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 3 would reduce the number of hatchery 22  origin steelhead released in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River  23  basins by 50 percent and, therefore, reduce the total number of steelhead available as food to Southern  24  Resident killer whales. Because (1) Alternative 3 would reduce the total number of juvenile hatchery- origin steelhead in the analysis area by a very small percentage relative to the total number of salmon and  26  steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie basin or in the  27  analysis area relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, and (2) Southern Resident killer whales do  28  not feed exclusively on steelhead, Alternative 3 would be expected to have a similar, but less pronounced  29  negligible positive effect on the diet, survival, distribution, and listing status of the species relative to  existing conditions or Alternative 2.  31  4.4.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that  32  Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d)  33  Rule  34  Under Alternative 4, WDFW the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would produce the same number of winter  Chapter 4 124 March 2016November 2015  1  hatchery-origin steelhead (620,000) as under Alternative 2, but would replace the early winter Chambers  2  Creek steelhead broodstock with native steelhead broodstocks that are local to the respective river basins  3  (Subsection 2.2.4, Alternative 4).  Effects on Southern Resident killer whales would be identical to those  4  under Alternative 2 (negligible positive) and existing conditions, because a change in broodstock would  not affect the number or availability of hatchery-origin steelhead available to Southern Resident killer  6  whales as prey.  7  4.4.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a  8  Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet  9  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  Under Alternative 5, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  11  Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be the same as under Alternative 2, and the production  12  level for the Skykomish River program would be reduced from 256,000 yearlings to 167,600 yearlings  13  (Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5), relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).   14  Relative to Alternative 1, under which the hatchery programs would be terminated, Alternative 5 would  increase the number of juvenile steelhead in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and  16  Snoqualmie River basins by 531,600 smolts, and more returning steelhead (adults) would be available as  17  a food source for Southern Resident killer whales (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer  18  Whale). Because (1) Alternative 5 would represent 3 percent of the total number of salmon and steelhead  19  released into the analysis area relative to Alternative 1 (531,600 smolts out of the 160 million salmon and  steelhead released into Puget Sound, see Table Y in Chapter 3), and (2) Southern Resident killer whales  21  do not feed exclusively on adult steelhead (preferring Chinook salmon), Alternative 5 would be expected  22  to have negligible positive effects on the diet, survival, distribution, and listing status of the species  23  relative to Alternative 1, and effects would be similar to the negligible positive effects under existing  24  conditions (Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale).  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, under Alternative 5, 88,400 fewer hatchery-origin  26  steelhead smolts would be released in the Skykomish River basin, which would lead to a reduction in the  27  total number of steelhead (adults) available as food to Southern Resident killer whales.  Because  28  (1) Alternative 5 would reduce the total number of hatchery-origin steelhead in the analysis area by an  29  unsubstantial amount relative to the total number of salmon and steelhead released in the analysis area  (160 million) relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, and (2) Southern Resident killer whales do  31  not feed exclusively on adult steelhead (preferring Chinook salmon), Alternative 5 would be expected to  32  have a similar, but less negligible positive effect on the diet, survival, distribution, and listing status of the  33  species relative to existing conditions or Alternative 2.  1  4.5 Socioeconomics  2  The socioeconomic analysis addresses effects of early winter steelhead hatchery programs on existing  3  socioeconomic conditions of regional and local economies described in Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics,  4  when combined with effects anticipated under each alternative. This assessment of the socioeconomic  effects of the alternatives evaluates predicted changes in recreational trips, hatchery operational cost  6  values (e.g., procurement of goods and services needed to operate hatcheries), and personal income and  7  jobs associated with fisheries on early winter hatchery-origin steelhead that would contribute to economic  8  conditions in the analysis area.  9  4.5.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule  Under Alternative 1, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  11  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be terminated immediately  12  (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 1), and 620,000 fewer steelhead would be produced by hatcheries in the  13  analysis area relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).  However, all of the  14  hatchery facilities that support these hatchery programs would continue to operate because they support  hatchery programs (e.g., for salmon) that are not part of the Proposed Action or its alternatives  16  (Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics).  17  None of the 19.3 FTE jobs supporting the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be  18  affected under Alternative 1, compared to existing conditions, because the hatchery facilities would be  19  used for production of other species (e.g., salmon) (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations; Appendix C,  Socioeconomics Methods). However, the hatchery programs would no longer need to procure local goods  21  and services, which would lead to a loss of $496,000 that would have low negative impact to personal  22  income and jobs in the regional economy, relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery  23  Operations).   24  NMFS estimates that early winter steelhead from the hatchery programs produce 4,412 adults that  contribute $5.3 million from annual angler expenditures associated with 78,400 fishing trips in the  26  analysis area under existing conditions (Subsection 3.5.2, Fisheries), which would not occur under  27  Alternative 1.  The overall economic loss of $5.8 million under Alternative 1 ($496,000 plus $5.3 million)  28  would have a moderate negative effect on socioeconomic resources in the analysis area, relative to  29  existing conditions.  Under Alternative 1, the number of steelhead available to tribal members as a food source would be  31  reduced, which may increase tribal reliance on other fish species or consumer goods, or increase travel  32  costs to participate in other steelhead fisheries, relative to existing conditions.  Further, Alternative 1  33  would reduce the amount of revenue that could be generated by tribes through the harvest and sale of  Chapter 4 126 March 2016November 2015  1  steelhead. Therefore, Alternative 1 would be expected to have a moderate negative effect on affected  2  tribes, relative to existing conditions.  3  4.5.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet  4  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  Under Alternative 2, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  6  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would operate as proposed in the submitted  7  HGMPs (Subsection 2.2.2, Alternative 2). Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would increase the  8  number of hatchery-origin steelhead produced in the analysis area by 620,000 smolts, which would be the  9  same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).  None of the 19.3 FTE jobs supporting the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be  11  affected under Alternative 2Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would increase jobs by 19.3 FTE to  12  support the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs, which is the same as under existing conditions  13  (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations; Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods). The hatchery programs  14  would procure local goods and services, which would contribute $496,000 and have a low positive impact  on personal income and jobs in the regional economy (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations).  16  Relative to Alternative 1, hatchery production under Alternative 2 would produce 4,412 adults  17  (Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods) which would contribute $5.3 million from annual angler  18  expenditures associated with 78,400 fishing trips in the analysis area. The overall economic contribution  19  of $5.8 million under Alternative 2 ($496,000 plus $5.3 million) would be the same as under existing  conditions, and would have a moderate positive effect on the socioeconomic resources in the analysis  21  areas, relative to Alternative 1.  22  Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would increase the number of steelhead available to tribal  23  members as a food source and may reduce tribal reliance on other species or consumer goods, or reduce  24  travel costs to participate in other fisheries (Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics).  Further, relative to  Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would increase the amount of revenue that could be generated by tribes  26  through the sale of fish. These effects would, however, continue to represent existing conditions.  27  Therefore, Alternative 2 would be expected to have a moderate positive effect on affected tribes, relative  28  to Alternative 1, but no change in effect relative to existing conditions.  29  4.5.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  31  Under Alternative 3, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  32  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be reduced by 50 percent relative to the  33  submitted HGMPs (Subsection 2.2.3, Alternative 3), and relative to existing conditions. Relative to  March 2016November 2015 127 Chapter 4  1  Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would increase the number of hatchery-origin steelhead produced in the  2  analysis area by 310,000 smolts.  3  None of the 19.3 FTE jobs supporting the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be  4  affected under Alternative 3, because the hatchery facilities would be used for production of other species  5  (e.g., salmon) (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations; Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods). However,  6  under Alternative 3, expenditures on goods and services needed to operate the hatchery programs would  7  be reduced (estimated at about $65,000), relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions (Appendix C,  8  Socioeconomics Methods), which would have a negligible negativepositive impact on personal income  9  and jobs in the regional economy (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations)  10  Relative to Alternative 1, hatchery production under Alternative 3 would produce 2,206 adults  11  (Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods) which would contribute $4.4 million from annual angler  12  expenditures associated with 59,800 fishing trips in the analysis area.  The overall economic contribution  13  of $4.8 million under Alternative 3 ($431,000 plus $4.4 million) would have a moderate positive effect on  14  the socioeconomic resources in the analysis areas, relative to Alternative 1. This effect would be the same  15  as under existing conditions.  16  Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 3 would increase the number of steelhead available to tribal  17  members as a food source and may reduce tribal reliance on other consumer goods or reduce travel costs  18  to participate in other fisheries (Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics).  Further, relative to Alternative 1,  19  Alternative 3 would increase the amount of revenue that could be generated through the sale of fish. Such  20  increases would not likely match existing food source availability and revenues, however, because  21  hatchery production would decrease 50 percent compared to existing conditions. Therefore, Alternative 3  22  would be expected to have a low positive effect on affected tribes, relative to Alternative 1.  23  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 3 would reduce the number of hatchery 24  origin steelhead released in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River  25  basins2 .  This would reduce the total number of steelhead harvested annually in recreational fisheries in  2 As explained in Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods, it is assumed that changes in operation and maintenance  costs would be proportional to differences between production levels under the alternatives. In contrast, labor  income from the five hatchery programs under the Alternative 1 (No Action), and Alternative 3 (Reduced  Production), and Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative), is assumed to remain the same as estimated for the Proposed  Action (Alternative 2), because no jobs are assumed to be lost under any alternative due to operations for programs  (e.g., salmon) not included in the Proposed Action. However, under Alternative 1, and Alternative 3, and Alternative  5, regional income generated by expected changes in hatchery-related expenditures associated with procurement of  goods and services and from angler expenditures, would change, because procurement spending to achieve the  production levels, and associated recreational angler effort, would change under the alternatives.  1  the river basins from about 4,412 to 2,206 adults, associated angler effort would decline by an estimated  2  19,600 trips (25 percent) to 59,800 trips, and overall regional economic income would be reduced  3  $1.0 million to $4.8 million, relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions.  4  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 3 also would reduce the number of steelhead  available to tribal members as a food source and may increase tribal reliance on other consumer goods or  6  increase travel costs to participate in other fisheries (Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics).  Further, relative  7  to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 3 would reduce the amount of revenue that could be  8  generated by tribes through the sale of fish.  9  4.5.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that  Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d)  11  Rule  12  Under Alternative 4, relative to Alternative 1, the same number of hatchery-origin winter steelhead would  13  be produced as under existing conditions and Alternative 2, but the broodstock source would change from  14  the early winter Chambers Creek stock to native steelhead broodstocks that are local to the respective  river basins (Subsection 2.2.4, Alternative 4). As described in Appendix C, Socioeconomic Methods,  16  under Alternative 4, it is assumed that the smolt-to-adult survival rates of fish from early winter hatchery  17  programs would be similar to smolt-to-adult survival rates of fish from native broodstocks, and therefore  18  over time, the harvest-related socioeconomic effects of Alternative 4 would not differ from existing  19  conditions or Alternative 2. Impacts would be expected during the transition period from early winter  steelhead broodstock to native broodstock. Therefore, socioeconomic effects would be less in the short  21  term, but identical to those under existing conditions and Alternative 2 (moderate positive effect) because  22  over time, the same number of fish would be produced and harvested.  23  4.5.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs Including a  24  Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  26  Under Alternative 5, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  27  Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be the same as under Alternative 2, and the production  28  level for the Skykomish River program would be reduced from 256,000 smolts to 167,600 smolts  29  (Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5), relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).   Under Alternative 5, the total number of steelhead smolts released would decrease by 88,400 smolts,  31  relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions. Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 5 would increase  32  the total number of early winter steelhead released into the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  33  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by 531,600 smolts,  1  None of the 19.3 FTE jobs supporting the five early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be  2  affected under Alternative 5 because the hatchery facilities would be used for production of other species  3  (e.g., salmon) (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations; Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods). However,  4  under Alternative 5, expenditures on goods and services needed to operate the hatchery programs would  be reduced (estimated at about $19,000), relative to Alternative 2 and existing conditions (Appendix C,  6  Socioeconomics Methods), which would have a negligible negative impact on personal income and jobs  7  in the regional economy (Subsection 3.5.1, Hatchery Operations).  8  Relative to Alternative 1, hatchery production under Alternative 5 would produce 3,633 adult steelhead  9  (Appendix C, Socioeconomics Methods), which would support $4.9 million from annual angler  expenditures associated with 72,912 fishing trips in the analysis area.  The overall economic contribution  11  of $5.4 million under Alternative 5 ($477,000 plus $4.9 million) would have a moderate positive effect on  12  the socioeconomic resources in the analysis areas, relative to Alternative 1. This effect would be the same  13  as under existing conditions.  14  Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 5 would increase the number of steelhead available to tribal  members as a food source and may reduce tribal reliance on other consumer goods (Subsection 3.5,  16  Socioeconomics).  Further, relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 5 would increase the amount of revenue  17  that could be generated through the sale of fish. Total hatchery production would decrease by  18  88,400 smolts compared to existing conditions; however, Alternative 5 would be expected to have an  19  overall moderate positive effect on affected tribes relative to Alternative 1. This effect would be the same  as under existing conditions.  21  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 5 would reduce the number of hatchery 22  origin steelhead released in Skykomish River basin. In addition, under Alternative 5 the total number of  23  steelhead harvested annually in recreational fisheries in the river basins would decrease from about  24  4,412 to 3,633 adults, associated angler effort would decline by an estimated 5,488 trips (7 percent) to  72,912 trips, and overall regional economic income would be reduced $369,000 to $5.4 million, relative  26  to Alternative 2 and existing conditions.  27  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 5 also would reduce the number of steelhead  28  available to tribal members as a food source and may increase tribal reliance on other consumer goods  29  (Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics).  Furthermore, relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2,  Alternative 5 would reduce the amount of revenue that could be generated by tribes through the sale of  31  fish.  1  4.6 Environmental Justice  2  The environmental justice analysis addresses effects of early winter steelhead hatchery programs on  3  existing environmental justice conditions in the analysis area described in Subsection 3.6, Environmental  4  Justice, when combined with effects anticipated under each alternative.  4.6.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) – Do Not Make a Determination under the 4(d) Rule  6  Under Alternative 1, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be terminated immediately  7  (Subsection 2.2.1, Alternative 1), and 620,000 fewer steelhead would be produced by hatcheries in the  8  analysis area relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).As a result, there  9  would be a loss of fishing opportunities in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and  Snoqualmie River basins relative to existing conditions.  All four of the counties in the analysis area are  11  environmental justice communities of concern because they meaningfully deviate from thresholds for low  12  income or minority populations (Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice) (Table 13).  Therefore, overall,  13  all counties in the analysis area would be similarly affected by the termination of the early winter  14  steelhead hatchery programs and loss of fishing opportunities under Alternative 1 would result in low and  negative environmental justice impacts, relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.6, Environmental  16  Justice). The most substantial impacts would be expected on the 13 communities of concern that are  17  associated with steelhead fishing. Clallam County and Whatcom County may be affected to a greater  18  extent than Snohomish and King Counties because per capita income and the percentage of persons below  19  the poverty level are the highest.  Because of the unique connection of Native American tribes to salmon and steelhead, any reduction in  21  steelhead harvest opportunities pose a disproportionate effect on Native American tribes. Therefore,  22  Alternative 1 would have a moderate negative impact on the following tribes: Lummi Nation, Nooksack  23  Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Tribe, Tulalip Tribes, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, Jamestown  24  S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe, relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.6,  Environmental Justice).  26  4.6.2 Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) – Make a Determination that the Submitted HGMPs Meet  27  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  28  Under Alternative 2, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  29  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would operate as proposed in the submitted  HGMPs (Subsection 2.2.2, Alternative 2). Relative to Alternative 1, Alternative 2 would increase the  31  number of hatchery-origin steelhead produced in the analysis area by 620,000 smolts, which would be the  32  same as under existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).  Relative to Alternative 1,  33  Alternative 2 would increase fishing opportunities in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  1  Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins.  However, such increases in fishing opportunities would be at  2  the same level as under current, existing conditions (Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice).  3  Overall, all counties in the environmental justice analysis area would be similarly affected by  4  implementation of the proposed HGMPs and fishing opportunities under Alternative 2, which would  result in low positive effects, relative to Alternative 1.  However, the low positive effects would continue  6  to represent existing conditions. The most substantial impacts would be expected on the 13 communities  7  of concern that are associated with steelhead fishing. Clallam County and Whatcom County may be  8  affected to a greater extent than Snohomish and King Counties because per capita income and the  9  percentage of persons below the poverty level are the highest.  Because of the unique connection of Native American tribes to salmon and steelhead, any changes in  11  harvest opportunity would pose a disproportionate effect on Native American tribes if the change reduces  12  harvest in their “usual and accustomed” fishing areas.  Because Alternative 2 would increase harvest  13  opportunities for tribes in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1, there would be a moderate positive  14  impact on the following tribes: Lummi Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Tribe,  Tulalip Tribes, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower Elwha Klallam  16  Tribe.  However, such increases in harvest opportunities would be at the same levels as under current,  17  existing conditions (Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice).  18  4.6.3 Alternative 3 (Reduced Production) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs with  19  Reduced Production Levels Meet Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  Under Alternative 3, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  21  Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be reduced by 50 percent relative to the  22  proposed hatchery programs (Subsection 2.2.3, Alternative 3), and 310,000 fewer steelhead would be  23  produced in the analysis area relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead).   24  Relative to Alternative 1 under which the hatchery programs would be terminated, Alternative 3 would  increase fishing opportunities in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie  26  River basins.  Such increases would not be at the same levels as under current, existing conditions  27  (Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice).  28  Overall, all counties in the environmental justice analysis area would be similarly affected by  29  implementation of the proposed HGMPs and fishing opportunities under Alternative 32, which would  result in low positive effects relative to Alternative 1, which would be similar to existing conditions. The  31  most substantial impacts would be expected on the 13 communities of concern that are associated with  32  steelhead fishing. Clallam County and Whatcom County may be affected to a greater extent than  1  Snohomish and King Counties because per capita income and the percentage of persons below the  2  poverty level are the highest.  3  Because of the unique connection of Native American tribes to salmon and steelhead, any changes in  4  harvest opportunity would pose a disproportionate effect on Native American tribes if the change reduces  harvest in their “usual and accustomed” fishing areas.  Because Alternative 3 would increase harvest  6  opportunities for tribes in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1, there would be a moderate, positive  7  impact on the following tribes: Lummi Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Tribe,  8  Tulalip Tribes, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower Elwha Klallam  9  Tribe.  This benefit would, however, be lower than under existing conditions (Subsection 3.6,  Environmental Justice).  11  Relative to existing conditions and Alternative 2, Alternative 3 would reduce harvest opportunities for  12  tribes in the analysis area. Consequently, there would be a moderate negative impact on the following  13  tribes: Lummi Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Tribe, Tulalip Tribes, Port Gamble  14  S’Klallam Tribe, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe.  4.6.4 Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) – Make a Determination that Revised HGMPs that  16  Replace Chambers Creek Stock with a Native Broodstock Meet Requirements of the 4(d)  17  Rule  18  Under Alternative 4, WDFW would produce the same number of hatchery-origin winter steelhead would  19  be produced as under Alternative 2, but the broodstock source would change from the early winter  Chambers Creek steelhead stock to native broodstocks that are local to the river basins (Subsection 2.2.4,  21  Alternative 4). Impacts would be expected during the transition period from early winter steelhead  22  broodstock to native broodstock. However, eEnvironmental justice effects would be identical to those  23  under Alternative 2 (low positive to environmental justice counties of concern, and moderate positive for  24  affected tribes) because the change in broodstock would over time lead to the same number of hatchery- origin steelhead available for harvest.  26  4.6.5 Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) – Make a Determination that HGMPs including a  27  Revised HGMP with Reduced Production Levels in Skykomish River Basin Meet  28  Requirements of the 4(d) Rule  29  Under Alternative 5, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs in the Dungeness, Nooksack,  Stillaguamish, and Snoqualmie River basins would be the same as under Alternative 2, except that the  31  production level for the Skykomish River program would be reduced from 256,000 smolts to 167,600  32  smolts (Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5), relative to existing conditions (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and  33  Steelhead).  Relative to Alternative 1 under which the hatchery programs would be terminated,  34  Alternative 5 would increase the total number of early winter steelhead released into the Dungeness,  March 2016November 2015 133 Chapter 4  1 Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins by 531,600 smolts, and would 2 increase fishing opportunities in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie 3 River basins. Such increases would not be at the same levels as under current, existing conditions 4 (Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice). Overall, all counties in the environmental justice analysis area would be similarly affected by 6 implementation of the proposed HGMPs and fishing opportunities under Alternative 5, which would 7 result in low positive effects relative to Alternative 1, which would be similar to existing conditions. The 8 most substantial impacts would be expected on the 13 communities of concern that are associated with 9 steelhead fishing. Clallam County and Whatcom County may be affected to a greater extent than Snohomish and King Counties because per capita income and the percentage of persons below the 11 poverty level are the highest. 12 Because of the unique connection of Native American tribes to salmon and steelhead, any changes in 13 harvest opportunity would pose a disproportionate effect on Native American tribes if the change reduces 14 harvest in their “usual and accustomed” fishing areas.  Because Alternative 5 would increase harvest opportunities for tribes in the analysis area relative to Alternative 1, there would be a moderate, positive 16 impact on the following tribes: Lummi Nation, Nooksack Tribe, Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians, Tulalip 17 Tribes, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, and Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe.  18 This benefit would, however, be lower than under existing conditions (Subsection 3.6, Environmental 19 Justice). Relative to existing conditions and to Alternative 2, under Alternative 5 fewer steelhead would be released into the Skykomish River basin, which would lead to a localized negative impact on tribal 21 harvest opportunity in that basin. 22 4.7 Summary of Resource Effects 23 This subsection provides a summary of potential direct and indirect environmental effects on the 24 physical, biological, and social environments that are associated with the alternatives. Cumulative effects associated with the alternatives are described in Chapter 5, Cumulative 26 Effects. Each subsection listed below describes potential effects on a specific resource topic; 27 each resource topic is described in a corresponding main subsection in Chapter 3, Affected 28 Environment. The specific order of the resource effects summarized in this subsection is: 29  Water Quantity (Subsection 4.1)  Salmon and Steelhead (Subsection 4.2) 31  Other Fish Species (Subsection 4.3) 32  Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale (Subsection 4.4) 1  Socioeconomics (Subsection 4.5) 2  Environmental Justice (Subsection 4.6) 3 Table 16 summarizes predicted effects from implementation of the No-action Alternative (Alternative 1) 4 and the action alternatives (Alternative 2 through Alternative 5 Alternative 4). This table summarizes the 5 detailed resource discussions in Subsection 4.1, Water Quantity, through Subsection 4.6, Environmental 6 Justice. Refer to those subsections for context and background to support conclusions stated in Table 16. 7 No preferred alternative has been identified in this draft EIS (Subsection 2.4, Selection of a Preferred 8 Alternative and an Environmentally Preferred Alternative). Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table 16. Summary of environmental consequences by resource and alternative. Resource  Alternative 1 (No Action – termination)  Alternative 21 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 31 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 41 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 51 (Preferred Alternative)  Water Quantity  Compared to existing conditions, the early winter steelhead hatchery programs would be terminated, but all of the hatchery facilities that support the programs would continue to operate to produce fish for programs that are not part of the Proposed Action. Short-and long-term water use may be less than under existing conditions because no early winter steelhead would be produced.  The hatchery programs would continue to operate at existing levels, and would have negligible to moderate negative effects on water quantity, depending on the hatchery program, compared to Alternative 1.  Effects on water quantity would be the same as Alternative 2, because all of the hatchery facilities that support the programs would continue to operate to produce fish for programs that are not part of the Proposed Action.. Same as Alternative 2, although water use would be reduced to support lower production levels of early winter steelhead.  Same as Alternative 32.  Same as Alternative 3.  Salmon and  Because early winter  The hatchery programs  Same as Alternative 2,  Same as Alternative 2  Similar to Alternative 2,  Steelhead  steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, negative and positive effects to salmon or steelhead from the programs would be eliminated, compared to existing conditions.  would continue to operate at existing levels, and would generally have negligible to low moderate negative effects on gene flow, competition and predation, hatchery facilities, masking, incidental fishing, and disease transfer effects; and negligible positive effects from nutrient cycling, depending on the hatchery program and affected species. As under existing conditions, there would be no benefit to the population viability of the listed steelhead DPS.  except that negative effects from gene flow, competition and predation, hatchery facilities, masking, incidental fishing, and disease transfer from early winter steelhead would be reduced. There would be no change to the population viability benefit of the listed steelhead DPS, compared to Alternative 2.  except that collection of local native broodstock could have a low negative effect on the abundance and spatial structure of the natural-origin populations (i.e., mining), and a potential positive benefit to viability of the listed steelhead DPS.  except that negative and positive effects would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  Chapter 4 136 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table 16. Summary of environmental consequences by resource and alternative. (continued) Resource  Alternative 1 (No Action – termination)  Alternative 21 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 31 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 41 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 51 (Preferred Alternative)  Other Fish Species  Because early winter steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, other fish species would be affected if they compete with, are prey of (positive effect), or prey on (negative effect) early winter steelhead, compared to existing conditions.  The hatchery programs would continue to operate at existing levels, and would have low negative to negligible positive effects on other fish species if they compete with or are prey of (negative effect), or prey on fish from early winter steelhead hatchery programs (positive effect), compared to Alternative 1.  Same as Alternative 2, except that the food supply for fish species that benefit from steelhead as prey would be reduced, and risk to other fish species that compete with, are prey of, or prey on steelhead would be reduced, compared to Alternative 2.  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2, except that negative and positive effects and would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  Wildlife –  Because early winter  The hatchery programs  Similar to Alternative 2,  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2,  Southern  steelhead hatchery  would continue to operate at  except that early winter  except that positive  Resident killer  production would be  existing levels, and would  steelhead hatchery  effects and would be less  whale  terminated, early winter steelhead prey that would have been available to Southern Resident killer whales under existing conditions would be eliminated. This reduction from existing conditions would likely result in a negligible negative effect.  have a negligible positive effect on Southern Resident killer whales, which would continue to occupy their existing habitats with a similar abundance, and would continue to prey on salmon and steelhead, especially Chinook salmon, compared to Alternative 1.  production and adult returns would decrease, reducing the supply of early winter steelhead available to Southern Resident killer whales as prey. Alternative 3 would have a less negligible positive effect than, similar to Alternative 2, but less pronounced.  than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  March 2016November 2015 137 Chapter 4 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table 16. Summary of environmental consequences by resource and alternative. (continued) Resource  Alternative 1 (No Action – termination)  Alternative 21 (Proposed Action)  Alternative 31 (Reduced Production)  Alternative 41 (Native Broodstock)  Alternative 51 (Preferred Alternative)  Southern Resident killer whales would continue to occupy their existing habitats with a similar abundance, and would continue to prey on available salmon and other steelhead, especially Chinook salmon, as under existing conditions.  Socioeconomics  Because early winter steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, non-tribal and tribal fishing opportunities would be reduced and there would be a loss of personal income and jobs compared to existing conditions.  The hatchery programs would continue to operate at existing levels, and would have low to moderate positive socioeconomic effects from hatchery operations and fishing activities (non-tribal and tribal), compared to Alternative 1.  Same as Alternative 2, except that the socioeconomic effects from hatchery operations and fishing (non-tribal and tribal) would decrease.  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2, except that positive effects and would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  Environmental Justice  Because early winter steelhead hatchery production would be terminated, reduced fishing opportunities would negatively impact all communities of concern, and affected Native American tribes, compared to existing conditions.  The hatchery programs would continue to operate at existing levels, and would provide low positive effects from fishing opportunities for all communities of concern, and moderate positive effects for Native American tribes, compared to Alternative 1.  Same as Alternative 2, except that fishing opportunities for all communities of concern, and for Native American tribes, would decrease.  Same as Alternative 2.  Similar to Alternative 2, except that positive effects and would be less than Alternative 2, but greater than Alternative 3.  1 1 Potential differences between the no action and the action alternatives would be due to differences in hatchery production levels and program type under the action alternatives. Chapter 4 138 March 2016November 2015 2  5 CUMULATIVE EFFECTS  3  5.1 Introduction  4  The National Environmental Policy Act defines cumulative effects as “the impact on the environment  5  which results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably  6  foreseeable future actions, regardless of what agency (Federal or non-Federal) or person undertakes such  7  other actions” (40 CFR 1508.7).  Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) guidelines recognize that it is  8  not practical to analyze the cumulative effects of an action from every conceivable perspective, but rather,  9  the intent is to focus on those effects that are truly meaningful. In other words, if several separate actions  10  have been taken or are intended to be taken within the same geographic area, all of the relevant actions  11  together (cumulatively) need to be reviewed, to determine whether the actions together could have a  12  significant impact on the human environment. Past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions  13  include those that are Federal and non-Federal. For this EIS analysis, they also include those that are  14  hatchery-related (e.g., hatchery production levels) and non-hatchery related (e.g., human development).  15  The cumulative effects of a Proposed Action can be represented as an equation:  16  Proposed Action + Past Actions + Present Actions + Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions =  17  Cumulative Effects  18  The CEQ provides an 11-step process for cumulative effects analyses that is woven into the larger NEPA  19  process and into documents supporting a Federal action (CEQ 1997) (Table 17). Other subsections of this  20  EIS are relevant as support for this cumulative effects analysis.  21  Chapter 3, Affected Environment, describes the existing conditions (or baseline, for the purposes of this  22  chapter) for each resource and reflects the effects of past actions and present condition.  Chapter 4,  23  Environmental Consequences, evaluates the direct and indirect effects of the alternatives on each  24  resource’s baseline conditions.  This chapter considers the cumulative effects of each alternative in the  25  context of past actions, present conditions, and reasonably foreseeable future actions and conditions.  Table 17. CEQ cumulative effects analysis process and documentation within this EIS. Steps in the Process  Location within this EIS  Scoping  1  Identify the significant cumulative effects issues associated with the proposed action and define the assessment goals  Subsections 1.2, 1.3, 1.6, and 5.5  2  Establish the geographic scope for the analysis  Subsections 1.4 and 5.1.1  3  Establish the time frame for the analysis  Subsection 5.1.1  4  Identify other actions affecting the resources, ecosystems, and human communities of concern  Subsection 5.4  Describing the AffectedEnvironment  5  Characterize the resources, ecosystems, and human communities identified in scoping in terms of their response to change and capacity to withstand stresses  Chapter 3  6  Characterize the stresses affecting these resources, ecosystems, and human communities and relations to regulatory thresholds  7  Define a baseline condition for the resources, ecosystems and human communities  Determining the Environmental Consequences  8  Identify the important cause-and-effect relationships between human activities and resources, ecosystems, and human communities  Chapter 3 and Subsections 5.2 to 5.5  9  Determine the magnitude and significance of cumulative effects  Subsection 5.6  10  Modify or add alternatives to avoid, minimize, or mitigate significant cumulative effects  Chapter 2  11  Monitor the cumulative impacts of the selected alternatives and apply adaptive management  Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative) including monitoring and adaptive management as described in HGMPs  2  3  5.1.1  Geographic and Temporal Scales  4  The cumulative effects analysis area includes the project area described in Subsection 1.4, Project and  5  Analysis Areas, and additionally includes the entire United States and Canadian portions of the Strait of  6  Juan de Fuca, Strait of Georgia, and all connecting channels and adjoining waters, all of which  7  encompasses an area collectively known as the Salish Sea. The area is also commonly referred to as the  8  Georgia Basin, Strait of Juan de Fuca, and Puget Sound ecosystem. This cumulative effects area was  9  determined based on the geography, topography, waterways, and natural interactions that occur among  10  the ecosystems present in Puget Sound.  Biological resources and human populations within the Salish  11  Sea cumulative effects area share a common airshed, common watershed, and common flyway.  The  12  developed area has a population of approximately 7 million people with some population projections to  13  9.4 million by 2025 (Environment Canada-EPA 2008).  14  The temporal scope of past and present actions for the affected resources encompasses actions that  15  occurred prior to and after Puget Sound salmon and steelhead species became listed under the ESA.  This  Chapter 5  140  March 2016November 2015  1  is also the temporal context within which affected resources are described in Chapter 3, Affected  2  Environment, whereby existing conditions are a result of prior and ongoing actions in the EIS project  3  area.  4  5.1.2 Chapter Organization  Provided below are known past, present, and future actions from a regional context that have occurred,  6  are occurring, or are reasonably likely to occur within the cumulative effects analysis area.  7  Subsection 5.2, Past Actions, summarizes past actions that affected the cumulative effects analysis area;  8  Subsection 5.3, Present Conditions, describes current overall trends for the area; and Subsection 5.4,  9  Future Actions and Conditions, describes climate change effects, development, habitat restoration,  hatchery production, and fisheries activities and objectives supported by agencies and other non 11  governmental organizations to restore habitat in the cumulative effects analysis area.  Finally,  12  Subsection 5.5, Cumulative Effects by Resource, describes how these past, present, and future actions  13  affect each resource evaluated in this EIS, and specifically focuses on the effects of alternatives, when  14  possible.  5.2 Past Actions  16  Humans have occupied the shores and islands of the Salish Sea for many millennia (Gunther 1950) at  17  least the past 8,000 years (Stein 2000).  Before Europeans arrived in the Salish Sea ecosystem, most  18  human inhabitants were hunter-gatherers.  They relied on sea life for food, animals for food and warm  19  clothing, and trees for building materials.  Indigenous peoples were known to use the waterways of the  Salish Sea as trading routes. Fire was used to modify the environment, to clear areas to aid hunting, to  21  promote berry production, and to support the growth of grasses for making nets, baskets, and blankets  22  (Barsh 2003).  23  In the 1800s, with the arrival of the first Europeans, trapping and logging were initiated on a large scale,  24  which changed the landscape. Washington State became one of the top five producers of timber, and  salmon harvest increased by over 2,000 percent compared to harvest before European arrival. As natural  26  resource extraction and the number of people in the area increased, the quality of the Salish Sea  27  ecosystem declined. Most of the old-growth forest was harvested, and much forestland was converted to  28  human-dominated uses, such as agriculture and urban development. The quantity and availability of tidal  29  marsh and other freshwater estuarine ecosystem types declined, floodplains were altered, rivers and  streams were channelized, substantial dams were constructed in some river basins, estuaries were filled,  31  shorelines were hardened and/or modified, water and air quality declined, pollution and marine traffic  32  increased, and habitat was lost (British Columbia Ministry of Water, Land, and Air Protection  33  [BCMWLAP] 2002; Puget Sound Partnership [PSP] 2012).  Additionally, hydropower development in  March 2016November 2015 141 Chapter 5  1  the cumulative effects analysis area increased in the early decades of the 20th century, which altered  2  stream courses, backfilled large tracts of land, and prevented fish spawning. As a result, the number of  3  marine-related species at risk in the Salish Sea ecosystem increased, as did the presence of non-native  4  invasive species (Quinn 2010).  Salmon and steelhead have been propagated in hatcheries in Puget Sound since the late 1800s (PSTT and  6  WDFW 2004). The purpose of early hatchery programs was to support recreational and commercial  7  fisheries as compensation for declining natural-origin fish populations due to overexploitation. Over time,  8  fish produced in hatcheries in the Puget Sound area gradually began to be used as mitigation for the  9  negative effects of human development on natural-origin salmon and steelhead survival and productivity.  In the 1970s, the legal framework of United States v. Washington (1974) was established that became the  11  primary driver for defining fish production and harvest objectives in Puget Sound (PSTT and WDFW  12  2004). In general, risks to natural-origin salmon and steelhead (e.g., competition and predation in  13  freshwater and marine water, genetics) from hatchery programs, and associated benefits for fisheries  14  increased as production levels increased (Subsection 2.0, General Effects (Risks and Benefits) of  Hatchery Programs to Salmon and Steelhead, of Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and Evaluation Methods  16  for Fish, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS [NMFS 2014a]).  17  The Pacific Salmon Treaty between Canada and the United States was finalized March 17, 1985 (Pacific  18  Salmon Commission 1985), and has provided a framework for the involved parties to manage salmon  19  stocks either originating from one country and intercepted by the other, or affecting the management or  the biology of the stocks of the other country. The objective of the original treaty and subsequently  21  negotiated agreements (annexes) is to constrain harvest on both sides of the United States-Canada border  22  and to rebuild depressed salmon stocks. The role of the Pacific Salmon Commission is to oversee  23  implementation of the treaty and to negotiate periodic revisions of the annex fishing regimes. Although  24  the emphasis of the work of the Pacific Salmon Commission under the Pacific Salmon Treaty is salmon,  it is charged with taking into account the conservation of steelhead trout while fulfilling its other  26  functions.  27  5.3 Present Conditions  28  As described in Subsection 5.2, Past Actions, substantial changes have occurred to land uses and the  29  marine environment in the Salish Sea cumulative effects analysis area, but the area remains one of the  most ecologically diverse in North America, containing a wide range of species and habitats that span  31  international boundaries (EPA 2011). The topography of the area creates highly variable local-scale  32  climates and, in combination with diverse soil types, results in a wide variety of environmental  33  conditions. This variety is important because it supports a diversity of fish species and life histories as  Chapter 5 142 March 2016November 2015  1  described in Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead, and Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species. For example,  2  the diversity (genetic and behavioral) represented by variation in Chinook salmon and steelhead life  3  histories helps both species adapt to short-and long-term changes in their environment over time  4  (McElhany et al. 2000).  The Center for Biological Diversity (2005) identified 7,000 species of organisms that occur in Puget  6  Sound, and the area is considered one of the most productive areas for salmon along the Pacific Coast  7  (Lombard 2006). However, the World Wildlife Fund (2012) considers the remaining natural habitats in  8  the Salish Sea area to be threatened from ongoing urbanization, agricultural practices, fire suppression,  9  introduction of noxious weeds, flood control efforts, operation of hydroelectric dams, and logging. For  example, these human-induced factors (e.g., habitat modifications, water quality degradation, presence of  11  dams and fish barriers, and other factors) have affected overall abundance, productivity, diversity, and  12  distribution of salmon and steelhead in Puget Sound. Habitat degradation due to human-dominated uses  13  continues to occur to the freshwater and estuarine habitats of Puget Sound (PSP 2015). For example,  14  forest lands continue to be converted for development, and freshwater and estuarine areas continue to be  degraded and lost faster than habitat can be restored (NMFS 2011; NWIFC 2012). In addition,  16  aquaculture (farming of fish, shellfish, and aquatic plants in fresh and marine water for direct harvest),  17  which is practiced in Washington and British Columbia, has grown over time and has the potential to  18  affect other aquatic organisms.   19  The legal framework of United States v. Washington (1974) continues to be the primary driver for  defining fish production and harvest objectives in Puget Sound. The current Pacific Salmon Treaty  21  agreement (or annex) governs Chinook salmon and several other species from 2009 through 2018.  22  As described in Subsection 3.2.2.1, General Effects of Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery  23  Programs, the co-managers release a total of about 160 million juvenile hatchery-origin salmon and  24  steelhead into Puget Sound freshwater and marine areas each year, including 47.4 million Chinook  salmon, 14.9 million coho salmon, 50 million chum salmon, 4.1 million pink salmon, 42.3 million  26  sockeye salmon, and 1.2 million steelhead (Appendix A, Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery  27  Programs and Facilities). In addition, aquaculture (farming of fish, shellfish, and aquatic plants in fresh  28  and marine water for direct harvest), which is practiced in Washington and British Columbia, has grown  29  over time and has the potential to affect other aquatic organisms.  Salmon and steelhead hatchery facilities and practices have become more sophisticated and efficient over  31  time as new technologies have been applied. For example, although the general risks to natural-origin  32  salmon and steelhead (e.g., competition and predation in freshwater and marine water, genetics) from  33  hatchery programs and associated benefits for fisheries as described Subsection 5.2, Past Actions, are  March 2016November 2015 143 Chapter 5  1  ongoing, risks are being reduced from development of contemporary policies that hatchery operators are  2  implementing for hatchery improvements (HSRG 2014). For example, to reduce or limit the risks of gene  3  flow from hatchery stocks to native fish, hatchery operators are developing more appropriate hatchery  4  broodstocks, limiting the extent to which hatchery-origin fish can be transferred from one basin to  another, marking hatchery-origin fish for harvest management and stock assessment purposes, and  6  actively managing unintended natural spawning and straying by hatchery-origin fish. Hatchery managers  7  are also making improvements in fish disease management and improving their understanding of and  8  approaches to reducing ecological impacts (Kostow 2012). Hatcheries are now also used in some  9  circumstances for conservation and recovery purposes by using locally adapted native broodstocks, while  simultaneously providing for some harvest benefits (Subsection 3.2, Fish, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS  11  (NMFS 2014a). Notwithstanding these beneficial changes, hatcheries continue to affect salmon in the  12  Salish Sea through genetic introgression, competition, predation and disease.  13  Altogether, the stressors described above under present conditions (e.g., human development and habitat  14  degradation, hatchery practices, and fisheries) are expected to continue under future actions and  conditions as described below.  16  5.4 Future Actions and Conditions  17  Reasonably foreseeable future actions include climate change, human development, planned restoration  18  activities, hatchery production, and fisheries. Many plans, regulations, and laws are in place, as well as  19  agreements between the United States and Canada, to minimize reduce effects of development and to  restore habitat function. However, it is unclear if these plans, regulations, and laws will be successful in  21  meeting their environmental goals and objectives. In addition, it is not possible to predict the magnitude  22  of effects from future development and habitat restoration with certainty for several reasons:  (1) the  23  activities may not have yet been formally proposed, (2) mitigation measures specific to future actions may  24  not have been identified for many proposed projects, and (3) there is uncertainty whether mitigation  measures for these actions will be fully implemented. However, when combined with climate change, a  26  general trend in expected cumulative effects can be estimated for each resource as described in  27  Subsection 5.5, Cumulative Effects by Resource.  28  Because of the large geographic scope of this analysis, it is not feasible to conduct a detailed assessment  29  of all project-level activities that have occurred, are occurring, or are planned in the future for the  cumulative effects analysis area. Rather, this cumulative effects analysis qualitatively assesses the overall  31  trends in cumulative effects considering past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions, and  32  describes how the alternatives contribute to those trends.  1 5.4.1 Climate Change 2 The changing climate is becoming recognized as a long-term trend that is occurring throughout the world. 3 Within the Pacific Northwest, Ford (2011) summarized expected climate changes in the coming years as 4 leading to the following physical and chemical changes (certainty of occurring is in parentheses):  Increased air temperature (high certainty) 6  Increased winter precipitation (low certainty) 7  Decreased summer precipitation (low certainty) 8  Reduced winter and spring snowpack (high certainty) 9  Reduced summer stream flow (high certainty)  Earlier spring peak flow (high certainty) 11  Increased flood frequency and intensity (moderate certainty) 12  Higher summer stream temperatures (moderate certainty) 13  Higher sea level (high certainty) 14  Higher ocean temperatures (high certainty)  Intensified upwelling (moderate certainty) 16  Delayed spring transition (moderate certainty) 17  Increased ocean acidity (high certainty) 18 These changes will affect human and other biological ecosystems within the cumulative effects analysis 19 area (Ecology 2012a; Mauger et al. 2015; NWFSC 2015). Changes to biological organisms and their habitats are likely to include shifts in timing of life history events, changes in growth and development 21 rates, changes in habitat and ecosystem structure, and rise in sea level and increased flooding (Littell et al. 22 2009; Johannessen and Macdonald 2009). 23 For the Pacific Northwest portion of the United States, Hamlet (2011) notes that climate changes will 24 have multiple effects. Expected effects include:  Overtaxing of storm water management systems at certain times 26  Increases in sediment inputs into water bodies from roads 27  Increases in landslides 28  Increases in debris flows and related scouring that damages human infrastructure 29  Increases in fires and related loss of life and property  Reductions in the quantity of water available to meet multiple needs at certain times of year 31 (e.g., for irrigated agriculture, human consumption, and habitat for fish) 32  Shifts in irrigation and growing seasons 1  Changes in plant, fish, and wildlife species’ distributions and increased potential for invasive 2 species 3  Declines in hydropower production 4  Changes in heating and energy demand 5  Impacts to homes along coastal shorelines from beach erosion and rising sea levels 6 The most heavily affected ecosystems and human activities along the Pacific coast are likely to be near 7 areas having high human population densities, and the continental shelves off Oregon and Washington 8 (Halpern et al. 2009). 9 Several studies note that similar changes are expected to occur in British Columbia. For example, climate 10 change effects in Georgia Strait are expected to include warming of marine waters (Littell et al. 2009) and 11 fresh waters (Perry 2009), and changes in river flow patterns from snow-melt-dominated conditions to 12 rainfall-dominated conditions. Examples of the effects of climate change on human populations include 13 loss of agricultural land because of inundation by rising sea levels, increases in storm intensity duration 14 and frequency, salinization of municipal water intakes, and increases in the risk of tidal flat erosion and 15 dike breaching and flooding (Natural Resources Canada [NRC] 2014). 16 5.4.2 Development 17 Future human population growth in the Seattle and Vancouver areas, and the areas between them, is 18 expected to continue over the next 15 years. For example, the number of people in the Vancouver area is 19 expected to grow by over 35,000 residents per year (Metro Vancouver 2013), and in the Puget Sound area 20 by 40,000 per year (Puget Sound Regional Council 2013). This growth will result in increased demand 21 for housing, transportation, food, water, energy, and commerce. These needs will result in changes to 22 existing land uses because of increases in residential and commercial development and roads, increases in 23 impervious surfaces, conversions of private agricultural and forested lands to developed uses, increases in 24 use of non-native species and increased potential for invasive species, and redevelopment and infill of 25 existing developed lands. The need to provide food and supplies to a growing human population in the 26 cumulative effects analysis area will result in increases in shipping, increases in withdrawals of fresh 27 water to meet increasing food and resource requirements, and increases in energy demands. Although the 28 rate of urban sprawl has been decreasing in comparison to previous increases in the late 1900s (Puget 29 Sound Regional Council 2012), development will continue to affect the natural resources in the 30 cumulative effects analysis area. 31 To help protect environmental resources in the cumulative effects analysis area from potential future 32 development effects, both the United States and Canada have Federal environmental protection agencies 33 and Federal laws, regulations, and policies that are designed to conserve each nation’s air, water, and land 1  resources. Regulatory processes involve agency review, approval, and permitting of development actions.   2  Regulatory examples include the ESA in the United States and the Species at Risk Act in Canada. Other  3  examples include the Navigable Waters regulations of the Clean Water Act in the United States, and the  4  Navigable Waters Protection Act in Canada. In the United States, aquaculture facilities (such as enclosed  facilities for raising and selling fish, shellfish [including geoducks], and aquatic plants) are regulated by  6  Washington State. In Canada, aquaculture facilities are regulated by British Columbia Department of  7  Fisheries, and Fisheries and Oceans Canada. These environmental laws will continue to require agency  8  review and approval of proposed activities.  9  In addition to Federal laws and processes, state and provincial laws, regulations, and guidelines will help  decrease the effects of future commercial, industrial, and residential development on natural ecosystems.   11  In Washington State, various habitat conservation plans (HCPs) have been implemented, such as the  12  Washington Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Forest Practices HCP (DNR 2005), and other HCPs  13  are in development (e.g., DNR Aquatic Lands HCP and WDFW Wildlife Areas HCP). These plans will  14  provide long-term, landscape-based protection of federally listed and non-listed species considered at risk  of extinction in Washington’s private and state forested lands. Other state laws, regulations, and guidance  16  include the Washington State Environmental Policy Act, and its Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive  17  Species Act as described in Subsection 1.7.10, Washington State Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive  18  Species Act. A law unique to the State of Washington is the Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A  19  Revised Code of Washington), which requires local land use planning and development of regulations,  including identification and protection of critical areas from future development.  21  Although the Province of British Columbia does not have comparable growth management laws and  22  regulations for future development, the province reviews and approves future development primarily  23  through its Environmental Assessment Act (which is separate from the Federal Canadian Environmental  24  Assessment Act) and other laws and regulations (such as the Environment and Land Use Act,  Environmental Management Act, Forest Act, Water Act, Water Protection Act, Wildlife Act, Fisheries  26  Act, Shorelines Management Act, and Fish Protection Act).  These provincial and state regulations will  27  continue to help decrease habitat fragmentation, avoid residential development and urban sprawl in  28  sensitive habitat and ecosystems, and decrease contamination to air, lands, and waterways.  29  In Washington, local land use laws, regulations, and policies will also help protect the natural  environment from future development effects. For example, the Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC)  31  developed Vision 2040 to identify goals that support preservation and restoration of the natural  32  environment ongoing with development through multicounty policies that address environmental  33  stewardship (PSRC 2009). Vision 2040 is a growth management, environmental, economic, and  34  transportation strategy for central Puget Sound. These objectives also include preserving open space,  March 2016November 2015 147 Chapter 5  1  focusing on sustainable development, and planning for a comprehensive green space strategy. Other local  2  policies and initiatives by counties and municipalities include designation of areas best suited for future  3  development, such as local sensitive areas acts and shoreline protection acts.  4  In lower British Columbia, local zoning and development laws will help to protect open space from future  development. The Greater Vancouver Regional District designates Green Zones to protect natural land  6  assets (Greater Vancouver Regional District 2005). In addition, the Fraser River Estuary Management  7  Plan was developed by a partnership of agencies and serves as a policy guide for municipalities and other  8  agencies with jurisdiction or interest in the Fraser River estuary (Fraser River Estuary Management  9  Program 2012). In ecologically sensitive areas, this plan is focused on protecting critical fish and wildlife  functions. In addition, municipalities in British Columbia have community plans with policies and  11  guidelines related to land use, development, services, amenities, and infrastructure related to future  12  development (NRC 2014). The plans identify environmentally sensitive areas where future development  13  is limited to protect environmental attributes.  14  In summary, in the Washington and British Columbia portions of the cumulative effects analysis area,  Federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and policies will be applied with the intent to better enforce  16  environmental protection for proposed future project developments. These laws, regulations, and policies  17  include processes for public input, agency reviews, mitigation measures, permitting, and monitoring. The  18  intent of these processes is to help ensure that development projects will occur in a manner that protects  19  sensitive natural resources. The environmental goals and objectives of these processes are aimed at  protecting ecosystems from activities that are regulated; however, not all activities are regulated to the  21  same extent (e.g., large developments tend to be regulated more than smaller developments). Further, it is  22  unlikely that all environmental goals and objectives will be successfully met by such processes.  23  Unregulated or minimally regulated activities may lead to cumulative effects on sensitive natural  24  resources over time. Thus, although Federal, state, and local laws, regulations, policies, and guidelines are  in place to protect environmental resources from future development effects, there will continue to be  26  some cumulative environmental degradation in the future from development, albeit likely to a lesser  27  extent than has occurred historically when environmental regulatory protections did not exist or were not  28  as comprehensive and collaborative.  29  5.4.3 Habitat Restoration  To help counterbalance the human-induced changes that will affect biodiversity in the cumulative effects  31  analysis area (Subsection 5.4.2, Development), future funding for environmental restoration efforts will  32  continue to help create a healthy environment and sustainable ecosystem (PSRC 2009; BCMWLAP  33  2002). United States Federal agencies and organizations are expected to continue to support habitat  34  protection and restoration initiatives/processes in Puget Sound, including projects such as the Puget  Chapter 5 148 March 2016November 2015  1 Sound Nearshore Ecosystem Restoration Project (Puget Sound Nearshore Ecosystem Restoration 2 Partnership 2013), which is a partnership between the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and WDFW for the 3 purpose of identifying ecosystem degradation, formulating solutions, and recommending actions and 4 projects to help restore Puget Sound. The Puget Sound Partnership (formerly the Shared Strategy for 5 Puget Sound) is a collaborative initiative that will continue efforts to recover the Puget Sound ecosystem 6 (including listed salmon, steelhead, and other species) with the support of NMFS, USFWS, Washington 7 State, Puget Sound tribes, local governments, and key non-government organizations. In addition, 8 implementation of salmon recovery plans in Puget Sound (72 Fed. Reg. 2493, January 19, 2007, for 9 Chinook salmon, and 72 Fed. Reg. 29121, May 24, 2007, for Hood Canal summer-run chum salmon), 10 will continue to recover salmon and steelhead and the habitats on which they depend in Puget Sound 11 (Subsection 1.7.12, Recovery Plans for Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead). It is expected that NMFS 12 will continue to provide funding for habitat restoration initiatives through the Pacific Coastal Salmon 13 Recovery Fund (NMFS 2011a). However, based on a recent review of the implementation of the Puget 14 Sound Chinook salmon recovery plan (NMFS 2011b), habitat continues to decline faster than it has been 15 restored, and habitat protection tools currently in place continue to need improvement. 16 Federal Canadian funding for habitat restoration includes several ongoing and expected future funded 17 programs supported by Environment Canada. These projects regularly provide annual funding for habitat 18 restoration and include: 19  B.C. Hydro Bridge Coastal Fish and Wildlife Restoration Program (designed to fund projects 20 to restore fish and wildlife populations and habitats in watersheds impacted by hydroelectric 21 generation facilities) 22  Habitat Conservation Trust Fund (includes funds for habitat enhancement and restoration) 23  Public Conservation Assistance Fund (with objectives similar to the Habitat Conservation 24 Trust Fund) 25  EcoAction Community Funding Program (with several objectives that include habitat 26 enhancement and rehabilitation) 27 It is expected that Washington State will continue to support habitat restoration through actions similar to 28 recent support efforts. In addition to cooperative partnerships with Federal agencies as described above, 29 Ecology (2012b) reserves funding for cleanups of toxics in Puget Sound. Although receiving substantial 30 Federal support, the Puget Sound Partnership is a state agency that was created to lead the recovery of the 31 Puget Sound ecosystem (PSP 2010). The agency created, and is overseeing implementation of, a roadmap 32 to a healthy Puget Sound. Objectives include prioritizing cleanup and improvement projects; coordinating 1  Federal, state, local, tribal, and private resources; and ensuring that all agencies and funding partners are  2  working cooperatively. Washington State also created the Salmon Recovery Funding Board, which  3  administers Federal and Washington State funds to protect and restore salmon and steelhead habitat.   4  Priorities for recovering the Puget Sound ecosystem include reducing land development pressure on  ecologically important and sensitive areas, protecting and restoring floodplain function, and protecting  6  and recovering salmon and freshwater resources (PSP 2012). In marine and freshwater areas,  7  development will continue to be encouraged away from ecologically important and sensitive nearshore  8  areas and estuaries, and efforts will be made to reduce sources of pollution into Puget Sound (including  9  stormwater runoff). Approaches will be used to help preserve the natural functions of the ecosystem and  support sustainable economic growth. Local community efforts, such as smaller community habitat  11  restoration and protection efforts, will help protect sensitive areas in Puget Sound.  12  In British Columbia, the provincial Watershed Restoration Program under Forest Renewal British  13  Columbia will continue to restore the productive capacity of fisheries, and forest and aquatic resources  14  that have been impacted by past forest practices. The Watershed Restoration Program hastens the  recovery of degraded environmental resources in logged watersheds by identifying the needs for proposed  16  restoration projects and by designing and implementing restoration that re-establishes conditions more  17  similar to those found in watersheds that are not degraded. Other provincial and local habitat restoration  18  initiatives will be continued, including the Salmon Habitat Restoration Program, which has historically  19  been supported by the Canadian Federal government, but is now supported by the provincial and local  governments.  21  In summary, degraded habitat from past and ongoing actions has contributed to Federal and state listings  22  of fish and wildlife species (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead; Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species;  23  and Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale). A variety of Federal, state, provincial,  24  and local programs willare expected to help restore degraded habitat conditions in the cumulative effects  analysis area. Collectively, these programs are expected to improve existing conditions resulting from  26  will help to counterbalance habitat degradation and long-term detrimental cumulative impacts to natural  27  resources in the cumulative effects analysis area. However, these programs are not expected to eliminate  28  negative impacts to the resources., which have previously contributed to Federal and state listings of fish  29  and wildlife species (Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead; Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species; and  Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale).  31  5.4.4 Hatchery Production  32  It is likely that the type and extent of salmon and steelhead hatchery programs and the numbers of fish  33  released in the analysis area will change over time. These changes are likely to reduce effects to natural 34  origin salmon and steelhead such as genetic effects, competition and predation risks that are described in  Chapter 5 150 March 2016November 2015  1  Subsection 3.2.2.1, General Effects of Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery Programs, especially  2  for those species that are listed under the ESA. For example, effects to natural-origin salmon and  3  steelhead would be expected to decrease over time to the extent that hatchery programs are reviewed and  4  approved by NMFS under the ESA. Hatchery program compliance with conservation provisions of the  ESA will ensure that listed species are not jeopardized and that “take” under the ESA from salmon and  6  steelhead hatchery programs is minimized or avoided. Where needed, reductions in effects on listed  7  salmon and steelhead may occur through changes such as refinement of times and locations of fish  8  releases to reduce risks of competition and predation; management of overlap in hatchery-origin and  9  natural-origin spawners to meet gene flow objectives; decreased use of isolated hatchery programs;  increased use of integrated hatchery programs for conservation purposes; when available, incorporation of  11  new research results and improved best management practices for hatchery operations; decreased  12  production levels; or termination of programs. Similar changes would be expected for non-listed species  13  in many cases as well, motivated by the desire to reduce negative effects where possible and to help avoid  14  species from becoming listed. For steelhead, under WDFW’s Statewide Steelhead Management Plan  (WDFW 2008), Wild Steelhead Management Zones (or wild stock gene banks) are in the process of being  16  identified and implemented in at least three Puget Sound watersheds to promote the recovery of steelhead  17  populations (see http://wdfw.wa.gov/conservation/fisheries/steelhead/gene_bank/). In those watersheds, to  18  protect natural-origin steelhead from the effects of steelhead hatchery programs, releases of hatchery 19  origin steelhead would not occur.  5.4.5 Fisheries  21  It is likely that the salmon and steelhead fisheries in the analysis area will change over time. These  22  changes are likely to reduce effects to natural-origin salmon and steelhead listed under the ESA. For  23  example, effects to natural-origin salmon and steelhead would be expected to decrease over time to the  24  extent that fisheries management programs continue to be reviewed and approved by NMFS under the  ESA, as evidenced by the beneficial changes to programs that have thus far undergone ESA review.  26  Fisheries management program compliance with conservation provisions of the ESA will ensure that  27  listed species are not jeopardized and that “take” under the ESA from salmon and steelhead fisheries is  28  minimized or avoided. Where needed, reductions in effects on listed salmon and steelhead may occur  29  through changes in areas or timing of fisheries, or changes in types of harvest methods used. To the  extent that recovery of listed fish species occurs or species abundance becomes sufficiently large,  31  potential future fisheries may be considered.  32  5.5 Cumulative Effects by Resource  33  Provided below is an analysis of the cumulative effects of climate change, development, habitat  34  restoration, hatchery production, and fisheries under the alternatives and for each resource analyzed in  March 2016November 2015 151 Chapter 5  1  this EIS. The resources for which cumulative effects are described are: water quantity and quality, salmon  2  and steelhead, other fish species, wildlife – Southern Resident killer whale, socioeconomics, and  3  environmental justice.  4  5.5.1 Water Quantity and Quality  Subsection 3.1, Water Quantity, describes the baseline conditions of water quantity.  Water quality  6  information for the analysis area is described in Subsection 3.6.1, Water Quality, in the PS Hatcheries  7  DEIS (NMFS 2014a). These conditions are the result of many years of climate change, development, and  8  habitat restoration, and operation of hatchery programs.  The effects of the alternatives on water quantity  9  are described in Subsection 4.1, Water Quantity.  As described in Subsection 1.6, Scoping and Relevant  Issues, and consistent with Subsection 4.6.3, Water Quality, in the PS Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a),  11  and draft environmental assessments for salmon hatchery programs in the Dungeness River (80 Fed. Reg.  12  15985, March 26, 2015), effects of hatchery programs on water quality would be expected to be  13  negligible. Future actions in the overall cumulative effects analysis area are described in Subsection 5.4,  14  Future Actions and Conditions. This subsection considers effects that may occur as a result of the  alternatives being implemented at the same time as other anticipated future actions. This subsection  16  discusses the incremental impacts of the alternatives in addition to past, present, and reasonably  17  foreseeable future actions (i.e., cumulative effects) on water quantity and water quality.  18  Successful operation of hatcheries depends on a constant supply of high-quality surface, spring, or  19  groundwater that, after use in hatchery facilities, is discharged to adjacent receiving environments.  Climate change and development are expected to affecting water quality by increasing water temperatures  21  and affect water quantity by changing seasonality and magnitude of river flows. Although existing  22  regulations are intended to help protect water quality and quantity from effects related to future  23  development, the effectiveness of these regulations over time is likely to vary. Future habitat restoration  24  would likely improve water quality and quantity (such as helping to decrease water temperatures through  shading, decrease sedimentation, decrease water diversions, and protect aquifers and recharge areas). As  26  discussed in Subsection 5.4.4, Hatchery Production, changes in hatchery programs may occur over time.  27  Changes in types of hatchery programs over time are unlikely to improve water quality and quantity,  28  because water use would be similar regardless of program type. However, reductions in hatchery  29  production or terminations of programs could improve water quality and quantity to the extent that less  water is used in hatchery operations. Fisheries on salmon and steelhead would not be expected to affect  31  water quality or quantity. Overall, cumulative effects of climate change, development, and hatchery  32  production on water quality and quantity are more likely to reduce water quantity than is described in  33  Subsection 4.1, Water Quantity.  These negative effects may be offset to some extent by habitat  34  restoration and potential decreases in hatchery production; however, these actions may not fully, or even  Chapter 5 152 March 2016November 2015  1  partially, mitigate for the greater impacts of climate change and development on water quality and  2  quantity, although this is the goal of many of the restoration programs.  3  In summary, cumulative effects from climate change, development, habitat restoration, and hatchery  4  production would likely impact water quality (particularly water temperature changes) and water quantity  (increased demand on limited water supplies) in the analysis area more than that described in  6  Subsection 4.1, Water Quantity, and as described in Subsection 4.6.3, Water Quality, in the PS Hatcheries  7  DEIS (NMFS 2014a) under all alternatives. None of the alternatives would affect the overall trend in  8  cumulative effects on water quantity and quality.  9  5.5.2 Salmon and Steelhead  Subsection 3.2, Salmon and Steelhead, describes baseline conditions for salmon and steelhead.  These  11  conditions are the result of many years of climate change, development, habitat restoration, hatchery  12  production, and fisheries.  The expected direct and indirect effects of the alternatives on salmon and  13  steelhead are described in Subsection 4.2, Salmon and Steelhead. Future actions are described in  14  Subsection 5.4, Future Actions and Conditions. This subsection describes cumulative effects on salmon  and steelhead that may occur as a result of implementing any of the alternatives at the same time as other  16  future actions. This subsection discusses the incremental impacts of the alternatives in addition to past,  17  present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (i.e., cumulative effects) on salmon and steelhead.  18  Salmon and steelhead abundance naturally alternates between high and low levels on large temporal and  19  spatial patterns that may last centuries and on more complex ecological scales than can be easily observed  (Rogers et al. 2013). Current run sizes of salmon and steelhead in the cumulative effects analysis area are  21  about 36 percent of historical run sizes in British Columbia, and are about 8 percent of historical run sizes  22  in Puget Sound (Lackey et al. 2006). Thus, cumulative effects on salmon and steelhead may be greater  23  than the direct and indirect effects of each alternative as analyzed in Subsection 4.2, Salmon and  24  Steelhead, under all alternatives. This subsection provides brief overviews of the effects of climate  changes, development, habitat restoration, hatchery production, and fisheries on salmon and steelhead.  26  The effects of climate change on salmon and steelhead are described in general in ISAB (2007), and  27  would vary among species and among species’ life history stages (NWFSC 2015). Effects of climate  28  change may affect virtually every species and life history type of salmon and steelhead in the cumulative  29  effects analysis area (Glick et al. 2007; Mantua et al. 2009). Cumulative effects from climate change,  particularly changes in streamflow and water temperatures, would likely impact hatchery-origin and  31  natural-origin salmon and steelhead life stages in various ways as described below and shown in  32  Table 18. For Puget Sound steelhead, changes in stream flows may be particularly important (Wade et al.  33  2013). For example, as winter flows become larger and more frequent, summer flows would decrease.  March 2016November 2015 153 Chapter 5  1  This would likely increase pre-spawning mortality of adults, and result in less space for juveniles rearing  2  in streams. Under all alternatives, impacts to salmon and steelhead from climate change are expected to  3  be similar, because climate change would impact fish habitat under each alternative in the same manner.  4  In other words, when added to the effects of climate change on habitat conditions (e.g., changes in  streamflow and water temperature), the effects to resources (e.g., fish) under the alternatives on salmon  6  and steelhead would not be substantially different.  7  As summarized in a recent review (ISAB 2015), density-dependent effects on natural-origin fish from  8  releases of hatchery-origin fish in freshwater and ocean conditions may occur as environmental  9  conditions change as a result of climate change. Such effects may be especially relevant where releases of  hatchery-origin fish are especially large (e.g., chum salmon, pink salmon, and sockeye salmon).   11  However, under all alternatives, effects to salmon and steelhead from density-dependent impacts would  12  be undetectable, because the numbers of early winter steelhead released would be unsubstantial.  13  Previous and new developments (such as residential, commercial, transportation, and energy  14  development); accidental discharges of oil, gas, and other hazardous materials; and the potential for  landowner and developer noncompliance with regulations continue to affect aquatic habitat used by  16  salmon and steelhead (Puget Sound Action Team 2007). Although regulatory changes for increased  17  environmental protection (such as local critical areas ordinances), monitoring, and enforcement have  18  helped reduce impacts of development on salmon and steelhead in fresh and marine waters, development  19  may continue to reduce salmon and steelhead habitat, decrease water quality, and contribute to salmon  and steelhead mortality. These developments result in environmental effects such as land conversion,  21  sedimentation, impervious surface water runoff to streams, changes in stream flow because of increased  22  consumptive uses, shoreline armoring effects, channelization in lower river areas, barriers to fish passage,  23  and other types of environmental changes that would continue to affect hatchery-origin and natural-origin  24  salmon and steelhead (Quinn 2010).  1 Table 18. Examples of potential impacts of climate change by salmon and steelhead life stage under all 2 alternatives. Life Stage  Effects  Egg  1) Increased water temperatures and decreased flows during spawning migrations for some species would increase pre-spawning mortality and reduce egg deposition. 2) Increased maintenance metabolism would lead to smaller fry. 3) Lower disease resistance may lead to lower survival. 4) Changed thermal regime during incubation may lead to lower survival. 5) Faster embryonic development would lead to earlier hatching. 6) Increased mortality for some species because of more frequent winter flood flows as snow level rises. 7) Lower flows would decrease access to or availability of spawning areas.  Spring and Summer Rearing  1) Faster yolk utilization may lead to early emergence. 2) Smaller fry are expected to have lower survival rates. 3) Higher maintenance metabolism would lead to greater food demand. 4) Growth rates would be slower if food is limited or if temperature increases exceed optimal levels; growth could be enhanced where food is available, and temperatures do not reach stressful levels. 5) Predation risk would increase if temperatures exceed optimal levels. 6) Lower flows would decrease rearing habitat capacity. 7) Sea level rise would eliminate or diminish the rearing capacity of tidal wetland habitats for rearing salmon, and would reduce the area of estuarine beaches for spawning by forage fishes.  Overwinter Rearing  1) Smaller size at start of winter is expected to result in lower winter survival. 2) Mortality would increase because of more frequent flood flows as snow level rises. 3) Warmer winter temperatures would lead to higher metabolic demands, which may also contribute to lower winter survival if food is limited, or higher winter survival if growth and size are enhanced. 4) Warmer winters may increase predator activity/hunger, which can also contribute to lower winter survival.  3  Sources:  ISAB (2007), Glick et al. (2007), Beamish et al. (2009), and Beechie et al. (2013), and Wade et al. (2013).  4  The primary cause of these continuing development changes is the continued increase in human  5  population in the cumulative effects analysis area (Subsection 5.4.2, Development), which also leads to  6  fisheries management challenges associated with overfishing (Puget Sound Action Team 2007).  7  Development would more likely affect species that reside in lower river areas (such as floodplains and  8  estuaries) most directly because that is where development tends to be concentrated. Effects from  9  development are expected to affect salmon and steelhead similarly under all alternatives because  10  preferred development sites would not change by alternative scenario.  11  Restoration of habitat in the cumulative effects analysis area will improve salmon and steelhead habitat in  12  general under all alternatives, with particular benefits to freshwater and estuarine environments  13  considered to be important for the survival and reproduction of fish. As a result, habitat restoration would  14  be expected to improve fish survival in local areas (Puget Sound Action Team 2007). However, habitat  March 2016November 2015  155  Chapter 5  1  restoration alone will not substantially increase survival and abundance of salmon and steelhead. In  2  addition, habitat restoration is dependent on continued funding, which is difficult to predict when  3  economic recessions occur or governments experience deficits. Benefits from habitat restoration are  4  expected to affect salmon and steelhead survival similarly under all alternatives.  The potential benefits of habitat restoration actions within the cumulative effects analysis area are  6  difficult to quantify, but are expected to occur in localized areas where the activities occur. These actions  7  may not fully mitigate for the impacts of climate change and development on fish and wildlife and their  8  associated habitats. However, climate change and development will continue to occur over time and affect  9  aquatic habitat, while habitat restoration (which is dependent on funding and is localized in areas where  agencies and stakeholders’ habitat restoration actions occur) is less certain under all alternatives.  11  In addition to hatchery production of salmon and steelhead in Puget Sound (described in Subsection 3.2,  12  Salmon and Steelhead), hatchery production and salmon aquaculture also occur in the Canadian portion  13  of the cumulative effects analysis area. The Canadian Salmonid Enhancement Program uses hatcheries,  14  along with other strategies, to conserve and rebuild populations of natural-origin salmon and to provide  fishing opportunities for Canadians (MacKinlay et al. 2004). In 2002, these hatcheries raised 173 million  16  salmon, steelhead, and trout (Chinook salmon, 30 percent; chum salmon, 42 percent; coho salmon,  17  11 percent; pink salmon, 10 percent; sockeye salmon, 7 percent; steelhead, less than 1 percent; and  18  cutthroat trout, less than 1 percent). Total time in hatcheries for these fish is 10 months or less with  19  subsequent release into freshwater or marine environments. Releases are from 18 major hatcheries,  21 community hatcheries, and 16 public involvement or educational hatcheries. Releases in 2009 were  21  300 million fish. The majority of the 2009 fish released were sockeye salmon (about half the fish  22  released) followed by chum salmon, Chinook salmon, pink salmon, coho salmon, steelhead, and cutthroat  23  trout (Sandher et al. 2010). Aquaculture operations also occur in British Columbia where salmon are  24  raised in marine pens to adulthood with subsequent seafood processing and no fish releases into the  freshwater or marine environment. These aquaculture operations raise almost exclusively Atlantic  26  salmon. Hatchery production in the Canadian portion of the cumulative effects area may increase  27  density-dependent impacts on Puget Sound salmon stocks that intermingle with Canadian stocks.  In  28  addition, salmon aquaculture in the Canadian portion of the cumulative effects analysis area may increase  29  disease risks for Puget Sound salmon stocks. Puget Sound steelhead would likely be less impacted by  hatchery production and salmon aquaculture in Canada when compared to Puget Sound salmon because  31  they out-migrate at a large size and move to sea more directly, therefore intermingling less with Canadian  32  salmon and steelhead stocks.  33  The effects to natural-origin salmon and steelhead from future releases from salmon and steelhead  34  hatcheries are expected to decrease over time, especially for listed species as hatchery programs are  Chapter 5 156 March 2016November 2015  1  reviewed and approved under the ESA (Subsection 5.4.4, Hatchery Production). For example, reduction  2  of genetic risks (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks; Appendix B, Genetic effects analysis of early winter  3  steelhead programs proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie  4  River basins of Washington; Subsection 2.1.3, Genetics, in Appendix B of the PS Hatcheries DEIS  [NMFS 2014a]) may occur through changes such as increased use of integrated hatchery programs,  6  application of new research results that lead to improved best management practices, and reductions in  7  production levels. For example, the hatchery co-managers recently decided to reduce the size of their  8  summer steelhead hatchery program in the Skykomish River basin (Unsworth 2016), and that will further  9  reduce genetic risks to Puget Sound steelhead under all alternatives. Over time, these changes would also  be expected to reduce the ecological risks of competition and predation. In general, continued hatchery  11  releases within the Salish Sea, along with other observed environmental trends as described in the  12  following subsections, would affect continued long-term viability of natural-origin salmon and steelhead.  13  In summary, to the extent aquatic habitat will continue to degrade over time under all alternatives, the  14  abundance and productivity of natural-origin salmon and steelhead populations may be reduced.   Hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead may be similarly affected.  In addition, effects to abundance and  16  productivity of natural-origin salmon and steelhead from changes in hatchery production and fisheries  17  would be expected to continue but may decrease over time. Although none of the alternatives would  18  affect the overall trend in cumulative effects on salmon and steelhead, Alternative 1 and Alternative 4  19  could help mitigate negative effects on steelhead.  That is, because under Alternative 1 hatchery programs  would be terminated, and under Alternative 4 the type of program would change to use of a local, native  21  broodstock (unlike under Alternative 2, and Alternative 3, and Alternative 5). These hatchery programs  22  could be used to reduce the extinction risk of natural-origin populations resulting from cumulative effects  23  such as habitat degradation in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie  24  River basins.   5.5.3 Other Fish Species  26  Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species, describes the baseline conditions of fish species other than salmon  27  and steelhead.  These conditions are the result of many years of climate change, development, habitat  28  restoration, hatchery production, and fisheries.  The effects of the alternatives on other fish species are  29  described in Subsection 4.3, Other Fish Species.  Future actions in the overall cumulative effects analysis  area are described in Subsection 5.4, Future Actions and Conditions. This subsection considers effects  31  that may occur as a result of the alternatives being implemented at the same time as other anticipated  32  future actions. This subsection discusses the incremental impacts of the alternatives in addition to past,  33  present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (i.e., cumulative effects) on fish species other than  34  salmon and steelhead.  1  Other fish species that have a relationship to salmon and steelhead include bull trout, rainbow trout,  2  coastal cutthroat trout, sturgeon and lamprey, forage fish, groundfish, and resident freshwater fish  3  (Subsection 3.3, Other Fish Species). Similar to salmon and steelhead species, these fish species require  4  and use a diversity of habitats.  However, similar to effects described above for salmon and steelhead,  these other fish species, including bull trout may also be affected by climate change and development  6  because of the overall potential for loss or degradation of aquatic habitat or the inability to adapt to  7  warmer water temperatures. In addition, climate change and development may attract non-native aquatic  8  plants that may, over time, out-compete native aquatic plants that provide important habitat to native fish  9  (Patrick et al. 2012).  As discussed in Subsection 5.4.3, Habitat Restoration, the extent to which habitat restoration actions may  11  mitigate impacts from climate change and development is difficult to predict.  These actions may not fully  12  mitigate for the effects of climate change and development.  13  As discussed in Subsection 5.4.4, Hatchery Production, changes in hatchery programs over time may  14  affect other fish species that have a relationship to salmon and steelhead, including bull trout. For  example, reductions in hatchery production or terminations of hatchery programs may decrease the prey  16  base available for other fish species (like bull trout) that use salmon and steelhead as a food source.  17  In summary, cumulative effects from climate change, development, habitat restoration, and hatchery  18  production on other fish species, including bull trout, would likely result in a decrease in the abundance of  19  those fish species in the analysis area.  Cumulative effects on fish species that compete, prey on, or are  prey items for salmon and steelhead may be greater than described under Subsection 4.3, Other Fish  21  Species.  None of the alternatives would affect the overall trend in cumulative effects on other fish  22  species, including bull trout, because the range of production levels under the alternatives (e.g., from 0 to  23  620,000 early winter steelhead hatchery-origin smolts) would be a small fraction of the total salmon and  24  steelhead in the analysis area that these other fish species could compete with, prey on, or be prey items  for.  26  5.5.4 Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale  27  Subsection 3.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale, describes the baseline conditions of wildlife  28  (Southern Resident killer whale).  These conditions represent the effects of many years of climate change,  29  development, habitat restoration, and hatchery production. The effects of the alternatives on wildlife in  Puget Sound are described in Subsection 4.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale.  Future actions  31  for the overall cumulative effects analysis area are described in Subsection 5.4, Future Actions and  32  Conditions.  This subsection considers potential effects that may occur as a result of implementing any  33  one of the alternatives at the same time as other anticipated actions.  This subsection discusses the  Chapter 5 158 March 2016November 2015  1  incremental impacts of the alternatives in addition to past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future  2  actions (i.e., cumulative effects) on wildlife.  3  As described in Subsection 5.5.2, Salmon and Steelhead, climate change and development in the  4  cumulative effects analysis area may reduce the abundance and productivity of natural-origin salmon and  steelhead populations.  Hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead may be similarly affected. Consequently,  6  the total number of salmon and steelhead available as prey to wildlife may be lower than that considered  7  in Subsection 4.4, Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale.  As described in Subsection 3.4, Wildlife –  8  Southern Resident Killer Whale, effects would be greatest on wildlife species that have a relationship  9  with salmon and steelhead, including Southern Resident killer whales. Other species with a relationship to  salmon and steelhead include common merganser, bald eagle, and Caspian terns (PS Hatcheries DEIS  11  [NMFS 2014a]). Cumulative effects to Southern Resident killer whales may include changes in  12  distribution in response to changes in the abundance and distribution of their food supply, decreases in  13  abundance, and decreases in reproductive success compared to that described in Subsection 4.4,  14  Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale.  Effects to other wildlife species that have a relationship with  salmon and steelhead may also occur depending on how their overall aquatic prey base (which includes  16  salmon and steelhead) would also be affected by climate change, development, habitat restoration, and  17  fisheries.  18  The potential benefits of habitat restoration actions within the cumulative effects analysis area are  19  difficult to quantify. These actions may not fully, or even partially, mitigate for the effects of climate  change and development on salmon and steelhead abundances.  21  As discussed in Subsection 5.4.4, Hatchery Production, and Subsection 5.4.5, Fisheries, changes in  22  hatchery programs and fisheries, respectively, may occur over time. These changes may affect wildlife  23  species that have a relationship to salmon and steelhead. For example, reductions in hatchery production  24  or terminations of hatchery programs may decrease the prey base available for wildlife species (Southern  Resident killer whales) that use salmon and steelhead as a food source.  26  In summary, it is likely that cumulative effects from climate change, development, habitat restoration,  27  hatchery production, and fisheries, would affect those wildlife species that have a relationship with  28  salmon and steelhead (including Southern Resident killer whales), and may impact other wildlife based  29  on whether their overall food supply would decrease or otherwise change in some way (e.g., distribution,  composition) as a result of climate change, development, habitat restoration, hatchery production, and  31  fisheries.  However, none of the alternatives would affect the overall trend in cumulative effects on  32  wildlife because the range of production levels under the alternatives (e.g., from 0 to 620,000 early winter  1  hatchery-origin steelhead smolts) would be a small fraction of the total number of prey items for wildlife  2  in the analysis area.  3  5.5.5 Socioeconomics  4  Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics, describes the baseline conditions for socioeconomics. These conditions  represent the effects of many years of climate change, development, habitat restoration, and hatchery  6  production.  The expected effects of the alternatives on socioeconomics are described in Subsection 4.5,  7  Socioeconomics. Future actions are described in Subsection 5.4, Future Actions and Conditions. This  8  subsection considers potential effects that may occur as a result of implementing any one of the  9  alternatives at the same time as other anticipated actions. This subsection discusses the incremental  impacts of the alternatives in addition to past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (i.e.,  11  cumulative effects) on socioeconomic resources.  12  Although unquantifiable, climate change and development actions, changes in hatchery production and  13  fisheries may reduce the number of salmon and steelhead available for harvest over time as described in  14  Subsection 5.5.2, Salmon and Steelhead.  This, in turn, may reduce angler expenditure and economic  revenue relative to conditions considered in Subsection 4.5, Socioeconomics. Likewise, it may reduce the  16  number of steelhead available to tribal members as a food source and may increase tribal reliance on other  17  consumer goods or increase travel costs to participate in other fisheries.  18  The potential benefits of habitat restoration actions within the cumulative effects analysis area are  19  difficult to quantify. These actions may not fully mitigate for the impacts of climate change and  development.  21  As discussed in Subsection 5.4.4, Hatchery Production, and Subsection 5.4.5, Fisheries, changes in  22  hatchery programs and fisheries may occur over time. Changes in hatchery programs may affect the  23  socioeconomic effects from hatchery production of salmon and steelhead. For example, reductions in  24  hatchery production or terminations of hatchery programs may decrease the number of fish available for  harvest, decrease associated angler expenditures and revenues generated from fishing, and reduce the  26  number of steelhead available to tribal members.  27  In summary, it is likely that cumulative effects from climate change, development, and hatchery  28  production would decrease the number of fish available for harvest and reduce angler expenditure and  29  economic revenue relative to conditions considered in Subsection 4.5, Socioeconomics.  However, none  of the alternatives would affect the overall trend in cumulative effects on socioeconomics because the  31  range of production levels under the alternatives (e.g., from 0 to 620,000 early winter hatchery-origin  32  steelhead smolts) would result in a small fraction of the total harvestable salmon and steelhead in the  Chapter 5 160 March 2016November 2015  1  analysis area, and, therefore, comprise a small fraction of the overall economic benefits derived from  2  salmon and steelhead harvest in the analysis area  3  5.5.6 Environmental Justice  4  Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice, describes environmental justice communities in the analysis area.   Subsection 3.6, Environmental Justice, also describes methods for identifying environmental justice user  6  groups and communities of concern.  Environmental justice user groups and communities of concern  7  within the cumulative effects analysis area include Indian tribes that fish for salmon and steelhead and  8  low income or minority communities. The expected effects of the alternatives on environmental justice  9  are described in Subsection 4.6, Environmental Justice. Future actions are described in Subsection 5.4,  Future Actions and Conditions. This subsection considers potential effects that may occur as a result of  11  implementing any one of the alternatives at the same time as other anticipated actions. This subsection  12  discusses the incremental impacts of the alternatives in addition to past, present, and reasonably  13  foreseeable future actions (i.e., cumulative effects) on environmental justice user groups and communities  14  of concern.  Climate change and development actions, and changes in hatchery production and fisheries, may reduce  16  the number of salmon and steelhead available for harvest over time as described in Subsection 5.5.2,  17  Salmon and Steelhead. This, in turn, may reduce fishing opportunity in the analysis area relative to  18  conditions considered in Subsection 4.6, Environmental Justice.   19  The potential benefits of habitat restoration actions within the cumulative effects analysis area are  difficult to quantify. These actions may not fully mitigate for the impacts of climate change and  21  development on the abundance of fish that would be available for commercial or recreational harvest.  22  As discussed in Subsection 5.4.4, Hatchery Production, and Subsection 5.4.5, Fisheries, changes in  23  hatchery programs and fisheries may occur over time. Changes in hatchery programs may affect the  24  number of salmon and steelhead available for harvest by environmental justice communities.  In summary, it is likely that cumulative effects from climate change, development, and hatchery  26  production would decrease the number of fish available for harvest relative to conditions considered in  27  Subsection 4.6, Environmental Justice.  However, none of the alternatives would affect the overall trend  28  in cumulative effects on environmental justice because the range of production levels under the  29  alternatives (e.g., from 0 to 620,000 steelhead smolts) would result in a small fraction of the total  harvestable salmon and steelhead in the analysis area available to environmental justice communities.  1  5.6  Summary of Effects  2  Table 19 summarizes the combined effects of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions, other than  3  the Proposed Action and alternatives (summarized above), affecting the environmental resources  4  reviewed in this EIS, affected by climate change, human development, habitat restoration, and hatchery  5  production.  6  Table 20 summarizes the conclusions made above on the impacts of past, present, and reasonably  7  foreseeable actions when combined with the impacts of the Proposed Action. Definitions for effects terms  8  are the same as described in Subsection 3, Affected Environment, and Subsection 4, Environmental  9  Consequences. The relative magnitude and direction of impacts is described using the following terms:  10  Undetectable:  The impact would not be detectable.  11  Negligible:  The impact would be at the lower levels of detection, and could be either  12  positive or negative.  13  Low:  The impact would be slight, but detectable, and could be either positive or  14  negative.  15  Moderate:  The impact would be readily apparent, and could be either positive or negative.  16  High:  The impact would be greatly positive or severely negative.  17  1 Table 19. Summary of effects of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions on the affected 2 resources evaluated in this EIS. Affected Resource  Past Actions  Present Actions  Reasonable Foreseeable Future Actions  Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Water Quantity  Negligible to low negative due to water withdrawals from human development  Negligible to low negative  Low negative  Low negative  Salmon and Steelhead  Moderate to high negative due to human development, past fishery, hatcheries, and habitat management practices  Mixed (negligible to moderate negative, to low positive) due to ESA compliance and improved fishery, hatcheries, habitat management practices, and habitat restoration, depending on population  Mixed (moderate negative to low positive), depending on population  Mixed (moderate negative to low positive), depending on population  Other Fish Species  Mixed (negligible to low negative, to negligible positive) depending on species, due to human development, past fishery, hatcheries, and habitat management practices  Mixed (negligible negative to negligible positive) depending on species  Negligible to low negative depending on species  Negligible to low negative depending on species  Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale  Mixed (negligible to low negative, to low positive) due to habitat degradation and hatchery-origin salmon and steelhead as a food source  Low positive due to ESA compliance  Negligible to low positive  Low positive  Socioeconomics  Moderate positive from benefits to recreational fisheries and tribal fisheries, although some have been reduced in recent years as numbers of fish available to harvest have declined  Low positive due to declines in harvest opportunities  Low positive  Low positive  Environmental Justice  Low to moderate negative due to reductions in fish available for use by communities of concern and populations of concern such as treaty Indian tribes  Low negative to low positive  Negligible negative  Low negative  3 4 Table 20. Summary of the cumulative effects of the Proposed Action. Affected Resource  Baseline  Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Proposed Action  Cumulative Effects of the Proposed Action  Water Quantity  Mixed (negligible negative to negligible positive)  Low negative  Negligible negative  None  Salmon and Steelhead  Mixed (negligible to moderate negative, to low positive) due to ESA compliance and improved fishery, hatchery, habitat management practices, and habitat restoration, depending on population  Mixed (moderate negative to low positive), depending on population  Negligible negative  None  Other Fish Species  Mixed (negligible negative to negligible positive) depending on species  Negligible to low negative depending on species  Mixed (negligible negative to negligible positive) depending on species  None  Wildlife – Southern Resident Killer Whale  Low positive due to ESA compliance  Low positive  Negligible positive  None  Socioeconomics  Moderate positive  Low positive  Moderate positive  None  Environmental Justice  Low negative to low positive  Low negative  Negligible positive  None  2  6 REFERENCES  3  Chapter 1 and Chapter 2  4  Anderson, J., K.I. Warheit, and B. Missildine. 2014. Genetic monitoring of hatchery-wild introgressive  5  hybridization in Puget Sound steelhead. December 2, 2014. Washington Department of Fish and  6  Wildlife, Olympia, WA. 12 pages.  7  Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 1981. Forty Most Asked Questions Concerning CEQ’s  8  National Environmental Policy Act Regulations.  9  Cohen, F. 2005. Cohen’s Handbook of Federal Indian Law.  LexisNexis. Newark, NJ.  647 pages.  10  Cunningham, Kelly. Deputy Assistant Director of the Fish Program, Washington Department of Fish and  11  Wildlife, Olympia, WA. July 8, 2015. Email to Isabel Tinoco, Muckleshoot Indian Tribe,  12  regarding withdrawal of the Green River early winter steelhead hatchery program from further  13  consideration under the ESA.  14  Hood Canal Coordinating Council. 2005. Hood Canal and Eastern Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum  15  salmon recovery plan. Adopted by the National Marine Fisheries Service in 2007. 334 pages.  16  Long Live the Kings (LLTK). 2011. The Hood Canal steelhead project. Project brochure. Long Live the  17  Kings, Seattle, WA. 2 pages.  18  National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2012. Final environmental assessment. Final environmental  19  assessment to analyze impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service determination that  20  five hatchery programs for Elwha River salmon and steelhead as described in joint state-tribal  21  hatchery and genetic management plans and one tribal harvest plan satisfy the Endangered  22  Species Act section 4(d) Rule. West Coast Regional Office, Sustainable Fisheries Division.  23  Portland, OR. 124 pages.  March 2016November 2015 165 Chapter 6  1  NMFS. 2014a. Draft environmental impact statement on two joint state and tribal resource management  2  plans for Puget Sound salmon and steelhead hatchery programs. NMFS West Coast Region,  3  Sustainable Fisheries Division. Lacey, WA.  4  NMFS. 2014b. Final supplemental environmental assessment. Supplemental environmental assessment to  analyze impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service determination that five hatchery  6  programs for Elwha River salmon and steelhead as described in joint state-tribal hatchery and  7  genetic management plans and one tribal harvest plan satisfy the Endangered Species Act 4(d)  8  Rule. West Coast Regional Office, Sustainable Fisheries Division. Portland, OR. 248 pages.  9  NMFS. 2015a. Draft environmental assessment to analyze the impacts of NOAA’s National Marine  Fisheries Service 4(d) determination under limit 6 for three early winter steelhead hatchery  11  programs in the Dungeness Nooksack, and Stillaguamish River Basins. Sustainable Fisheries  12  Division. Portland, OR. 123 pages.  13  NMFS. 2015b. Draft environmental assessment to analyze the impacts of NOAA’s National Marine  14  Fisheries Service determination that three hatchery programs for Dungeness River basin salmon  as described in joint state-tribal hatchery and genetic management plans satisfy the Endangered  16  Species Act section 4(d) Rule. Sustainable Fisheries Division. Portland, OR.  17  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 1999. NOAA Administrative Order 216-6,  18  Revised NOAA Order 216-6, Environmental Review Procedures for Implementing the National  19  Environmental Policy Act.  Newton, N.J., R.T. Anderson, C.E. Goldberg, J.P. La Velle, J.V. Royster, J.W. Singer, R. Strickland, and  21  B.R. Berger. 2005. Cohen's handbook of Federal indian law, 2005 edition. LexisNexis Matthew  22  Bender Publications, San Francisco, CA.  23  Northwest Fisheries Science Center (NWFSC). 2015. Status review update for Pacific salmon and  24  steelhead listed under the Endangered Species Act: Pacific Northwest. Northwest Fisheries  Science Center, Seattle, WA. 357 pages.  26  Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC). 2013. Tribal policy statement for salmon hatcheries in  27  the face of treaty rights at risk. January 13, 2013. Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission.  28  Olympia, WA. 3 pages.  1  Scott, J. B., Jr. 2014. letter from Scott, J. B., Jr., (WDFW) to Robert Turner, NMFS, WCR, SMD.  2  Resubmittal of five early winter steelhead HGMPs in Puget Sound for review under ESA-Limit 6  3  of the 4(d) rule (50 CFR Part 223). 1 page. July 28, 2014.  4  Scott, J.B., and J. Gobin. 2014. Letter from Scott, J. B., Jr., WDFW, and J. Gobin, Tulalip Tribes, to Rob  Jones, NMFS, WCR, SFD. Modification of initial submission of Snohomish early winter  6  steelhead HGMP into two HGMPs – one for the Skykomish program and one for the Snoqualmie  7  program, and request for review and approval of these two plus the Dungeness, Nooksack, and  8  Stillaguamish HGMPs as a group. 1 page. November 21, 2014.  9  Shared Strategy for Puget Sound (SSPS). 2007. Puget Sound salmon recovery plan. Volume 1. Submitted  to NMFS by the Shared Strategy for Puget Sound, Seattle, WA. 472 pages.  11  Stay, A.C. 2012. Treaty tribes and hatcheries. The Water Report – Water Rights, Water Quality and  12  Water Solutions in the West. May 15, 2012. Issue #99: Pages 1-9. Envirotech Publications, Inc.  13  Eugene, OR.  14  Tinoco, Isabel. Muckleshoot Indian Tribe, Auburn, WA. July 8, 2015. Email to Steve Leider, NMFS,  regarding withdrawal of the Green River early winter steelhead hatchery program from further  16  consideration under the ESA.  17  Unsworth, J., 2016. Letter from Unsworth, J., WDFW, to Robert Turner, NMFS, WCR, SFD.  18  Resubmission of a hatchery and genetic management plan for the Wallace/Reiter early winter  19  steelhead hatchery program for consideration under the ESA, and information on separate  summer steelhead hatchery programs. 9 pages, plus 5 appendix tables. January 19, 2016.  21  U.S. Department of Commerce. 1995. American Indian and Alaska Native Policy. U.S. Department of  22  Commerce, Washington, DC 5 pages.  23  Washington Fish and Wildlife Commission (WFWC). 2009. Washington Department of Fish and  24  Wildlife hatchery and fishery reform. Policy Number C-3619. Olympia, WA. 3 pages.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). 2014a. Dungeness River early winter steelhead  26  hatchery program.  Hatchery and genetic management plan. July 28, 2014. Fish Program.   27  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 69 pages.  1  WDFW. 2014b. Kendall Creek winter steelhead hatchery program.  Hatchery and genetic management  2  plan.  July 28, 2014.  Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia,  3  WA. 64 pages.  4  WDFW. 2014c. Whitehorse Ponds (Stillaguamish River) winter steelhead hatchery program.  Hatchery  5  and genetic management plan. July 28, 2014.  Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish  6  and Wildlife.  Olympia, WA. 65 pages.  7  WDFW 2014d. Snohomish/Skykomish winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic  8  management plan. November 25, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and  9  Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 65 pages.  10  WDFW 2014e. Tokul Creek winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic management plan.  11  November 24, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA.  12  64 pages.  13  WDFW. 2016. Snohomish/Skykomish winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic  14  management plan. February 16, 2016. Fish Program. Washington Department of Fish and  15  Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 64 pages.  16  Washington State Recreation and Conservation Office (RCO). 2014. State of salmon in watersheds 2014  17  report. Percent hatchery scientific standards met. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife  18  hatchery programs: Puget Sound. http://www.stateofsalmon.wa.gov/regions/puget 19  sound/hatcheries-summary/ Accessed October 5, 2015.  20  Chapter 3 and Chapter 4  21  Amoss, P.T. 1987. The fish god gave us: the first salmon ceremony revived. Arctic Anthropology.  22  Volume 24, pages 56 to 66.  23  Anderson, J., K.I. Warheit, and B. Missildine. 2014. Genetic monitoring of hatchery-wild introgressive  24  hybridization in Puget Sound steelhead. December 2, 2014. Washington Department of Fish and  25  Wildlife, Olympia, WA. 12 pages.  26  Ashbrook, C.E., M.C. Mizell, K.I. Warheit, and J.G. Sneva. In prep. Hooking mortality and migration  27  behavior of a Puget Sound wild steelhead population.  1  Beamish, R.J. 1980. Adult biology of the river lamprey (Lampetra ayresi) and the Pacific lamprey  2  (Lampetra tridentata) from the Pacific coast of Canada.  Canadian Journal of Fisheries and  3  Aquatic Sciences. 37: 1906-1923.  4  Beauchamp, D. A. 1990. Seasonal and diet food habit of rainbow trout stocked as juveniles in Lake  5  Washington. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society. 119: 475-485.  6  Buckley, R.M. 1999. Incidence of cannibalism and intra-generic predation by chinook salmon  7  (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) in Puget Sound, Washington.  Technical Report # RAD 99-04.  Fish  8  Program, Resource Assessment Division.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.   9  Olympia, WA.  10  Columbia Basin Fish and Wildlife Authority (CBFWA). 1996. Draft programmatic environmental impact  11  statement. Impacts of artificial salmon and steelhead production strategies in the Columbia River  12  basin. USFWS, NMFS, and Bonneville Power Administration. Portland, OR.  13  Cannamela, D.A. 1992. Potential impacts of releases of hatchery steelhead trout smolts on wild and  14  natural juvenile chinook and sockeye salmon. Idaho Department of Fish and Game, Boise, ID.  15  Cardwell, R.D. and K.L. Fresh. 1979. Predation upon juvenile salmon. Draft No. 8. Washington  16  Department of Fisheries. 21 pages.  17  Crawford, B.A. 1979. The origin and history of the trout brood stocks of the Washington Department of  18  Game. Olympia, WA. 76 pages.  19  Dixon, James. Fishery Biologist, National Marine Fisheries Service, September 15, 2015. Personal  20  communication, email to Tom Wegge (TCW Economics) regarding angler effort for steelhead  21  harvest in Washington State.  22  Elwha-Dungeness Planning Unit (EDPU). 2005. Elwha-Dungeness Watershed Plan, Water Resource  23  Inventory Area 18 (WRIA 18) and Sequim Bay in West WRIA 17. May, 2005. Published by  24  Clallam County. Volume 1: Chapters 1-3 and 15 appendices; Volume 2: Appendix 3-E.  25  Finger, T.R. 1982. Interactive segregation among three species of sculpins (Cottus).  Copeia 1982: 680–  26  694.  27  Ford, M.J. 2002. Selection in captivity during supportive breeding may reduce fitness in the wild.  28  Conservation Biology. 16(3): 815-825.  March 2016November 2015 169 Chapter 6  1  Ford, M.J. 2011. Status review update for Pacific salmon and steelhead listed under the Endangered  2  Species Act: Pacific Northwest. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.  3  NMFS-NWFSC-113, 281 pages.  4  Ford, M.J., J. Hempelmann, M.B. Hanson, K.L. Ayres, R.W. Baird, C.K. Emmons, J.I. Lundin,  5  G.S. Schorr, S.K. Wasser, and L.K. Park. 2016. Estimation of a killer whale (Orcinus orca)  6  population’s diet using sequencing analysis of DNA from feces. PLoS One. 11(1): e0144956.  7  Good, T.P., R.S. Waples, and P. Adams, editors. 2005. Updated status of federally listed ESUs of West  8  Coast salmon and steelhead. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.  9  NMFS-NWFSC-66, 598 pages.  10  Gunther, E. 1950. The Indian background of Washington history. Pacific Northwest Quarterly. July,  11  pages 189 to 202.  12  Hatchery Scientific Review Group (HSRG). 2005. Hatchery reform in Washington State:  principles and  13  emerging issues.  L. Mobrand (chair), J. Barr, L. Blankenship, D. Campton, T. Evelyn, T. Flagg,  14  C. Mahnken, R. Piper, P. Seidel, L. Seeb, and B. Smoker.  Fisheries. 30(6): pages 1 to 23.  15  HSRG. 2009. Columbia River hatchery reform system wide report. Available from,  16  http://www.hatcheryreform.us/hrp/reports/system/welcome_show.action.  17  HSRG. 2014. On the Science of Hatcheries: An updated perspective on the role of hatcheries in salmon  18  and steelhead management in the Pacific Northwest. A. Appleby, H.L. Blankenship, D. Campton,  19  K. Currens, T. Evelyn, D. Fast, T. Flagg, J. Gislason, P. Kline, C. Mahnken, B. Missildine, L.  20  Mobrand, G. Nandor, P. Paquet, S. Patterson, L. Seeb, S. Smith, and K. Warheit. June 2014.  21  Available online: http://hatcheryreform.us.  22  Hard, J.J., J.M. Myers, M.J. Ford, R.G. Kope, G.R. Pess, R.S. Waples, G.A. Winans, B.A. Berejikian,  23  F.W. Waknitz, P.B. Adams, P.A. Bisson, D.E. Campton, and R. Reisenbichler. 2007. Status  24  review of Puget Sound steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss). U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA  25  Technical Memorandum. NMFS-NWFSC-81, 117 pages.  26  Hard, J.J., J.M. Myers, E.J. Connor, R.A. Hayman, R.G. Kope, G. Luchetti, A.R. Marshall, G.R. Pess,  27  and B.E. Thompson. 2015. Viability criteria for steelhead within the Puget Sound distinct  28  population segment. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum. NMFS 29  NWFSC-129, 332 pages.  1  Hartt, A.C. and M.B. Dell. 1986. Early oceanic migrations and growth of juvenile Pacific salmon and  2  steelhead trout. International North Pacific Fisheries Commission. Bulletin Number 46.  3  Vancouver, BC, Canada. 105 pages.  4  Hastein, T. and T. Lindstad. 1991. Diseases in wild and cultured salmon: Possible  5  interaction. Aquaculture. 98:277-288.  6  Hillman, T.W., and J.W. Mullan, editors. 1989. Effect of hatchery releases on the abundance of wild  7  juvenile salmonids. Report to Chelan County PUD by D.W. Chapman Consultants, Inc., Boise,  8  ID.  9  Hiss, J. 1993. Recommended Instream Flows for the Lower Dungeness River. U. S. Fish and Wildlife  10  Service, Western Washington Fishery Resource Office. Lacey, WA.  11  Hoffmann, A. 2015a. Spreadsheet from Hoffmann, A., WDFW, to C. Busack (NMFS); Beata Dungeness  12  Gene Flow 6-24-14.xlsx. Mill Creek, WA. February 27, 2015.  13  Hoffmann, A. 2015b. Spreadsheet from Hoffmann, A., WDFW, to C. Busack (NMFS); DRAFT  14  Hoffmann 2014 Gene Flow 11-22-14.xlsx. Mill Creek, WA. January 29, 2015.  15  Horner, N.J. 1978. Survival, densities and behavior of salmonid fry in stream in relation to fish predation.   16  M.S. Thesis.  University of Idaho, Moscow, ID.  132 pages.  17  Integrated Hatchery Operations Team (IHOT). 1995. Policies and procedures for Columbia Basin  18  anadromous salmonid hatcheries. Annual report 1994. Bonneville Power Administration  19  DOE/BP-60629. Portland, OR. 115 pages.  20  Independent Scientific Advisory Board (ISAB). 2015. Density dependence and its implications for fish  21  management and restoration programs in the Columbia River Basin. ISAB 2015-1. Northwest  22  Power and Conservation Council, Portland,  OR. 246 pages.  23  Jones, M.H., J.E. Seeb, K.I.Warheit, T.R. Seamons, T.P. Quinn, and L.W. Seeb. 2015. Consequences of  24  emergence timing for the growth and relative survival of steelhead fry from naturally spawning  25  wild and hatchery parents. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society. 144:977-989.  26  Krohn, D.C. 1968. Production of the reticulate sculpin (Cottus perplexus) and its predation on salmon fry  27  in three Oregon streams.  M.S. Thesis, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR.  78 pages.  1  Light, J.T., C.K. Harris, and R.L. Burgner. 1989. Ocean distribution and migration of steelhead  2  (Oncorhynchus mykiss, formerly Salmo gairdneri). FRI-UW-8912. Fisheries Research Institute,  3  University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 50 pages.  4  Maret, T.R., C. Robinson, and G. Minshall. 1997. Fish assemblages and environmental correlates in least 5  disturbed streams of the Upper Snake River Basin.  Transactions of the American Fisheries  6  Society. 126:2, 200-216.  7  McElhany, P., M.H. Ruckelshaus, M.J. Ford, T.C. Wainwright, and E.P. Bjorkstedt. 2000. Viable  8  salmonid populations and the recovery of Evolutionarily Significant Units. U.S. Department of  9  Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum. NMFS-NWFSC-42, 156 pages.  10  McMillan, B. 2015a. The Reproductive Ecology of Oncorhynchus mykiss in Tributary Streams of the Mid  11  Skagit River Basin. Concrete, WA. January 15, 2015. 11 pages.  12  McMillan, B. 2015b. Steelhead reproductive ecology: spawning time, emergence time, intermittency, and  13  changing climate -a race for survival in mid-Skagit River tributaries. Unpublished Report.  14  Concrete, WA. June 3, 2015.  15  Meyer Resources Inc. 1999. Tribal Circumstances and Impacts of the Lower Snake River Project on the  16  Nez Perce, Yakama, Umatilla, Warm Springs and Shoshone Bannock Tribes. Prepared for  17  Columbia River Intertribal Fish Commission, Portland, OR. 260 pages.  18  Moore, J.W., J.D. Yeakel, D. Peard, D. Lough, and M. Beere. 2014. Life-history diversity and its  19  importance to population stability and persistence of a migratory fish: steelhead in two large  20  North American watersheds. Journal of Animal Ecology. 5:1035-1046.  21  Moore, M.E., B.A. Berejikian, F.A. Goetz, A.G. Berger, S.S. Hodgson, E.J. Connor, and T.P. Quinn.  22  2015. Multi-population analysis of Puget Sound steelhead survival and behavior. Marine Ecology  23  Press Series. 537:217-232.  24  Myers, J. M., J. J. Hard, E. J. Connor, R. A. Hayman, R. G. Kope, G. Lucchetti, A. R. Marshall, G. R.  25  Pess, and B. E. Thompson. 2015. Identifying historical populations of steelhead within the Puget  26  Sound Distinct Population Segment. U.S. Dept. Commerce, NOAA Tech. Mem. NMFS-NWFSC 27  128. 155 pages.  1  Myers, J.M., R.G. Kope, G.J. Bryant, D. Teel, L.J. Lierheimer, T.C. Wainwright, W.S. Grant, F.W.  2  Waknitz, K. Neely, S.T. Lindley, and R.S. Waples. 1998. Status review of Chinook salmon from  3  Washington, Idaho, Oregon, and California. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical  4  Memorandum. NMFS NWFSC-35, 443 pages.  Naman, S.W. and C.S. Sharpe. 2012. Predation by hatchery yearling salmonids in the freshwater  6  environment: a review of studies, two case histories, and implications for management.  7  Environmental Biology of Fishes. 94:21-28.  8  National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2003. Letter from D. Robert Lohn, NMFS, to Ed Bowles,  9  ODFW, dated December 9, 2003, concurring with ODFW’s “Oregon Coastal Coho, Siltcoos and  Tahkenitch Lakes Coho Fishery” Fisheries Management and Evaluation Plan under limit 4 of the  11  4(d) rule. Portland, OR.  12  NMFS. 2009. Letter from Barry Thom, NMFS, to Ed Bowles, ODFW, dated September 1, 2009,  13  concurring with ODFW’s “Oregon Coastal Coho, Coastal Rivers Coho Sports Fishery” Fisheries  14  Management and Evaluation Plan under limit 4 of the 4(d) rule. Portland, OR.  NMFS. 2011a. Anadromous Salmonid Passage Facility Design.  National Marine Fisheries Service  16  Northwest Region. July 2011.  http://www.nwr.noaa.gov/Salmon 17  Hydropower/FERC/upload/Fish-Passage-Design.pdf  18  NMFS. 2011b. 2011 Implementation status assessment – final report. A qualitative assessment of  19  implementation of the Puget Sound Chinook salmon recovery plan. Prepared by Millie M. Judge,  Lighthouse Natural Resource Consulting, Inc. for the National Marine Fisheries Service,  21  Northwest Region, Portland, OR. 45 pages.  22  NMFS. 2012. Final environmental assessment. Final environmental assessment to analyze impacts of  23  NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service determination that five hatchery programs for Elwha  24  River salmon and steelhead as described in joint state-tribal hatchery and genetic management  plans and one tribal harvest plan satisfy the Endangered Species Act section 4(d) Rule. West  26  Coast Regional Office, Sustainable Fisheries Division. Portland, OR. 124 pages.  27  NMFS. 2014a. Draft environmental impact statement on two joint state and tribal resource management  28  plans for Puget Sound salmon and steelhead hatchery programs. NMFS West Coast Region,  29  Sustainable Fisheries Division. Lacey, WA.  1  NMFS. 2014b. Final supplemental environmental assessment. Supplemental environmental assessment to  2  analyze impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service determination that five hatchery  3  programs for Elwha River salmon and steelhead as described in joint state-tribal hatchery and  4  genetic management plans and one tribal harvest plan satisfy the Endangered Species Act section  5  4(d) Rule. West Coast Regional Office, Sustainable Fisheries Division. Portland, OR. 248 pages.  6  NMFS. 2014c.  Final environmental impact statement to inform Columbia River Basin hatchery  7  operations and the funding of Mitchell Act hatchery programs.  NMFS West Coast Regional  8  Office, Sustainable Fisheries Division. Portland, OR.  9  NMFS. 2015a. Draft environmental assessment to analyze the impacts of NOAA’s National Marine  10  Fisheries Service 4(d) determination under limit 6 for three early winter steelhead hatchery  11  programs in the Dungeness Nooksack, and Stillaguamish River Basins. Sustainable Fisheries  12  Division. Portland, OR. 123 pages.  13  NMFS. 2015b. Draft environmental assessment to analyze the impacts of NOAA’s National Marine  14  Fisheries Service determination that three hatchery programs for Dungeness River basin salmon  15  as described in joint state-tribal hatchery and genetic management plans satisfy the Endangered   16  Species Act section 4(d) Rule. Sustainable Fisheries Division. Portland, OR.  17  Nelson, T.C., M.L. Rosenau and N.T. Johnston. 2005. Behavior and survival of wild and hatchery origin  18  winter steelhead spawners caught and released in a recreational fishery. North American Journal  19  of Fisheries Management. 25:931–943.  20  Northwest Fisheries Science Center. 2015. Status review update for Pacific salmon and steelhead listed  21  under the Endangered Species Act: Pacific Northwest. Northwest Fisheries Science Center,  22  Seattle, WA. 357 pages.  23  Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC). 2013. Tribal policy statement for salmon hatcheries in  24  the face of treaty rights at risk. January 13, 2013. Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission.  25  Olympia, WA. 3 pages.  26  Pearsons, T.N., and A.L. Fritts. 1999. Maximum size of chinook salmon consumed by juvenile coho  27  salmon. North American Journal of Fisheries Management. 19: 165-170.  1  Pflug, D., E. Connor, B. Hayman, T. Kassler, K. Warheit, B. McMillan, and E. Beamer. 2013. Ecological,  2  genetic and productivity consequences of interactions between hatchery and natural‐origin  3  steelhead of the Skagit watershed. Report prepared for the Skagit River System Cooperative,  4  Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Program funding number NMFS‐FHQ‐2008‐2001011. La Conner,  5  WA. 207 pages.  6  Phelps, S.R., S.A. Leider, P.L. Hulett, B.M. Baker, and T. Johnson. 1997. Genetic analysis of Washington  7  steelhead: preliminary results incorporating 36 new collections from 1995 and 1996. Progress  8  report. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, WA. 29 pages.  9  Puget Sound Treaty Tribes and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (PSTT and WDFW). 2004.  10  Puget Sound hatchery strategies for steelhead, coho salmon, chum salmon, sockeye salmon, and  11  pink salmon. Resource management plan. Puget Sound Treaty Tribes and Washington  12  Department of Fish and Wildlife. March 31, 2004. 185 pages.  13  Recovery Implementation Science Team (RIST). 2009. Hatchery reform science: A review of some  14  applications of science to hatchery reform issues.  April 9, 2009.  93 pages.  15  Scott, J.B., and W.T. Gill, editors. 2008. Oncorhynchus mykiss: Assessment of Washington State's  16  steelhead populations and programs. Preliminary draft for Washington Fish & Wildlife  17  Commission. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, WA. 424 pages.  18  Seamons, T.R., L. Hauser, K.A. Naish, and T.P. Quinn. 2012. Can interbreeding of wild and artificially  19  propagated animals be prevented by using broodstock selected for a divergent life history?  20  Evolutionary Applications. 5(7): 705-719.  21  Shared Strategy for Puget Sound (SSPS). 2005. Shared Strategies for Puget Sound-Nooksack Watershed  22  Profile. WRIA 1. In Volume II of the Shared Strategy for Puget Sound. Plan adopted by the  23  National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) January 19, 2007. Seattle, WA. June, 2005.  24  Sharpe, C.S., P.C. Topping, T.N. Pearsons, J.F. Dixon, and H.J. Fuss. 2008. Predation of naturally  25  produced subyearling Chinook by hatchery steelhead juveniles in western Washington rivers.  26  Report FPT 07-09. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Fish Program, Olympia, WA.  27  68 pages.  1  Species Interactions Work Group (SIWG). 1984. Evaluation of potential species interaction effects in the  2  planning and selection of salmonid enhancement projects. In Fresh, K., editor. Report prepared  3  for the Enhancement Planning Team for implementation of the Salmon and Steelhead  4  Conservation and Enhancement Act of 1980. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife,  5  Olympia, WA. 80 pages.  6  Stay, A.C. 2012. Treaty tribes and hatcheries. The Water Report – Water Rights, Water Quality and  7  Water Solutions in the West. May 15, 2012. Issue #99: Pages 1-9. Envirotech Publications, Inc.  8  Eugene, OR.  9  Stein, J. 2000. Exploring Coast Salish prehistory. University of Washington Press, Seattle, WA. 126  10  pages.  11  Stillaguamish. 2007. South Fork Stillaguamish Chinook Natural Stock Restoration Program-Hatchery  12  and genetic management plan. Stillaguamish Tribe. Arlington, WA. August 1, 2007. 50 pages.  13  Taylor, G. and R.A. Barnhart. 1999. Mortality of angler caught and released summer steelhead. Final  14  report, contract number FG 5018 IF. California Department of Fish and Game, steelhead trout  15  catch report -restoration card. Sacramento, CA. 30 pages.  16  Tulalip Tribes (Tulalip). 2012. Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin salmon hatchery “Tulalip Hatchery” subyearling  17  summer Chinook salmon.  Hatchery and genetic management plan. Tulalip Tribes. Marysville,  18  WA.  19  Tulalip. 2013a. Tulalip Bay hatchery coho salmon. Hatchery and genetic management plan. Tulalip  20  Tribes. Marysville, Washington. Tulalip Tribes. Marysville, WA.  21  Tulalip. 2013b. Tulalip Bay hatchery chum salmon. Hatchery and genetic management plan. Tulalip  22  Tribes. Marysville, Washington. Tulalip Tribes. Marysville, WA.  23  Unsworth, J., 2016. Letter from Unsworth, J., WDFW, to Robert Turner, NMFS, WCR, SFD.  24  Resubmission of a hatchery and genetic management plan for the Wallace/Reiter early winter  25  steelhead hatchery program for consideration under the ESA, and information on separate  26  summer steelhead hatchery programs. 9 pages, plus 5 appendix tables. January 19, 2016.  27  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1998. Reviewing for environmental justice: EIS and  28  permitting resource guide.  EPA Review.  Region 10 – Environmental Justice Office.  Chapter 6 176 March 2016November 2015  1  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2004. Draft recovery plan for the coastal-Puget Sound distinct  2  population segment of bull trout (Salvelinus confluentus). Volume I (of II):  Puget Sound  3  management unit. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Portland, OR. 389 + xvii pages.  4  USFWS. 2012. Washington Fish and Wildlife Office: Listed species by county.   5  http://www.fws.gov/wafwo/speciesmap_new.html (Accessed November 2014).  6  Wampler, P., and J. Hiss. 1991. Fish habitat analysis for the Dungeness River using the instream flow  7  incremental methodology. U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Western Washington Fishery  8  Resource Office. Lacey, WA.  9  Warheit, K.I. 2014a. Measuring reproductive interaction between hatchery-origin and wild steelhead  10  (Oncorhynchus mykiss) from northern Puget Sound populations potentially affected by segregated  11  hatchery programs. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA. October 10,  12  2014.  13  Warheit, K.I. 2014b. Warheit, K.I., WDFW, to C. Busack (NMFS); Probability_PEHC_Greater_02.xlsx.  14  Olympia, WA. November 21, 2014.  15  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). 2008. Statewide steelhead management plan:  16  Statewide policies, strategies, and actions. Olympia, WA. February 29, 2008.  17  WDFW. 2009. Hatchery performance summary tables. Puget Sound and coastal salmon and steelhead  18  facilities. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 25 pages.  19  WDFW. 2013a. Wallace River hatchery summer chinook salmon.  Hatchery and genetic management  20  plan. February 11, 2013. Fish Program. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia,  21  WA.   22  WDFW. 2013b. Wallace River hatchery coho salmon. Hatchery and genetic management plan. October  23  14, 2013. Fish Program. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA.  24  Washington State Conservation Commission (WSCC). 2005. Watershed resource inventory areas  25  limiting factors reports. Washington State Conservation Commission. Olympia, WA.  26  WDFW. 2013c. Everett Bay net-pen coho salmon. Hatchery and genetic management plan. June 27,  27  2013. Fish Program. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA.  1  WDFW 2014a. Dungeness River early winter steelhead program.  Hatchery and genetic management  2  plan. July 28, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA.  3  WDFW 2014b. Kendall Creek winter steelhead program.  Hatchery and genetic management plan.  July  4  28, 2014.  Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA.  WDFW 2014c. Whitehorse ponds (Stillaguamish River) winter steelhead hatchery program.  Hatchery  6  and genetic management plan. July 28, 2014.  Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish  7  and Wildlife.  Olympia, WA.  8  WDFW 2014d. Snohomish/Skykomish winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic  9  management plan. November 25, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and  Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 65 pages.  11  WDFW 2014e. Tokul Creek winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic management plan.  12  November 24, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, WA.  13  64 pages.  14  WDFW. 2016. Snohomish/Skykomish winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic  management plan. February 16, 2016. Fish Program. Washington Department of Fish and  16  Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 64 pages.  17  WDFW and Western Washington Treaty Indian Tribes (WDFW and WWTIT). 1998 (Revised 2006).  18  Salmonid disease control policy of the fisheries Co-Managers of Washington State. Washington  19  Department of Fish and Wildlife and Western Washington Treaty Indian Tribes, Olympia WA.  Winans, G.A., M.L. McHenry, J. Baker, A. Elz, A. Goodbla, E. Iwamoto, D. Kuligowski, K.M. Miller,  21  M.P. Small, P. Spruell, and D. VanDoornik. 2008. Genetic inventory of anadromous Pacific  22  salmonids of the Elwha River prior to dam removal. Northwest Science. Volume 82 (Special  23  Issue), pages 128 to 141.  24  Chapter 5  Barsh, R.L. 2003. The importance of human intervention in the evolution of Puget Sound ecosystems. In  26  Droscher, T. W. and D.A. Fraser, editors. Proceedings of the 2003 Georgia Basin/Puget Sound 21  27  Research Conference; March 31 to April 3, 2003, Vancouver, BC. Puget Sound Action Team,  28  Olympia, WA.  1  Beamish, R.J., B.E. Riddell, K.L. Lange, E. Farley Jr., S. Kang, T. Nagasawa, V. Radchenko,  2  O. Temnykh, and S. Urawa. 2009. The effects of climate on Pacific salmon – a summary of  3  published literature. North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC) Special Publication  4  No. 1, Published Literature. 11 pages.  Beechie, T., H. Imaki, J. Greene, A. Wade, H. Wu, G. Pess, P. Roni, J. Kimball, J. Stanford, P. Kiffney,  6  and N. Mantua. 2013. Restoring salmon habitat for a changing climate. River Research and  7  Applications. Volume 29(8), pages 939 to 960.  8  British Columbia Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (BCMWLAP). 2002. Environmental Trends  9  1 in British Columbia 2002. Available at http://wlapwww.gov.bc.ca/soerpt. Accessed December  2, 2 2012.  11  Center for Biological Diversity. 2005. The Puget Sound Basin: a biodiversity assessment. Center for  12  Biological Diversity, Portland, OR. 35 pages.  13  Environment Canada-U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2008. Joint statement of cooperation  14  on Georgia Basin and Puget Sound ecosystem 2008-2010: action plan initiatives for the Salish  Sea. 16 pages.  16  Ford, M.J. 2011. Status review update for Pacific salmon and steelhead listed under the Endangered  17  Species Act: Pacific Northwest. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.  18  NMFS-NWFSC-113, 281 pages.  19  Fraser River Estuary Management Program. 2012. Fraser River management plan. Available at  http://www.bieapfremp.org/main_fremp.html. Accessed December 2, 2012.  21  Glick, P., J. Clough, and B. Nunley. 2007. Sea-level rise and coastal habitats in the Pacific Northwest: an  22  analysis for Puget Sound, Southwestern Washington, and Northwestern Oregon. National  23  Wildlife Federation.  24  Greater Vancouver Regional District. 2005. Green zone issues and policy options. Metro Vancouver,  Vancouver, BC.  26  Gunther, E. 1950. The Indian background of Washington history. Pacific Northwest Quarterly. July,  27  pages 189 to 202.  1  Halpern, B. S., C. V. Kappel, K. A. Selkow, F. Micheli, C. M. Ebert, C. Kontigs, C. M. Crain, R. G.  2  Martone, C. Shearer, and S. J. Teck. 2009. Mapping cumulative human impacts to California  3  Current marine ecosystems. Conservation Letters. Volume 2, pages 138 to 148.  4  Hamlet, A.F. 2011. Impacts of climate variability and climate change on transportation systems and  5  infrastructure in the Pacific Northwest. Climate Impacts Group, University of Washington,  6  Seattle, WA. 42 pages.  7  Hatchery Scientific Review Group (HSRG). 2014. On the science of hatcheries: an updated perspective  8  on the role of hatcheries in salmon and steelhead management in the Pacific Northwest. 160  9  pages. Available from www.hatcheryreform.us/  10  Independent Scientific Advisory Board (ISAB). 2007. Climate change impacts on Columbia River Basin  11  fish and wildlife. ISAB Climate Change Report. ISAB 2007-2. ISAB, Northwest Power and  12  Conservation Council, Portland, OR. 136 pages.  13  ISAB. 2015. Density dependence and its implications for fish management and restoration programs in  14  the Columbia River Basin. ISAB 2015-1. Northwest Power and Conservation Council, Portland,  15  OR. 246 pages.  16  Johannessen, S.C. and R.W. Macdonald. 2009. Effects of local and global change on an inland sea: the  17  Strait of Georgia, British Columbia, Canada. Climate Research. Volume 40, pages 1 to 21.  18  Kostow, K. 2012. Strategies for reducing ecological risks of hatchery programs: case studies from the  19  Pacific Northwest. Environmental Biology of Fishes. 94(1): 285-310.  20  Lackey, R.T., D.H. Lach, and S.O. Duncan. 2006. Wild salmon in western North America; the historical 1  21  and policy context. Pages 13 to 55 in Lackey, R. T., D. H. Lach, and S. O. Duncan, editors.  22  Salmon 2100: The future of wild Pacific salmon, American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, MD. 629  23  pages.  24  Littell, J. S., M. McGuire Elsner, L. C. Whitely Binder, and A. K. Snover, editors. 2009. The Washington  25  climate change impacts assessment – evaluating Washington’s future in a changing climate –  26  executive summary. Climate Impacts Group, Center for Science in the Earth System, Joint  27  Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Oceans, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.  1  Lombard, J. 2006. Saving Puget Sound: a conservation strategy for the 21st century. American Fisheries  2  Society, Bethesda, MD. 320 pages.  3  MacKinlay, R., S. Lehmann, J. Bateman, and R. Cook. 2004. Pacific Salmon Hatcheries in British  4  Columbia. Pages 57 to 75 in Nickum, M., P. Mazik, J. Nickum, and D. MacKinlay, editors.  5  Propagated fish in resource management; June 2003. American Fisheries Society Symposium 44.  6  Bethesda, MD.  7  McElhany, P., M.H. Ruckelshaus, M.J. Ford, T.C. Wainwright, and E.P. Bjorkstedt. 2000. Viable  8  salmonid populations and the recovery of Evolutionarily Significant Units. U.S. Department of  9  Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum. NMFS-NWFSC-42, 156 pages.  10  Mantua, N., I. Tohver, and A. Hamlet. 2009. Impacts of climate change on key aspects of freshwater  11  salmon habitat in Washington State. Pages 217 to 253 (Chapter 6) in McGuire Elsner, M., J.  12  Littell, and L. Whitely Binder, editors. The Washington climate change impact assessment.  13  Climate Impacts Group, Center for Science in the Earth System, Joint Institute for the Study of  14  the Atmosphere and Oceans, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.  15  Mauger, G.S., J.H. Casola, H.A. Morgan, R.L. Strauch, B. Jones, B. Curry, T.M. Busch Isaksen,  16  L. Whitely Binder, M.B. Krosby, and A.K. Snover. 2015. State of knowledge: climate change in  17  Puget Sound. Report prepared for the Puget Sound Partnership and National Oceanic and  18  Atmospheric Administrations. Climate Impacts Group, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.  19  281 pages.  20  Metro Vancouver. 2013. Metro Vancouver 2040: shaping our future. Vancouver, BC.  21  National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2011a. 2011 Report to Congress: Pacific coastal salmon  22  recovery fund FY 2000-2010. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA, National Marine Fisheries  23  Service. 12 pages.  24  NMFS. 2011b. 2011 implementation status assessment – final report. A qualitative assessment of  25  implementation of the Puget Sound Chinook Salmon Recovery Plan. Prepared by Millie M.  26  Judge, Lighthouse Natural Resource Consulting, Inc. for National Marine Fisheries Service,  27  Northwest Region. Portland, OR. 45 pages.  1  NMFS. 2014. Draft environmental impact statement on two joint state and tribal resource management  2  plans for Puget Sound salmon and steelhead hatchery programs. NMFS West Coast Region,  3  Sustainable Fisheries Division. Lacey, WA.  4  Natural Resources Canada (NRC). 2014. Municipal case studies: climate change and the planning  5  process. Available at http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community 6  adaptation/municipalities/616. Accessed May 9, 2014.  7  Northwest Fisheries Science Center. 2015. Status review update for Pacific salmon and steelhead listed  8  under the Endangered Species Act: Pacific Northwest. Northwest Fisheries Science Center,  9  Seattle, WA. 357 pages.  10  Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC). 2012. 2012 state of our watersheds report.  11  WRIAs 1-23. Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission. Olympia, WA. 336 pages.  12  Pacific Salmon Commission. 1985. Treaty between government of Canada and the U.S. of America  13  concerning Pacific salmon. 152 pages.  14  Patrick, D.A., N. Boudreau, G.S. Carpenter, D.M. Langdon, S.R. LeMay, S.M. Martin, R.M. Course,  15  S.L. Prince, and K.M. Quinn. 2012. Effects of climate change on late-season growth and survival  16  of native and non-native species of watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spp.): implications for invasive  17  potential and ecosystem change. Aquatic Botany. Volume 103, pages 83 to 88.  18  Perry, I. 2009. Status of the Strait of Georgia. Pages 41 to 47 in Gallaugher, P. and L. Wood, editors.  19  Haig-Brown symposium on sustaining wild salmon: moving from words to actions; August 16 to  20  17, 2008, Campbell River, BC. Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC.  21  Puget Sound Action Team. 2007. State of the Sound. Office of the Governor, State of Washington,  22  Olympia, WA.  23  Puget Sound Nearshore Ecosystem Restoration Partnership. 2013. Puget Sound nearshore ecosystem  24  restoration project. Available at http://www.pugetsoundnearshore.org/index.html. Accessed on  25  December 30, 2013.  26  Puget Sound Partnership (PSP). 2010. 2009 state of the Sound: a report on Puget Sound ecosystem status  27  and a performance management system to track Action Agenda implementation. Puget Sound  28  Partnership, Olympia, WA.  1  PSP. 2012. Highlights of the 2012 Action agenda for Puget Sound. Available at  2  http://www.psp.wa.gov/action_agenda_2011_update_home.php. Accessed December 2, 2012.  3  PSP. 2015. 2015 state of sound: report on the Puget Sound vital signs. Puget Sound Ecosystem  4  Monitoring Program and Puget Sound Partnership. Olympia, WA. 88 pages.  5  Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC). 2009. Vision 2040 – the growth, management, environmental,  6  economic, and transportation strategy for the Central Puget Sound Region. Puget Sound Regional  7  Council, Seattle, WA.  8  PSRC. 2012. Population change and migration. Puget Sound trends index no. D7. Seattle, WA.  9  PSRC. 2013. 2012 regional macroeconomic forecast, July, 2013. Seattle, WA.  10  Puget Sound Treaty Tribes (PSTT) and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). 2004.  11  Resource management plan -Puget Sound hatchery strategies for steelhead, coho salmon, chum  12  salmon, sockeye salmon, & pink salmon. 185 pages.  13  Quinn, T. 2010. An environmental and historical overview of the Puget Sound ecosystem. Pages 11 to 18  14  in Shipman, H., M. N. Dethier, G. Gelfenbaum, K. L. Gresh, and R. S. Dinocola, editors. Puget  15  Sound Shorelines and the Impacts of Armoring. Proceedings of a State of the Science Workshop;  16  May 16 to 19, 2009, Union, WA. U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2015 17  5254.  18  Rogers, L.A., D.E. Schindler, P.J. Lisi, G.W. Holtgrieve, P.R. Leavitt, L. Bunting, B.P. Finney,  19  D.T. Selbie, G. Chen, I. Gregory-Eaves, M.J. Lisac, and P.B. Walsh. 2013. Centennial-scale  20  fluctuations and regional complexity characterize Pacific salmon population dynamics over the  21  past five centuries. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Volume 110(5), pages  22  1,750 to 1,755.  23  Sandher, J., R. Cook, and J.R. Irvine. 2010. Canadian enhanced salmonid production during 1978-2009  24  (1977-2008 brood years). North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission Doc. 1258. 12 pages.  25  Stein, J.E. 2000. Exploring Coast Salish prehistory: the archaeology of San Juan Island. University of  26  Washington, Seattle, WA. 126 pages.  1  Unsworth, J., 2016. Letter from Unsworth, J., (WDFW), to Robert Turner, NMFS, WCR, SFD.  2  Resubmission of a hatchery and genetic management plan for the Wallace/Reiter early winter  3  steelhead hatchery program for consideration under the ESA, and information on separate  4  summer steelhead hatchery programs. 9 pages, plus 5 appendix tables. January 19, 2016.  5  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2011. 2011 Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference  6  Proceedings. October 25 to 27, 2011, Vancouver, BC.  7  Wade, A.A., T.J. Beechie, E. Fleishman, N.J. Mantua, H. Wu, J.S. Kimball, D.M. Stoms, and  8  J.A. Stanfordl. 2013. Steelhead vulnerability to climate change in the Pacific Northwest.  9  J. Applied Ecology. 50:1093-1104.  10  Washington Department of Ecology (Ecology). 2012a. Preparing for a changing climate: Washington  11  State’s integrated climate response strategy. WDOE Publication No. 12-01-004. Olympia, WA.  12  203 pages, plus four appendices.  13  Ecology. 2012b. Saving Puget Sound, Puget Sound cleanup projects. Available at  14  http://www.ecy.wa.gov/puget_sound/index.html. Accessed December 2, 2012.  15  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). 2008. Statewide steelhead management plan:  16  Statewide policies, strategies, and actions. Olympia, WA. February 29, 2008.  17  Washington Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 2005. Forest practices habitat conservation plan.  18  Olympia, WA. 274 pages, plus 15 appendices.  19  World Wildlife Fund. 2012. Puget lowland forests Ecoregion. Available at  20  http://worldwildlife.org/ecoregions/na0524. Accessed December 2, 2012.  2  7 DISTRIBUTION LIST  3  Federal and State Agencies  4  Council of Environmental Quality  5  Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Government of Canada  6  NMFS Northwest Fisheries Science Center  7  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, (Seattle District)  8  U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs  9  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 10  10  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Portland Oregon Office  11  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Western Washington Office  12  Washington Governor’s Salmon Recovery Office  13  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia Office  14  Puget Sound Partnership  15  16  Elected Officials  17  Washington Governor’s Office  18  U.S. Representatives, Washington State  19  U.S. Senators, Washington State  20  21  Utilities  22  Puget Sound Energy  23  Seattle City Light  24  Tacoma Public Utilities  25  26  Puget Sound and Olympic Peninsula Native American Tribes  27  Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe  28  Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe  29  Lummi Indian Nation  30  Makah Indian Tribe  31  Muckleshoot Indian Tribe  March 2016November 2015 185  Chapter 7  Nisqually Indian Tribe Nooksack Indian Tribe Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe Puyallup Tribe Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Skokomish Tribe Skagit System Cooperative Snoqualmie Tribe Squaxin Island Tribe Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Suquamish Tribe Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Tulalip Tribes Upper Skagit Tribe Councils and Commissions Columbia River Inter-tribal Fish Commission Hood Canal Coordinating Council Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission Northwest Power and Conservation Council Pacific Fishery Management Council Pacific Salmon Commission Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission Point No Point Treaty Council Organizations and Associations American Rivers Building Industry Association of Washington Center for Biological Diversity Coastal Conservation Association, Washington Earth Justice Fishing Vessel Owner’s Association Long Live the Kings Marine Conservation Biology Institute Native Fish Society Northwest Sportfishing Industry Association NW Energy Coalition Ocean Conservancy Pacific Biodiversity Institute Pacific Coast Federation ofFishermen’s Associations 1  Pacific Rivers Council  2  People for Puget Sound  3  Puget Sound Anglers  4  Seattle Audubon Society  Sierra Club  6  Steelhead Trout Club of Washington  7  The Conservation Angler  8  The Mountaineers  9  Trout Unlimited  Washington Association of Realtors  11  Washington Environmental Council  12  Washington State Council of the Federation of Fly Fishers  13  Washington State Farm Bureau  14  Wild Fish Conservancy  Wild Salmon Center  16  Wild Steelhead Coalition  17  18  Libraries  19  Anacortes Public Library  Clallam Bay Library  21  Everett Public Library  22  Jefferson County Library  23  King County Library System, Bellevue  24  Kitsap Regional Library  Mount Vernon City Library  26  North Olympic Library System, Main Library, Port Angeles  27  Olympia Timberland Library  28  Pierce County Library  29  Port Orchard Library  Seattle Public Library, Main Library  31  Sno-Isle Libraries  32  Tacoma Public Library  33  Washington State Library  34  Whatcom County Library  36  Individuals  37  (An extensive distribution list of individuals were notified by email that contained an electronic link to the  38  EIS.)  39  March 2016November 2015 187 Chapter 7  1 2 Page Intentionally Left Blank 3 2 8 LIST OF PREPARERS Name/Professional Discipline  Affiliation  Education  Steve Leider, NMFS Project Manager  NMFS  B.S. Fisheries  Allyson Purcell, NMFS Project Manager  NMFS  B.S. Biology, M.S. Fisheries and Allied Aquaculture  Tim Tynan, NMFS, Fish, Hatchery Production  NMFS  B.S. Fisheries  Mike Haggerty, Fish  Mike Haggerty Consulting  B.S. Environmental Engineering Geology M.S. Environmental Geology/Hydrology  Tom Wegge, Socioeconomics  TCW Economics  B.A. Urban Studies, M.S. Environmental Economics  Margaret Spence, Contractor Project Manager, document preparation  Parametrix  B.S. Mathematical Sciences, M.S. Applied Statistics-Biometry  Ryan Scally, Word Processing  Parametrix  Associates Degree in Art  3 4 Agencies and Individuals Consulted for Development of the EIS 5 The following organizations and individuals contributed to development of the EIS: 6  NMFS Washington and Oregon Area Office (Matt Longenbaugh on fish passage) 7  NMFS Sustainable Fisheries Division (Rob Jones on hatchery production and salmon and 8 steelhead, Craig Busack on genetics, James Dixon on socioeconomics) 1  NMFS Protected Resources Division (Lynne Barre and Teresa Mongillo on Southern 2 Resident killer whales) 3  NWIFC (Chris James on hatchery plans) 4  WDFW (Jim Scott, Kelly Cunningham, and Brian Missildine on hatchery production; Teresa 5 Scott and Beata Dymowska on water quantity; Robert Leland and Eric Kraig on steelhead 6 harvest) 7 During development of the EIS, NMFS also consulted with the following tribes, organizations, and 8 individuals: 9  Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe (Scott Chitwood on tribal resources) 10  Lummi Nation (Alan Chapman, Randy Kinley, and Merle Jefferson on tribal resources) 11  Muckleshoot Indian Tribe (Isabel Tinoco on tribal resources) 12  Nooksack Indian Tribe (Ned Currance on tribal resources) 13  Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe (Janice Mabee on tribal resources) 14  Skagit System Cooperative (Lorraine Loomis on tribal resources) 15  Stillaguamish Tribe (Jason Griffith and Kate Konoski on tribal resources) 16  Tulalip Tribes (Terry Williams and Mike Crewson on tribal resources) 17  Upper Skagit Tribe (Jennifer Washington on tribal resources) 2  9 INDEX  3  #  4  4(d) Rule S-2, S-3, S-4, S-6, S-7, S-9, 1, 2, 3, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 71, 89, 90,  5  96, 99, 102, 103, 106, 109, 112, 116, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 129, 131, 132, 133  6  A  7  Adaptive management 34, 36, 140  8  Analysis area 13, 14, 39, 40, 41, 45, 48, 49, 52, 54, 55, 57, 64, 75, 78, 79, 81, 82, 84, 86, 87, 103, 120,  9  121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 140, 141, 142, 144, 145, 146, 148, 150,  10  151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161  11  C  12  Co-manager S-1, S-2, S-4, S-5, S-6, S-7, 2, 3, 5, 12, 13, 15, 19, 22, 26, 29, 31, 33, 34, 35, 51, 105, 143,  13  157  14  D  15  Distinct Population Segment or DPS S-3, S-4, S-10, 12, 26, 48, 49, 50, 54, 58, 59, 61, 71, 74, 75, 77,  16  78, 103, 136  17  E  18  Endangered Species Act or ESA S-1, S-2, S-3, S-4, S-5, S-6, S-9, S-13, S-14, 1, 2, 3, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15,  19  16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 25, 29, 34, 35, 48, 49, 58, 71, 72, 75, 78, 79, 140, 147, 151, 157, 163, 164  20  Evolutionarily Significant Unit or ESU S-3, S-4, 12, 25, 48, 54, 58, 61, 74, 103  21  G  22  Gene flow S-8, S-10, 12, 30, 33, 54, 61, 62, 63, 103, 106, 109, 111, 112, 115, 117, 119, 136, 144, 151  March 2016November 2015 191 Chapter 9  1  Goals and objectives 15, 144, 148  2  H  3  Hatchery and genetic management plan or HGMP S-1, S-2, S-3, S-4, S-6, S-7, S-13, S-14, 1, 2, 3, 4,  4  5, 12, 15, 19, 20, 26, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 44, 54, 96, 99, 102, 103, 106, 109, 112, 116, 120, 121,  5  122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 151, 157  6  I  7  Integrated hatchery program 61, 74, 112, 151, 157  8  Isolated hatchery program 58, 59, 61, 151  9  K  10  Killer whale S-11, 18, 27, 39, 78, 79, 80, 123, 124, 125, 137, 152, 158, 159  11  N  12  National Environmental Policy Act or NEPA S-1, S-2, S-3, S-5, S-6, S-13, S-14, 4, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20,  13  21, 26, 34, 36, 39, 51, 68, 85, 103, 139  14  P  15  Preferred Alternative S-1, S-2, S-6, S-7, S-9, S-10, S-13, S-14, 14, 27, 29, 30, 31, 33, 36, 89, 92, 102,  16  116, 122, 125, 128, 129, 133, 135, 136, 140  17  Project area S-4, S-7, 13, 14, 17, 22, 32, 39, 40, 45, 54, 78, 89, 140, 141  18  R  19  Resource management plan (hatchery) or RMP S-2, S-3, S-4, S-7, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 15, 19  20  S  21  Scoping S-1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 15, 19, 39  22  Straying 53, 58, 68, 144  23  T  24  Treaty tribes S-2, S-5, 2, 3, 13, 22, 56, 84  25  V  26  Viability S-10, 36, 51, 53, 58, 74, 79, 85, 103, 105, 109, 111, 112, 115, 116, 118, 119, 136, 157  1 Appendix A 2 Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead Hatchery 3 Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table A-1. Chinook salmon hatchery programs and facilities. Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  Chinook  Georgia Strait  Nooksack  Skookum Creek Hatchery South Fork Early Chinook (August 2015)  SF Nooksack  Spring  Integrated recovery  Conservation  Lummi Indian Nation  Subyearling/  May  1,000,000  Skookum Creek Hatchery  SF Nooksack RM 14.3, tributary to the mainstem Nooksack River at RM 36.6  Chinook  Georgia Strait  Nooksack  Kendall Creek Hatchery NF Nooksack Native Chinook Restoration (September 2014)  NF Nooksack  Spring  Integrated recovery  Conservation  WDFW  Subyearling/   April-May  800,000  Kendall Creek Hatchery  Kendall Cr Hatchery, NF Nooksack RM 46; NF Nooksack in the vicinity of Boyd Cr RM 63; McKinnon Pond on the MF Nooksack RM 5.  Chinook  Georgia Strait  Nooksack  Lower Nooksack Fall Chinook (August 2015)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Summer/ Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Lummi Indian Nation  Subyearling/  May  2,000,000  Lummi Bay Hatchery  Lummi Bay (1.0 million) and Bertrand Creek, tributary to the Nooksack River at RM 1.5 (1.0 million)  Chinook Chinook  Georgia Strait  Nooksack  Samish Hatchery fall Chinook (November 2014)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Summer/ Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  May  4,000,000  Samish Hatchery  Samish River RM 10.5  Georgia Strait  San Juan Islands (Orcas)  Glenwood Springs Hatchery (January 2013)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Summer/ Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Long Live The Kings  Subyearling/  July  550,000  Glenwood Springs Hatchery  Eastsound, Orcas Island (One HGMP)  March 2016November 2015 A-1 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Skagit  Marblemount spring Chinook (2015-pending)  Cascade  Spring  Isolated harvest  Indicator stock/ Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  June  587,500  Marblemount Hatchery  Cascade River, tributary to the Skagit River at RM 78.5  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Skagit  Marblemount summer Chinook (2015-pending)  Upper Skagit  Summer  Integrated research  Indicactor stock  WDFW  Subyearling/  May  200,000  Marblemount Hatchery  Countyline Ponds, Skagit River mainstem RM 91  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish Summer Chinook Natural Stock Restoration (draft September 2015)  NF Stillaguamish  Summer  Integrated recovery  Conservation  WDFW  Subyearling/  April-May  220,000  Whitehorse Pond  Whitehorse Spring Ck (RM 1.5); trib to NF Stillaguamish at RM 28  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish Fall Chinook Natural Stock Restoration (draft September 2015)  SF Stillaguamish  Fall  Integrated recovery  Conservation  Stillaguamish Tribe  Subyearling/  May  200,000  Harvey Creek Hatchery  Brenner Hatchery, SF Stillaguamish River RM 31.0  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin Salmon Hatchery, Tulalip spring Chinook (March 2004)  Cascade  Spring  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Tulalip Tribes  Yearling/ March  40,000  Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin Salmon Hatchery  Tulalip Bay, Port Susan  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin Salmon Hatchery “Tulalip Hatchery” Subyearling Program (December 2012)  Skykomish  Summer/ Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Tulalip Tribes  Subyearling/  May  2,400,000  Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin Salmon Hatchery  Tulalip Bay, Port Susan  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-2 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  Chinook  Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Wallace River summer Chinook (February 2013)  Skykomish  Summer  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  June  1,000,000  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River RM 4.0, tributary to Skykomish River at RM 36  Yearling/ April  500,000  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River RM 4.0, tributary to Skykomish River at RM 36  Chinook  Central/South Sound  Lake Washington  Issaquah Hatchery fall Chinook (2015-pending)  Sammamish  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  May-June  2,000,000  Issaquah Hatchery  Issaquah Creek RM 3.0, tributary to Lake Sammamish  Chinook  Central/South Sound  Kitsap Peninsula  Grovers Creek Hatchery and Satellite Rearing Ponds (March 2013)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Suquamish Tribe  Subyearling/  May-June  420,000  Grovers Creek  Grovers Creek  Subyearling/  May-June  100,000  Grovers Creek Hatchery/Gorst Creek Rearing Ponds  Websters Rearing Ponds  Subyearling/  May  1,600,000  Grovers Creek Hatchery/Gorst Creek Rearing Ponds  Gorst Creek Rearing Pond  March 2016November 2015 A-3 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Duwamish/ Green  Soos Creek fall Chinook (April 2013)  Green  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  June  3,200,000  Soos Creek Hatchery  Soos Creek RM 0.8, tributary to the Green River at RM 33  Subyearling/  June  1,000,000  Palmer Ponds  Green River RM 56.1  Yearling/ April  300,000  Soos Creek /Icy Creek Pond  Icy Creek, tributary to the Green River at RM 48.3  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Duwamish/ Green  Fish Restoration Facility (FRF) Green River Fall Chinook (July 2014) replaces Keta Creek fall Chinook (July 2014)  Green  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation/ research  Muckleshoot Tribe  Subyearling/  June  600,000 or below  FRF  Green River mainstem at RM 60  Fry/ March-May  ?  FRF  Green River watershed tributaries upstream of Howard Hanson Dam, located at RM 64  Subyearling/ June  ?  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Puyallup  Voights Creek fall Chinook fingerling program (April 2013)  Puyallup  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  June  1,600,000  Voights Creek Hatchery  Voights Creek (RM .5), trib to Carbon River at RM 4.0, trib to Puyallup River at RM 17.8  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-4 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Puyallup  Clarks Creek Fall Chinook (November 2012)  Puyallup  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Puyallup Tribe  Subyearling/  April-May  1,000,000  Clarks Creek  Clarks Creek RM 0.8, tributary to Puyallup River at RM 5.8; Acclimation Ponds in Upper Puyallup River watershed (Puyallup RM 31-49 includes Rushingwater Ck, Mowich R., and Cowskull Ck.); W.F. Hylebos Creek RM 1.0  200,000  Upper Puyallup Acclimation Ponds  20,000  Hylebos Creek  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  White  White River Hatchery (spring Chinook)(December 2014)  White  Spring  Integrated recovery  Conservation  Muckleshoot Tribe  Subyearling/  Late April June  340,000  White River Hatchery  White River RM 23.4  Yearling/ April  55,000  White River Hatchery  White River RM 23.4  Subyearling/  June  1,300,000  White River Acclimation Ponds  Acclimation Ponds on the Greenwater R (trib to White River at RM 35.3), Huckleberry Creek (trib at RM 53.1), Cripple Creek (trib to W Fork White at RM 2), Jensen Creek, and  March 2016November 2015 A-5 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  Twenty-eight Mile Creek.  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Carr Inlet/South Sound  Minter Creek/ Hupp Springs Hatchery White River spring Chinook (2015-pending)  White  Spring  Isolated recovery  Conservation/ Harvest  WDFW  Subyearling/  May  400,000  Hupp Springs Hatchery  Hupp Springs Hatchery on Minter Creek RM 3.0, tributary to Carr Inlet, South Puget Sound  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Carr Inlet/South Sound  Minter Creek Hatchery fall Chinook (May 2013)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  May  1,400,000  Minter Creek Hatchery  Minter Creek RM 0.5, tributary to Carr Inlet, South Puget Sound  Yearlings/ March-April  120,000  Hupp Springs Hatchery  Hupp Springs Hatchery on Minter Creek RM 3.0, tributary to Carr Inlet, South Puget Sound  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Chambers Creek, South Puget Sound  Chambers Creek fall Chinook (May 2015)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/ April-May  450,000  Garrison Springs Hatchery  Chambers Creek Fishway Trap RM 0.5  Subyearling/ May  400,000  Chambers Creek Hatchery  Chambers Creek Fishway Trap RM 0.5  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Nisqually  Nisqually Fish Hatchery at Clear Creek/Kalama Creek Salmon Hatchery (September 2014)  Nisqually  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Nisqually Tribe  Subyearling/  May-June  3,500,000  Clear Creek Hatchery  Clear Creek, tributary to Nisqually River at RM 6.3  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-6 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  600,000  Kalama Creek Hatchery  Kalama Creek, tributary to Nisqually River at RM 9.2  Chinook  Central/ South Sound  Deschutes  Tumwater Falls fall Chinook (May 2013)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/ March-June  3,800,000  Tumwater Falls Hatchery George Adams Hatchery  Deschutes River RM 0.2  Chinook  Hood Canal  Skokomish  George Adams fall Chinook (November 2014)  Skokomish  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  May-June  3,800,000  Purdy Creek RM 1.8, tributary to the Skokomish River ay RM 4.0  Chinook  Hood Canal  Skokomish  North Fork Skokomish River spring Chinook (March 2015)  Cascade  Spring  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Tacoma Power in cooperation with WDFW and the Skokomish Tribe  Subyearling/ summer-fall  300,000  North Fork Skokomish Hatchery  North Fork Skokomish River at RM 8.3, tributary to the Skokomish River at RM 9  Yearling/ spring  75,000  Chinook  Hood Canal  Finch Creek, west Hood Canal  Hoodsport fall Chinook (July 2014)  Green R. lineage (out-of-ESU)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Subyearling/  June  3,000,000  Hoodsport Hatchery  Finch Creek RM 0.0, tributary to west Hood Canal  Yearling/ May  120,000  Hoodsport Hatchery  Finch Creek RM 0.0, tributary to west Hood Canal  Chinook  Strait of Juan de Fuca  Dungeness  Dungeness River spring Chinook (January 2013)  Dungeness  Spring  Integrated recovery  Conservation  WDFW  Subyearling/  May-June  150,000  Dungeness and Hurd Creek  Upper Dungeness River RM 15.8; Gray Wolf Acclimation Ponds RM 1.0; Dungeness  March 2016November 2015 A-7 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Watershed  Chinook salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program  name, HGMP date  (in parentheses),  and listing status  [listed or proposed  for listing stocks  shown in bold]  River RM 10.5  Yearling/ April  50,000  Hurd Creek Hatchery  Dungeness River RM 3.0  Chinook  Strait of Juan de Fuca  Elwha  Elwha River summer/fall Chinook (November 2012)  Elwha  Summer/ Fall  Integrated recovery  Conservation  WDFW  Subyearling/  June  2,500,000  Elwha Channel  Elwha River RM 3.5  Yearling/ March-April  200,000  Elwha Channel  Elwha River RM 3.5  1 2 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-8 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table A-2. Steelhead hatchery programs and facilities. Salmon Species  Steelhead major population group  Watershed  Steelhead population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Steelhead  Northern Cascades  Nooksack  Kendall Creek Hatchery Winter Steelhead (July 2014)  Chambers Ck lineage (out-of-DPS)  Winter  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April-May  150,000  Kendall Creek Hatchery  NF Nooksack RM 46  Steelhead  Northern Cascades  Skagit  Baker River: Steelhead Reservoir Passage Research (August 2015)  Skagit River  Winter  Integrated research  Research  Upper Skagit Indian Tribe  Yearling/ May  11,000  Marblemount Hatchery  Baker Lake  Steelhead  Northern Cascades  Stillaguamish  Whitehorse Pond Summer Steelhead Program (draft 2014)  Skamania Hatchery-lineage (out-of-DPS)  Summer  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April-May  70,000  Whitehorse Pond  Whitehorse Spring Ck RM 1.5, tributary to NF Stillaguamish at RM 28  Steelhead  Northern Cascades  Stillaguamish  Whitehorse Pond Winter Steelhead Program (July 2014)  Chambers Ck lineage (out-of-DPS)  Winter  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April-May  130,000  Whitehorse Pond  Whitehorse Spring Ck RM 1.5, tributary to NF Stillaguamish at RM 28  Steelhead  North Cascades  Snohomish/ Skykomish  Reiter Pond Summer Steelhead Program (draft 2013)  Skamania Hatchery-lineage (out-of-DPS)  Summer  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April-May  190,000  Reiter Ponds  Reiter Pond 140K (RM 45); NF Skykomish @ Index 10K; Sultan R. 20K; Raging R. 50K  Steelhead  Northern Cascades  Snohomish/ Skykomish  Skykomish River Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program (February 2016July 2014)  Chambers Ck lineage (out-of-DPS)  Winter  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April-May  140,000 185,000  Reiter Ponds  Reiter Pond at Skykomish River RM 46  Yearling/ April-May  27,600 71,000  Wallace Hatchery  Wallace River RM 4.0, tributary to Skykomish at RM 36  Steelhead  Northern Cascades  Snohomish/ Snoqualmie  Tokul Creek Winter Steelhead Program (July 2014)  Chambers Ck lineage (out-of-DPS)  Winter  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April-May  74,000  Tokul Creek Hatchery  Tokul Creek (RM 0.5), tributary of the Snoqualmie River at RM 39, tributary to the Snohomish River at RM 20.5  Steelhead Steelhead  Northern Cascades Northern Cascades  Green Green  Soos Creek (Green River) Hatchery Summer Steelhead (draft June 2015) Green River Native Winter (late) Steelhead (July 2014)  Skamania Hatchery-lineage (out-of-DPS) Green River  Summer Winter  Isolated harvest Integrated recovery  Harvest augmentation Conservation  WDFW WDFW  Yearling/ April  30,000  Soos Creek Hatchery  Soos Creek RM 0.8, tributary to the Green River at RM 33.5  Yearling/ April  20,000  Icy Creek Pond  Icy Creek, tributary to the Green River at RM 48.3  Yearling/ May  18,000  Icy Creek Pond  Icy Creek, tributary to the Green River RM 48.3  March 2016November 2015 A-9 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon Species  Steelhead major population group  Watershed  Steelhead population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Steelhead  Central and South Puget Sound  Green  Fish Restoration Facility (FRF) Green River Winter Steelhead (July 2014)  Green River  Winter  Integrated Recovery  Harvest Augmentation  Muckleshoot Indian Tribe  Yearling/ May  15,000  Flaming Geyser (Pond)  Flaming Geyser Park, Crystal Creek, tributary to the  Green River at RM 44.3  Yearling/ May  17,000  Palmer Ponds  Palmer Ponds, Green River RM 56.1  Yearling/ July  350,000 or below  FRF  Green River mainstem at RM 60  Fed Fry/ July  ?  FRF  Green River watershed tributaries upstream of Howard Hanson Dam, located at RM 64  Yearling/ July  ?  Steelhead  Central and South Puget Sound  White  White River Winter Steelhead Supplementation Program (September 2006)  White River  Winter  Integrated recovery  Conservation  Puyallup Indian Tribe and Muckleshoot Indian Tribe w/ WDFW  Yearling/ May  35,000  Diru Creek Hatchery and White River Hatchery  White River RM 24.3, which is tributary to the Puyallup River at RM 10.1  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-10 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon Species  Steelhead major population group  Watershed  Steelhead population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Steelhead Steelhead  Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca  Skokomish Dewatto  Hood Canal Steelhead Supplementation Project (April 2014) Dungeness Winter Steelhead Program (July 2014)  Skokomish River Eastside Hood Canal Tributaries  Winter Winter  Integrated recovery Isolated harvest  Conservation Harvest augmentation  Long Live the Kings WDFW  Yearlings/ April-May  21,600  McKernan Hatchery  SF Skokomish River  6,000  LLTK Lilliwaup Hatchery  SF Skokomish River  Yearlings/ April-May  7,400  LLTK Lilliwaup Hatchery  Dewatto River  Adults/ March-April  253  Dewatto River  Duckabush  Westside Hood Canal Tributaries  Yearlings/ April-May  6,667  LLTK Lilliwaup Hatchery  Duckabush River  Adults/ March-May  230  Duckabush River  Dungeness  Chambers Ck lineage (out-of-DPS)  Yearling/ May  10,000  Dungeness Hatchery  Dungeness River RM 10.5  Steelhead  Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca  Elwha  Lower Elwha Fish Hatchery (August 2012)  Elwha River  Winter  Integrated recovery  Conservation  Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe  Yearling/ May  175,000  Lower Elwha Hatchery  Elwha River RM 1.25  1 2 March 2016November 2015 A-11 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table A-3. Coho salmon hatchery programs and facilities. Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks Watershed shown in bold]  Coho salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Coho  Strait of Georgia  Nooksack  Skookum Hatchery Coho (August 2015)  Nooksack  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Lummi Indian Nation  Yearling/ May-June  2,000,000  Skookum Creek Hatchery  SF Nooksack RM 14.3, tributary to the mainstem Nooksack River at RM 36.6  Coho Coho Coho  Strait of Georgia Whidbey Basin  Nooksack Skagit Skagit  Lummi Bay Hatchery Coho (August 2015)  Nooksack  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation Harvest augmentation  Lummi Indian Nation  Yearling/ April-May  2,000,000  Lummi Bay Hatchery  Lummi Bay, north Puget Sound  Skagit Coho Program (Draft August 2015) Baker River Coho (Draft August 2015)  Skagit (Cascade) River  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  WDFW  Yearling/ June  250,000  Marblemount Hatchery  Cascade River Rm 1.0, tributary to the Skagit River at RM 78.5  Whidbey Basin  Skagit (Baker)  Normal-timed  Integrated Harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Fry/ May-June  160,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Baker Lake, behind Upper Baker Dam, Baker River RM 9.1  Yearling/ May-June  5,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Baker Lake, behind Upper Baker Dam, Baker River RM 9.1  Yearling/ May-June  55,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Stress Relief Ponds on Baker River RM 0.7 (Baker River Fish Trap), tributary to Skagit River at RM 56.5  Yearling/ May-June  5,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Lake Shannon, behind Lower Baker Dam, Baker River RM 8.9  Coho  Whidbey Basin  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish Coho Program (March 2004)  Stillaguamish  Normal-timed  Integrated harvest/recovery  Harvest augmentation/conservation  Stillaguamish Tribe  Yearling/ May-June  60,000  Harvey Creek Hatchery/North Fork/Johnson Creek Hatchery  Harvey Creek Hatchery RM 2.0 on Harvey/Armstrong Creek, trib to the Stillaguamish River at RM 15.3  Coho  Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Tulalip Coho Program (March 2013)  Skykomish  Normal-timed  Integrated Harvest  Harvest augmentation  Tulalip Tribes  Yearling/ May-June  2,000,000  Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin Salmon Hatchery, Wallace River Hatchery  Tulalip Creek and Tulalip Bay, Port Susan  Coho  Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Wallace River Coho Program (October 2013)  Skykomish  Normal-timed  Integrated Harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ May  150,000  Wallace River Hatchery  Wallace River RM 4.0, tributary to Skykomish River at RM 36  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-12 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks Watershed shown in bold]  Coho salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Coho  Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Everett Net Pen Coho Program (June 2013)  Skykomish  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Everett Steelhead and Salmon Club  Yearling/ June  20,000  Wallace River Hatchery  Port of Everett Visitor's Dock, mouth of the Snohomish River on Port Gardner Bay.  Coho Coho  Central/South Sound Central/South Sound  Lake Washington Green  Issaquah Coho Program (December 2014) Soos Creek Coho Program (July 2014)  Issaquah Creek (x Green River) Green  Normal-timed Normal-timed  Isolated harvest Integrated Harvest  Harvest augmentation Harvest augmentation  NWSSC-Laebugten WDFW  Yearling/ June  25,000  Issaquah Creek Hatchery  Port of Edmonds, Public Fishing Pier  Yearling/ May  450,000  Issaquah Creek Hatchery  Issaquah Creek RM 3.0, tributary to Lake Sammamish  Integrated Harvest  WDFW  Yearling/ May  600,000  Soos Creek Hatchery  Soos Creek RM 0.8, tributary to the Green River at RM 33.5  Isolated harvest  Trout Unlimited  Yearling/ June  30,000  Soos Creek Hatchery  Des Moines Marina, central Puget Sound  Fry/ January  54,000  Miller Creek Hatchery  Des Moines Creek, various  Fry/ January  33,000  Miller Creek Hatchery  Miller Creek, various  Fry/ January  33,000  Miller Creek Hatchery  Walker Creek, various  March 2016November 2015 A-13 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks Watershed shown in bold]  Coho salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Coho  Central/South Sound  Green  Keta Creek Complex (December 2014)  Green  Normal-timed  Integrated Harvest  Harvest augmentation  Muckleshoot Indian Tribe  Yearling/ May  500,000  Crisp Creek Ponds  Crisp Creek RM 1.1 Green R. tributary at RM 40.1  500,000  Elliot Bay Netpens  Elliot Bay, Puget Sound  50,000  Supplementation site  TBD in Green River watershed  Coho  Central/South Sound  Green  Fish Restoration Facility (FRF) Green River Coho (July 2014)  Green  Normal-timed  Integrated Harvest  Harvest augmentation  Muckleshoot Indian Tribe/ Suquamish Tribe  Yearling/ TBD  600,000 or below  FRF  Green River mainstem at RM 60  Fed Fry/ TBD  ?  FRF  Green River watershed tributaries upstream of Howard Hanson Dam, located at RM 64  Yearling/TBD  ?  Coho  Central/South Sound  Green  Marine Technology Center Coho Program (November 2014)  Green  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Education  WDFW  Yearling/ May  10,000  Soos Creek Hatchery  Seahurst Park (on Puget Sound) in Burien, Washington  Coho  Central/South Sound  Puyallup  Voights Creek Coho Program (June 2013)  Puyallup (Voights Creek Hatchery)  Normal-timed  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ April,May  780,000  Voights Creek Hatchery  Voights Creek RM 0.5, tributary to Carbon River at RM 4.0, trib to Puyallup River at RM 17.8  Coho  Central/South Sound  Puyallup  Puyallup Acclimation Sites (March 2003)  Puyallup (Voights Creek Hatchery)  Normal-timed  Integrated recovery  Restoration  Puyallup Tribe  Yearling/ April-May  100,000  Diru Creek Hatchery  Mowich River Acclimation Pond, RM 0.2 on Mowich River; Cowskull Creek Acclimation Pond, RM 0.1 on Cowskull Creek, trib to Puyallup River at RM 44.8  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-14 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks Watershed shown in bold]  Coho salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Yearling/ May  100,000  Voights Creek Hatchery/ Puyallup Tribal Hatchery  Rushingwater Acclimation Pond, RM 0.5 on Rushingwater Creek, trib to Mowich River at RM 1.1  Coho  Central/South Sound  Carr Inlet  Minter Creek Coho (January 2013)  Minter Creek  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ May-July  500,000  Minter Creek Hatchery  Minter Creek RM 0.5, tributary to northern Carr Inlet in south Puget Sound  Coho  Central/South Sound  Nisqually  Kalama Creek Hatchery Fall Coho (April 2003)  Central/South Sound mix  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Nisqually Tribe  Yearling/ April  400,000  Kalama Creek Hatchery  Kalama Creek, tributary to Nisqually River at RM 9.2  Coho  Central/South Sound  Nisqually  Clear Creek Hatchery Fall Coho (April 2003)  Central/South Sound mix  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Nisqually Tribe  Yearling/ April  ?  Clear Creek Hatchery  Clear Creek, tributary to Nisqually River at RM 6.3  Coho  Central/South Sound  South Puget Sound  Squaxin Island/ South Sound Net Pens (July 2014)  Central/South Sound mix  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Squaxin Island Tribes and WDFW  Yearling/ May-June  1,800,000  South Sound net-pens,  Peale Passage, deep South Puget Sound  Coho  Hood Canal  Skokomish  George Adams Coho Yearling Program (January 2013)  Mixed Puget Sound, localized to Skokomish River  Normal-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ post April-15  300,000  George Adams Hatchery  Purdy Creek RM 1.0, tribuary to Skokomish River at RM 4.1  Coho  Hood Canal  Port Gamble Bay/ Little Boston Creek  Port Gamble Coho Net Pens (March 2003)  Big Quilcene River  Early-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe/USFWS  Yearling/ June  400,000  George AdamsHatchery, Port Gamble Net pens  Port Gamble Bay, northern Hood Canal  Coho  Hood Canal  Quilcene  Quilcene Coho Net Pen (March 2003)  Big Quilcene River  Early-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Skokomish Tribe and USFWS  Yearling/ May  150,000  Quilcene NFH, Quilcene Bay Net pens  Quilcene Bay, northwestern Hood Canal  Coho  Hood Canal  Big Quilcene River  Quilcene National Fish Hatchery Coho Salmon Production Program (June 2010)  Big Quilcene River  Early-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  USFWS  Yearling/ April-May  406,000  Quilcene NFH  Big Quilcene River RM 2.8  Coho  Strait of Juan de Fuca  Dungeness  Dungeness River Coho (January 2013)  Dungenessmixed origin  Early-timed  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Yearling/ June  500,000  Dungeness Hatchery and Hurd Creek Hatchery  Dungeness River RM 10.5  March 2016November 2015 A-15 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Hatchery program name, HGMP date  Salmon species  Chinook salmon major population group  (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks Watershed shown in bold]  Coho salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Coho  Strait of Juan de Fuca  Elwha  Lower Elwha Fish Hatchery (August 2012)  Elwha  Normal-timed  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe  Yearling/ May  425,000  Lower Elwha Hatchery  Elwha River RM 0.3  Note: MPGs for coho salmon have not been designated. Unless otherwise noted, MPG names are for the Chinook salmon MPGs associated with the watershed, or coho salmon populations. Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-16 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table A-4. Pink salmon hatchery programs and facilities. Hatchery program  Species  Hatchery  Life stage  HGMP  Salmon  Major population  name, HGMP date  Pink salmon  run or  program  Hatchery  Hatchery  and time of  release  species  group  Watershed  (in parentheses)  population  race  type  program purpose  operator  release  number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Pink salmon MPGs  Pink  have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Strait  Nooksack  Whatcom Creek Pink Program (January 2013)  Nooksack (localized to release site)  Normal  Isolated harvest  Education/ Harvest augmentation  Bellingham Technical College/ WDFW  Fed fry/ April  500,000  Whatcom Creek Hatchery  Whatcom Creek RM 0.5, tributary to Bellingham Bay  of Georgia  Pink  Pink salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Hood Canal  Finch Creek (western Hood Canal)  Hoodsport Pink Salmon Program (January 2013)  Dungeness/ Dosewallips (localized to the release site)  Normal  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Fed fry/ April  500,000  Hoodsport Hatchery  Finch Creek, western Hood Canal  Pink salmon MPGs  Pink  have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Strait  Dungeness  Dungeness River Pink Salmon Program (January 2013)  Dungeness  Normal  Integrated Recovery  Conservation  WDFW  Fed fry/ Apirl  100,000  Hurd Creek Hatchery  Dungeness River RM 3.0  of Juan de Fuca  Pink  Pink salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Strait of Juan de Fuca  Elwha  Elwha River Pink Salmon Preservation and Restoration Program (August 2012)  Elwha  Normal  Integrated Recovery  Conservation  Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe (and WDFW)  Fed fry/ March  3,000,000  Lower Elwha Hatchery  Elwha River, RM 1.3  Note: MPGs for pink salmon have not been designated. MPG names are for the Chinook salmon MPGs associated with the watershed. 2 3 March 2016November 2015 A-17 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table A-5. Sockeye salmon hatchery programs and facilities. Salmon species  Major population group  Watershed  Hatchery program name, HGMP date (in parentheses)  Sockeye salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Sockeye  Baker River sockeye form a single ESU. No MPG.  Skagit/Baker  Baker River Sockeye Program (August 2015)  Baker River (ESU)  Early Summer  Integrated harvest  Conservation  WDFW  Unfed fry/ February-May  2,000,000  Baker Lake Spawning Beach #4  Baker Lake Spawning Beach #4, located at the mouth of Sulphur Creek  Fed fry/ March-May  3,500,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Baker Lake, behind Upper Baker Dam, Baker River RM 9.1  Fed fry/ March-May  2,500,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Lake Shannon, tailrace below hatchery  Subyearling/ November  330,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Baker Lake, behind Upper Baker Dam, Baker River RM 9.1  Yearling/ April  5,000  Baker Lake Sockeye Spawning Beach facilities  Baker Lake, behind Upper Baker Dam, Baker River RM 9.1  Yearling/ April  5,000  Baker Lake Sulphur Cr Facility  Lake Shannon, tailrace below hatchery  Sockeye NA  Lake Washington  Cedar River Sockeye Program (December 2014)  Lake Washington (localized Baker River stock)  Early Summer  Integrated harvest  Conservation/Harvest  WDFW  Fed fry/ January-May  34,000,000  Cedar River Hatchery  Cedar River RM 21.7, 13.5, and 2.1  2 3 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-18 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Table A-6. Fall and summer chum salmon hatchery programs and facilities. Hatchery  program name, HGMP date (in  Salmon species  Major population group  Watershed  parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Chum salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP Release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Strait of Georgia  Nooksack  Whatcom Creek Chum Program (October 2014)  Nooksack  Fall  Isolated harvest  Education/ Harvest augmentation  Bellingham Technical College/WDFW  Fed fry/ May  2,000,000  Whatcom Creek Hatchery, Kendall Creek Hatchery  Whatcom Creek RM 0.5, tributary to Bellingham Bay  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Strait of Georgia  Nooksack  NF Noosack River Fall Chum Program (May 2013)  Nooksack  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Lummi Indian Nation/ WDFW  Fed fry/ April-May  1,000,000  Lummi Bay Complex, Kendall Creek Hatchery  Kendall Creek, tributary to NF Nooksack River RM 46.  Fall-run chum  salmon MPGs have  Chum  not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Whidbey Basin  Skagit  Upper Skagit Hatchery (August 2015)  Skagit  Fall  Integrated harvest/ Education  Education/ Harvest augmentation  Upper Skagit Indian Tribe  Fed fry/ May  450,000  Upper Skagit Hatchery  Red Creek tributary to Skagit River at RM 22.9  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Whidbey Basin  Skagit  Chum Remote Site Incubator (August 2015)  Skagit  Fall  Integrated Recovery  Conservation  Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe  Fed fry/ April  125,000  Three Sauk River RSI sites.  Hatchery Creek, trib. To the Sauk River at RM 0.2; Lyle Creek at RM 0.5; and Unnamed Side Channel At RM 15  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Whidbey Basin  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish (Harvey Creek) Chum Program (March 2003)  Stillaguamish  Fall  Integrated education  Education/ Harvest augmentation  Stillaguamish Tribe  Unfed and fed fry/ April-May  225,000  Harvey Creek Hatchery  Harvey Creek Hatchery RM 2.0 on Harvey/Armstrong Creek, trib to the Stillaguamish River at RM 15.3  March 2016November 2015 A-19 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Hatchery  Salmon species  Major population group  Watershed  program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Chum salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP Release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Whidbey Basin  Snohomish  Tulalip Bay Hatchery Chum (April 2013)  Walcott Slough (localized to release site)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Tulalip Tribes  Fed fry/ May  8,000,000  Bernie Kai-Kai Gobin Salmon Hatchery  Battle Creek RM 0.3, Tulalip Bay, Port Susan  Fall-run chum  salmon MPGs have  Chum  not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Central/South Sound  Green  Keta Creek Hatchery (December 2014)  East Kitsap (localized)  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Muckleshoot Indian Tribe  Fed fry/ April-May  5,000,000  Keta Creek Hatchery  Crisp Creek RM 1.1, tributary to the Green River at RM 40.1  Dogfish Creek  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is  East Kitsap  Cowling Creek Hatchery and Satellite Incubation and Rearing  Chico Creek (East Kitsap)  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Suquamish Tribe  Unfed fry/ April  ?  Cowling Creek Hatchery  (Liberty Bay), Clear and Barker Creeks (Dyes Inlet), and Steele Creek (Burke Bay); all are East Kitsap tribs  Central/South Sound  Facilities (March 2003)  Fed fry/ May  ?  Cowling Creek Hatchery  Cowling Creek, tributary to Miller bay, East Kitsap  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Central/South Sound  Puyallup  Diru Creek Winter Chum (May 2013)  Chambers Creek (localized)  Late Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Puyallup Indian Tribe  Fed fry/ April-May  1,950,000  Diru Creek Hatchery (Puyallup Tribal Hatchery)  Diru Creek RM 0.25, tributary to Clarks Creek, trib to Puyallup River at RM 5.8  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook salmon MPG is Central/South Sound  Carr Inlet  Minter Creek Chum Program(January 2013)  Elson Creek (Skookum Inlet), localized  Fall  Integrated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Fed fry/ April  2,000,000  Minter Creek Hatchery  Minter Creek RM 0.5, tributary to northern Carr Inlet in south Puget Sound  Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-20 March 2016November 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Hatchery  Salmon species  Major population group  Watershed  program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Chum salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP Release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Listed summer-run chum salmon population is Hood Canal. Chinook salmon MPG is Hood Canal.  Skokomish  McKernan Fall Chum Program (September 2013)  Finch Creek  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Fed fry/ April  11,500,000  McKernan Hatchery, George Adams Hatchery  Weaver Creek RM 1.0, tributary to the Skokomish River at RM  Fry/ May-June  1,500,000  Rick's Ponds (LLtK), George Adams  Skokomish River  Chum  Fall chum MPGs have not been designated. Listed summer chum population is Hood Canal. Chinook salmon MPG is Hood Canal.  Enetai Creek (south Hood Canal)  Enetai Hatchery Fall Chum (September 2013)  Walcott Slough/Quilcene (localized to release site)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Skokomish Tribe  Fed fry/ April  3,200,000  Enetai Hatchery  Enetai Creek, tributary to south Hood Canal north of the Skokomish River  Chum  Fall chum MPGs have not been designated. Area includes listed Hood Canal summer chum population, and the Hood Canal Chinook MPG.  Finch Creek (west Hood Canal)  Hoodsport Fall Chum (September 2013)  Finch Creek  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  WDFW  Fed fry/ April  12,000,000  Hoodsport Hatchery, George Adams Hatchery  Finch Creek, westside tributary to Hood Canal  Chum  Hood Canal. No MPGs for summer-run chum salmon  Lilliwaup Creek  Lilliwaup Creek Summer Chum (October 1999)  Hood Canal  Summer  Integrated recovery  Conservation  WDFW and LLTK  Fry  150,000  Lilliwaup Hatchery  Lilliwaup Creek RM 0.5  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Area includes the listed Hood Canal summer-run chum salmon population, and the Hood Canal Chinook salmon MPG.  Port Gamble Bay (north Hood Canal)  Port Gamble Hatchery Fall Chum (March 2013)  Walcott Slough (localized to release site)  Fall  Isolated harvest  Harvest augmentation  Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe  Fed fry/ April-May  475,000  Little Boston Hatchery  Little Boston Creek, Port Gamble Bay, north Hood Canal.  March 2016November 2015 A-21 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead EIS Hatchery  Salmon species  Major population group  Watershed  program name, HGMP date (in parentheses), and listing status [listed or proposed for listing stocks shown in bold]  Chum salmon population  Species run or race  Hatchery program type  Hatchery program purpose  Hatchery operator  Life stage and time of release  HGMP Release number  Primary facility  Release location(s)  Chum  Fall-run chum salmon MPGs have not been designated. Chinook MPG is Strait of Juan de Fuca  Elwha  Lower Elwha Fish Hatchery (August 2012)  Elwha  Fall  Integrated recovery  Conservation  Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe  Fed fry/ March-April  450,000  Lower Elwha Hatchery  Elwha River RM 0.3  Note: MPGs for fall chum salmon have not been designated. Unless otherwise noted (for summer chum), MPG names are for the Chinook salmon associated with the watershed, or summer chum populations. 1 2 Appendix A – Puget Sound Hatchery Programs and Facilities A-22 March 2016November 2015 1 APPENDIX B 2 3 4 5 6 Genetic effects analysis of early winter steelhead programs 7 proposed for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, 8 Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River Basins of Washington 9 10 Anadromous Production and Inland Fisheries Program 11 Sustainable Fisheries Division 12 NMFS West Coast Region 13 October 13, 2015 14 15 February 21, 2016 Revision 16 17 18 19 This revision of the appendix includes some updated data and analyses. It 20 replaces the version that was appended to the draft EIS. For ease of 21 readability, edits are not shown in redline/strikeout format. 1 PREFACE ..................................................................................................................................... B-1 2 INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... B-1 3 1. WITHIN-POPULATION DIVERSITY EFFECTS......................................................................... B-1 4 2. OUTBREEDING EFFECTS AND HATCHERY-INFLUENCED SELECTION EFFECTS................... B-6 5 2.1. Gene Flow and Fitness ...............................................................................................................B-8 6 2.2. Estimation of Gene Flow.......................................................................................................... B-14 7 2.3. Estimation of Gene Flow using Genetic Data.......................................................................... B-15 8 2.3.1. Introduction to Warheit Method..................................................................................................B-15 9 2.3.2. Application of Warheit Method ..................................................................................................B-17 10 2.3.3. Genetic Monitoring.....................................................................................................................B-19 11 2.4. Estimation of Gene Flow Using Demographic Methods ......................................................... B-21 12 2.4.1. The Scott-Gill Method ................................................................................................................B-21 13 2.4.2. Sensitivity Analysis.....................................................................................................................B-24 14 2.5. Summary of Results from Both Methods................................................................................. B-27 15 2.6. Early Summer Steelhead Hatchery Programs .......................................................................... B-28 16 List of Tables 17 Table B-1. Expected percentage of natural-origin escapement involved in HxN matings for winter 18 steelhead populations affected by EWS releases.  19 Table B-2. PEHC estimates and confidence intervals based on recent past practices (e.g., last 5-10 years), 20 and projected PEHC estimates from proposed early winter steelhead hatchery programs, and sampling 21 details for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie steelhead populations. 22 Table B-3. Genetic sampling plans for Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and 23 Snoqualmie steelhead. 24 Table B-4. DGF values generated from the Scott-Gill equation for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, 25 Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie winter steelhead populations. 26 Table B-5. Input parameter values used in sensitivity analysis of Scott-Gill method applied to Puget 27 Sound steelhead populations. 28 Table B-6. Summary of analyses of gene flow from early winter hatchery steelhead into listed Nooksack, 29 Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie steelhead populations. 30 Table B-7. PEHC estimates based on recent past practices and projected PEHC estimates for EWS and 31 ESS hatchery programs in the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie 32 steelhead populations. 1  List of Figures  2  Figure B-1. Schematic of temporal spawning overlap between early winter hatchery steelhead and  3  natural-origin winter steelhead.   4  Figure B-2. Proportion of natural-origin fish expected to be involved in HxN matings as a function of  5  pHOS, and proportion of spawners in overlap zone.  6  Figure B-3. EWS Sim results: percent fitness loss over 25 generations as a function of gene flow.  7  Figure B-4. Gene flow values when varying each Scott-Gill parameter in isolation by a 50% increase and  8  a 50% decrease over the input value averaged over all watersheds and all cases.  1  PREFACE  2  This appendix to the final environmental impact statement (EIS) on early winter steelhead hatchery  3  programs in Puget Sound has been revised with updated data and analysis from the version that was  4  appended to the draft EIS. For ease of readability, edits to the previous version are not shown in  5  redline/strikeout format.  6  INTRODUCTION  7  The hatchery programs under consideration in the Nooksack (WDFW 2014b), Stillaguamish (WDFW  8  2014e), Dungeness (WDFW 2014a), Skykomish (Unsworth 2016; WDFW 2014c; WDFW 2016), and  9  Snoqualmie (WDFW 2014d) basins are isolated harvest programs that release fish that are not included in  10  the Puget Sound steelhead DPS, and do not contribute to the conservation or recovery of the DPS.  The  11  program operators will use only early winter steelhead1 (EWS) produced by the programs (identified by  12  early return timing and presence of an adipose fin clip mark) as broodstock, and no natural-origin  13  steelhead will be collected and spawned. The intent of management of these programs is to have few  14  returning fish in excess of broodstock needs escape to spawn in the wild. Those that do spawn in the wild  15  are expected to have low reproductive success relative to the natural-origin fish because they spawn  16  earlier than natural-origin fish, and thus are presumed to spawn under non-optimal conditions.  They may  17  also be less successful than natural-origin fish due to other aspects of domestication.  To the extent they  18  do reproduce and contribute to the next generation of natural-origin fish, however, they pose genetic risks  19  to the population.  In this section, we analyze the risks posed by this gene flow.  NMFS considers three  20  areas of effects caused by gene flow from hatchery-origin fish: within-population diversity, outbreeding  21  effects, and hatchery-influenced selection.   22  This appendix evaluates genetic effects from recent past practices (e.g., past 5-10 years) of early winter  23  steelhead hatchery programs, and also evaluates projected effects from programs under the most recently  24  submitted HGMPs (i.e., WDFW 2016).  25  1. WITHIN-POPULATION DIVERSITY EFFECTS  26  Risk to within-population diversity is much less of a concern in isolated programs such as EWS than in  27  integrated programs, so we will deal with this risk briefly.  Within-population diversity is influenced  28  strongly by the effective size of the population.  Effective size depression is  generally a concern only if  29  the relative abundance of hatchery-origin fish on the spawning grounds far exceeds that of natural-origin  1 Early winter steelhead are hatchery-origin steelhead of Chambers Creek stock origin.  March 2016 B-1 Appendix B  1  fish, so that a disproportionate share of the progeny come from a small number of hatchery-origin parents  2  (Ryman et al. 1995). We do not expect this to be the case with the five proposed programs. An additional  3  potential concern is that diversity in the natural-origin population could be lowered by gene flow from a  4  hatchery population with a lower background level of diversity. This is not the case with these programs:  5  the background levels of genetic diversity are essentially identical in the hatchery-origin and natural 6  origin steelhead populations (Warheit 2014a).  In general, we expect the risk posed by the EWS programs  7  to within-population diversity to be negligible.  8  However, a concern that has been raised in connection with these isolated steelhead programs is that, due  9  to the low expected reproductive success of early winter steelhead spawning in the wild, the reproductive  10  potential of natural-origin fish that spawn with hatchery-origin fish would be reduced or wasted.  11  Reductions in the reproductive output of these natural-origin fish thus reduces the size of the spawning  12  population and therefore the genetically effective size of the population. Figure B-1 is a generalized  13  schematic of the expected distribution of hatchery-origin and natural-origin spawners over time.   15  Figure B-1. Schematic of temporal spawning overlap between early winter hatchery steelhead and  16  natural-origin winter steelhead.  Shape, sizes and placement of curves is conceptual and is not  17  meant to represent any specific situation (Scott and Gill 2008, Fig. 4-7).  18  19  Although the difference varies from basin to basin, EWS have an earlier spawn timing than natural-origin  20  Puget Sound winter steelhead (Table 3 in Myers et al. 2015).This means there will be a time during the  21  spawning season when hatchery-origin steelhead can only spawn with other hatchery-origin  steelhead  1  (Region A), an overlap period when hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead can spawn amongst  2  themselves or with each other (Region B), and a period when natural-origin steelhead can spawn only  3  with natural-origin steelhead (Region C).  Assuming random mating2, the expected proportion of different  4  mating types can easily be determined. In this case, since the only matings that are of interest are those  5  that occur in Region B, and of those, only the matings in which natural-origin fish mate with hatchery 6  origin fish are of interest.   7  The expected proportion of the natural-origin escapement actually mating with hatchery-origin fish is  8  given by:  9  𝑝𝐻𝑂𝑆∗𝑂𝑁∗𝑂𝐻 (1), 𝑝𝐻𝑂𝑆∗𝑂𝐻+(1−𝑝𝐻𝑂𝑆)∗𝑂𝑁  10  where pHOS is the proportion of natural-origin spawners that are of hatchery origin, and ON and OH are   11  the proportions of the natural-origin spawners and the hatchery-origin spawners, respectively, that spawn  12  in Region B.  13  Based on extrapolations from spawning ground observations and return times of hatchery fish to the  14  hatcheries (Hoffmann 2014), the proportion of the natural-origin spawners involved in HxN matings3 is  15  expected to be very low, at most 1.4% in the Skykomish population (Table B-1).  Thus, under the  16  assumption that the reproductive output of a natural-origin fish mating with a hatchery-origin fish is a  17  complete loss, the impact to the population in terms of demographic population size would be less than  18  1% in three of the programs and under 2% in the others. This loss would be expected to occur repeatedly,  19  but the effects would not be cumulative. In this respect, its demographic impact would be the same as a  20  loss due to harvest or an ecological interaction.  21  All parameters used in the modeling just presented are subject to uncertainty, as will be discussed in other  22  sections below.  We present a simple evaluation of the effects of this uncertainty in Figure B-2, which  23  shows the proportion of natural-origin fish participating in HxN matings as a function of pHOS and  24  overlap.  For simplicity, in this analysis we assumed that ON and OH were equal (Table B-1).  Overlap and  25  pHOS must be considerable before the proportion of natural-origin spawners in HxN matings reaches  2 Random mating is assumed in a number of basic population genetic models for mathematical simplicity. The  models in this section are based on simple population genetic models, and use the random mating assumption for the  same reason. Mating dynamics of steelhead and salmon are in fact non-random, but attempting to include all the  deviations from random mating would be a major modelling exercise in itself. We assume that the results of our  modelling is robust to the typical deviations from random mating found in nature.  3 The HxN notation indicates matings in which a hatchery-origin male mates with a natural-origin female, and vice  versa. HxH indicates matings between hatchery-origin parents, and NxN indicates matings between natural-origin  parents.  March 2016 B-3 Appendix B  1  even 1%, and this proportion has a maximum value of pHOS if overlap is complete (equation 1).  This  2  additional analysis reinforces the result that the effect of loss of reproductive capacity due to natural 3  origin spawners mating with hatchery-origin fish would be small.  This would translate to an even smaller  4  percentage decrease in effective size, and a consequent effect on genetic diversity that would be  5  unmeasurably small.  6  Table B-1.  Expected percentage of natural-origin escapement involved in HxN matings for winter  7  steelhead populations affected by EWS releases.  Table B-2 provides further details on metrics used in  8  calculations. All values are expressed as percentages.  Metric/Data  Population  Nooksack  Stillaguamish  Dungeness  Skykomish  Snoqualmie  ON  6.21  1.25  4.33  1.96  2.10  OH  8.38  18.41  16.88  27.90  16.88  Max pHOS  5.5  5.1  3.8  14.6  13.5  Expected percentage of natural-origin fish mating with hatchery-origin EWS  0.45  0.55  0.58  1.39  1.17  0.06 Proportion of natural-origin spawners expected to mate with hatchery-origin fish 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0 Spawning overlap  1  2  Figure B-2. Proportion of natural-origin fish expected to be involved in HxN matings as a function of  3  pHOS, and proportion of spawners in overlap zone. For simplicity we have assumed that the  4  overlap is the same for natural-origin and hatchery-origin fish; e.g., for the 0.05 level,  5  ON=OH=0.05.  Isopleths represent pHOS=0.1 (small dashes), 0.08 (dots and dashes), 0.06 (dots),  6  0.04 (large dashes), and 0.02 (solid).  7  8  A potential limitation of this “region” approach to analysis of spawning used in the example above is that  9  it assumes that all the spawners are returning anadromous adults.  Resident Oncorhynchus mykiss  10  (rainbow trout) and precocious residual hatchery juveniles may also be involved, both of which would not  11  have been counted as part of the escapement. McMillan et al. (2007) noted both types of males  12  participating in mating in the later part of the spawning season in an Olympic Peninsula stream.  Residual  13  males accounted for less than 1% of the observed mating attempts, and only late in the season.   14  Measurable reproductive success of non-anadromous male O. mykiss was noted in another Olympic  15  Peninsula stream that has no hatchery program (Seamons et al. 2004).  In Puget Sound, the relative  16  abundance of anadromous and non-anadromous O. mykiss is not well known in most streams (Myers et  17  al. 2015), and residualism rates for the programs in the analysis area are not known. A recent meta 18  analysis of steelhead programs throughout the Pacific Northwest found an average residualism rate of  19  5.6%, ranging from 0 to 17% (Hausch and Melnychuk 2012).  Although residualism per se may have  20  ecological consequences, residual males are not a genetic concern unless they are sexually mature.  1  Although high rates of precocious maturation in Pacific Northwest steelhead have been reported in the  2  past (e.g., Schmidt and House 1979) before fish cultural methods were developed to control precocious  3  maturation, currently the occurrence of precocious males in WDFW steelhead releases tends to vary from  4  1 to 5% (Tipping et al. 2003). At these levels, both the demographic and genetic influence of these fish  would be insignificant.  6  2. OUTBREEDING EFFECTS AND HATCHERY-INFLUENCED SELECTION EFFECTS  7  Although we conclude that the effects of EWS on within-population diversity will be negligible, EWS  8  may pose non-negligible risks to natural-origin steelhead populations through outbreeding effects and  9  hatchery-influenced selection. Outbreeding effects are a concern whenever the hatchery-origin and  natural-origin fish are from different populations, and this is certainly a case with the early winter  11  hatchery steelhead and the natural-origin populations. In fact, the early winter steelhead are considered so  12  diverged genetically from natural-origin steelhead that they are not considered part of any steelhead DPS  13  (NMFS 2003).  The basis of this is the fact that they have been subjected to so many years of intense  14  artificial selection for early smolting, which has resulted not only in smolting predominantly  at one year  of age, but also earlier spawning time (Crawford 1979).  Of all the salmon and steelhead hatchery  16  populations used on the West Coast, NMFS considers the early winter steelhead population the most  17  altered by artificial selection. NMFS has also voiced concerns about the potential genetic risks of EWS  18  programs (Hard et al. 2007; McMillan et al. 2010).  19  Evaluation of outbreeding effects is very difficult.  Under conditions of no selection and no genetic drift,  and the best existing management guidance for avoiding out breeding effects, it was the conclusion of the   21  1995 straying workshop (Grant 1997) that gene flow between populations (measured as immigration  22  rates) should be under 5%.  The HSRG (2009) generally recommended  that, for primary populations  23  (those of high conservation concern) affected by isolated hatchery programs, the proportion of natural 24  origin spawners consisting of hatchery-origin fish (pHOS) not exceed 5%, and more recently (HSRG  2014) have suggested that perhaps this level should be reduced.  While not addressing them specifically  26  in their guidelines, the HSRG earlier discussed risks posed by highly diverged hatchery populations such  27  as the early winter  steelhead, concluding that “…if non-harvested fish spawn naturally, then these  28  isolated programs can impose significant genetic risks to naturally spawning populations. Indeed, any  29  naturally spawning by fish from these broodstocks may be considered unacceptable because of the  potential genetic impacts on natural-origin populations” (HSRG 2004, Appendix B).  WDFW used the  31  Ford (2002) model to evaluate the hatchery-influenced selection risk of early winter  isolated steelhead  32  programs, and concluded they posed less risk than integrated native-stock programs at gene flow levels  33  below 2%, but greater risk at levels above that (Scott and Gill 2008).  WDFW’s statewide steelhead  1  management plan states that isolated programs will result in average gene flow levels of less than 2%  2  (WDFW 2008).  3  Some explanation is needed at this point of the relationship between pHOS and gene flow, because the  4  two can easily be confused.  Genetic impacts from hatchery programs are caused by gene flow from  hatchery fish into the naturally spawning population. Thus, if hatchery-origin fish equal natural-origin  6  fish in reproductive success, pHOS represents the maximum proportionate contribution of hatchery-origin  7  parents to the next generation of natural-origin fish.  In the absence of other information, pHOS is an  8  estimate of maximum gene flow on the spawning grounds, and thus is a surrogate for gene flow.   9  Although the EWS-specific modeling by Scott and Gill (2008) used the Ford model, NMFS feels the Ford  model may not be a good fit to the situation of EWS spawning in the wild for two reasons. First, highly  11  domesticated steelhead stocks are known to have low fitness in the wild (e.g., Araki et al. 2007; Chilcote  12  et al. 1986), so gene flow is nearly certain to be lower than that predicted by the Ford model.  This is the  13  situation that inspired the HSRG (2014) to develop the “effective pHOS” concept.  Second, even if it is  14  assumed that the EWS are equal in fitness to the natural-origin fish, the Ford model does not consider the  effects on gene flow of partially overlapping spawning distributions, which will decrease the proportion  16  of HxN matings and increase the proportion of HxH matings relative to what it would be with total  17  temporal overlap of hatchery-origin and natural-origin spawners. Focusing attention on gene flow rates  18  rather than pHOS is thus always advisable if feasible, and especially in the case of EWS spawning in the  19  wild, NMFS feels that pHOS levels considerably overestimate gene flow levels.  In discussing gene flow from hatchery programs, it is also important to distinguish the EWS from most  21  other hatchery programs.  Although some divergence from natural life history can be expected over time  22  in hatchery programs, the EWS stock represents a situation in which the fish have been subjected to  23  intensive artificial selection over many years for a divergent life history (Crawford 1979). The prospect of  24  gene flow from such highly domesticated stocks seems intuitively risky, as is reflected in the cautionary  statement of the HSRG that was cited above.  However, studies have only recently begun to compare the  26  relative impact of highly domesticated stocks, such as those considered in this review, and with those that  27  are less domesticated. A modeling effort by Baskett and Waples (2013) demonstrated that the effects of  28  programs using “different” broodstocks could be quite different than those from “similar” programs, and  29  depending on the circumstances, could pose more or less risk.  The key element in determining risk level  is an understanding of the impact of the gene flow on fitness.  This is discussed in the next section.  1  2.1. Gene Flow and Fitness  2  In attempting to understand the risks posed by EWS spawning in the wild, three distinctive characteristics  3  of this phenomenon must be considered: 1) the hatchery-origin fish are known to have low reproductive  4  success in the wild relative to natural-origin fish; 2) the hatchery-origin fish comprise a small portion of  5  the spawning population; and 3) a level of temporal isolation exists between hatchery-origin and natural 6  origin spawners, resulting in hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish mating among themselves at higher  7  levels than expected under random mating. We know of no empirical information that is applicable to the  8  fitness consequences of natural spawning of EWS in this situation. Similarly, we also know of no  9  modelling that adequately simulates the phenomenon of EWS spawning in the wild, although elements of  10  existing models, such as those of Ford (2002) and Baskett and Waples (2013) would be useful in  11  modeling the EWS situation.  Therefore, we decided to develop a new model.  In developing the model  12  our intent was above all to capture the maximum fitness impact that could be expected from EWS  13  spawning in the wild, while simulating the conditions mentioned above.  We also wanted to do this in as  14  simple a model as possible, as every element added to increase mimicry of biological reality can also  15  create parameterization and interpretation complexity.  16  The new model, “EWS Sim,” is fundamentally an individual-based version of the Ford model4, with  17  selection occurring only at reproduction that also simulates zones of NxN, HxN, and HxH matings.  Like  18  the Ford model, EWS Sim tracks phenotypic change due to interbreeding with hatchery fish as a trait  19  subject to stabilizing selection5. Fitness of an individual fish is determined by the distance of its  20  phenotype from an optimum ϴ, and by the strength of selection.  In application, as in the Ford model, the  21  trait under selection is a surrogate for a complex of traits that collectively contribute to fitness, rather than  22  a representation of a specific trait. The model was developed with input and review from geneticists at  23  NMFS’ Northwest Fisheries Science Center (NWFSC).   24  To run EWS Sim, the user inputs key management elements:  total number of spawners, pHOS, and  25  overlap of hatchery-origin and natural-origin spawners.  The user also inputs two “unknown” values  26  which control the fitness in general, and especially that of the hatchery-origin fish: selection strength and  27  difference between natural and hatchery trait optima.  Here we used Ford (2002) for initial guidance. Ford  4 The Ford model simulates groups of fish; EWS Sim simulates individual fish. This lessens the need for  assumptions about phenotypic and fitness distributions.  5 Stabilizing selection is a form of natural selection in which fitness of individuals decreases as their phenotypes  deviate from an optimal value.  Appendix B B-8 March 2016  1  used selection strengths of 3σ6 and 10σ for strong and weak selection, respectively7, and distances  2  between the two optima ranging from approximately 3σ to 15σ.  We used approximately the same range  3  for selection strength, but used a more limited range for the difference between optima. Heritability is  4  also an “unknown” input, but one that has considerably less impact on results than selection strength and  5  difference between optima; here we used 0.25, based on the recommendation of NWFSC geneticists.  6  Using these input values, EWS Sim then simulates a mating among natural-origin and hatchery-origin  7  fish, with the number or progeny produced per mating determined by the fitness values of the parents.  8  The phenotypic mean of the progeny generation is then compared to the parental generation, and the  9  difference is expressed in in terms of fitness.  Two other key outputs are gene flow (the proportion of the  10  naturally produced progeny gene pool from matings involving hatchery fish), and reproductive success of  11  hatchery-origin fish relative to natural-origin fish (RRS).  This process is done for a user-specified  12  number of iterations, with results averaged over all iterations.  13  After some initial exploration of the model, we did a series of simulations (500 iterations each), holding  14  the total number of parental fish constant at 500 and heritability constant at 0.25.  The following values  15  were used for other parameters:  16  1) pHOS: 2%, 5%, 8%, 10%, 15%, and 20%  17  2) overlap:  OH=OW in both cases, 20% and 40%  18  3) selection strength (ω) in units of σ : 2, 3, 4, 5, and 10  19  4) distance between θw and θH , in units of σ : 3, 4.5, and 6  20  21  Our goal in this initial series of runs was to narrow the range of parameter values to combinations that  22  resulted in biologically plausible outcomes, with the goal of finding the relationship between gene flow  23  and fitness loss, and then to examine these cases more carefully.  RRS was the sole criterion used for  24  biological plausibility.  The low RRS of long-domesticated steelhead hatchery is established in the  25  literature (e.g., Araki et al. 2008); we considered any outcome with an RRS above 0.5 as unrealistic.  6 σ is the phenotypic standard deviation. 7 Selection strength values indicate the width of the selection curve, and the smaller the curve width, the stronger the selection. 2  Figure B-3. EWS Sim results: percent fitness loss over 25 generations as a function of gene flow.  Circles  3  and triangles denote data points from scenarios in which spawning overlap is 20% or 40%,  4  respectively.  5  6  For the plausible subset of scenarios, we used a multiple-generation modification of EWS Sim (100  7  iterations/scenario) to examine long-term fitness loss, comparing mean fitness after 25 generations to  8  original fitness.  We chose 25 generations because it is approximately a century, the default timeline for  9  ESA viability analysis (McElhany et al. 2000).  Fitness loss over 25 generations is plotted against the  10  mean gene flow for a single-generation run of the same scenario8 in the initial set of runs in Figure B-3.   11  The fitness-gene flow relationship is a shallow power curve that can be well approximated by the  12  equation 𝑦=19.055𝑥1.4115, where y is fitness loss and x is gene flow, so expected fitness loss is not a  13  simple linear function of gene flow.  The simulations show that gene flow levels of 2% or less should  14  result in no more than 8% fitness loss over 25 generations, but that 4% gene flow could result in three  15  times as much.  An important result not apparent from the figure is that the pace of fitness loss changes  16  over time, with the largest decline in the first generation and then the proportionate loss decreasing every  17  generation.  The relationship between first-generation loss and cumulative loss over 25 generations can be  18  approximated by an almost identical power curve to that presented above, where y is the 25-generation  8 Because of time constraints, the additional programming required for multiple-generation tracking of variables  other than phenotype and fitness have not yet been incorporated into the multiple-generation version of EWS Sim.  Appendix B  B-10  March 2016  1  loss and x is the first-generation loss9 .  First-generation fitness loss ranged from less than half a percent to  2  nearly 5%; in runs that approximated the gene flow levels expected under the proposed programs (see  3  Sections 2.3.2 and 2.4.1), it was at most less than 1.5%.  This phenomenon of fitness loss diminishing in  4  magnitude each generation has an interesting consequence in that if this actually occurs, then populations  already subjected to EWS programs (which is the case in the present context), will have already suffered  6  some fitness loss.  If so, then into the future the fitness loss 25 generations out will be less than that  7  modeled.   8  Interestingly, the effect of different levels of spawning overlap seemed to have only a minor effect on  9  fitness loss, especially at low levels of gene flow. Figure B-3 is deceptive in this respect.  Although  fitness of hatchery-origin spawners (driven by selection strength and difference between optima) was the  11  main determinant of gene flow and thus fitness loss, it is important to note that the higher levels of gene  12  flow were achieved only at the 40% overlap level.    13  This not to presume, however that EWS Sim is a complete depiction of reality.  Like virtually all  14  mathematical models of complex biological processes, EWS Sim is a simplification of reality developed  to explore one or more biological phenomena.  It incorporates genetic processes as probability  16  distributions, so contains no explicit genetic mechanism. It uses non-overlapping generations, and ignores  17  age structure.  It greatly simplifies mating dynamics, and generation of varying numbers of progeny per  18  mating.  None of these simplifications can be regarded as out of the ordinary for modelling of this sort,  19  and their consequences to results are likely minor.  EWS Sim also does not explicitly consider the  consequences of life history variations such as residual males and mating with resident males; we assume  21  they are adequately covered by the spawning overlap parameter.  Most importantly, the model assumes  22  that all the poor reproductive behavior of EWS is genetic in origin and causes fitness loss due to  23  stabilizing fecundity selection, which is almost certainly a simplification of the true situation.  However,   24  these simplifications likely overestimate the fitness impact of EWS programs, especially in that the upper  level of spawning overlap modeled (40% in both directions) allows higher rates of mating of  26  interbreeding between hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish than are thought to be possible under the  27  levels of hatchery releases envisioned in the proposed HGMPs.  28  The basic result from the EWS Sim runs, that low rates of gene flow can result in relatively minor fitness  29  loss, are consistent with earlier simulations by Ford, who showed that low level gene flow from  isolated  programs could result in long-term fitnesses of approximately 85% or more of the original level (Ford  31  2002, Figures 3A and 3B).  The EWS Sim results are also consistent with recent HSRG thinking.  In the  9 The relationship becomes less precise as modeled fitness loss increases.  March 2016 B-11 Appendix B  1  past, discussions about effects of gene flow from hatchery programs have been dominated by the HSRG  2  gene flow guidelines (HSRG 2009; HSRG 2014), which are based on phenotypic means, not directly on  3  fitness.  More recently, however, the HSRG has equated its guidelines with long-term (equilibrium)  4  fitness loss, and concluded that existing guidelines for integrated programs affecting primary populations  5  are consistent with a 15% long-term fitness loss, and found that the corresponding level of fitness loss  6  would be achieved by an effective pHOS of 2% in an isolated program affecting a primary population  7  (HSRG 2014, Table 3-2)10 .  Because the intent of the HSRG’s use effective of pHOS is to more closely  8  reflect gene flow, their 2% pHOS equates approximately to 2% gene flow in EWS Sim. Although we did  9  not run EWS Sim to equilibrium, this level of correspondence with Ford’s work and that of the HSRG  10  indicates that EWS Sim do not conflict with previous modeled results of fitness loss caused by gene flow  11  from isolated hatchery programs.  12  Translating a fitness loss (e.g., relative reproductive success) determined empirically or theoretically to  13  population demographics is not straightforward.  The most conservative approach would assume that a  14  fitness reduction of x% would mean that the population would be now be capable of producing on  15  average x% fewer progeny.  The alternative would be to apply the fitness loss to a Beverton-Holt, Ricker,  16  or some other production function involving compensatory mechanisms, in which case the loss to  17  population abundance would be less than x%.  A good example of this approach is the HSRG AHA  18  model, in which fitness loss is applied to both the capacity and the productivity parameters of a Beverton 19  Holt function (RIST 2009).  Alternatively, in very small populations, a depensatory effect might occur, in  20  which case the abundance loss would be greater than x%.    21  Our approach in evaluating programs with respect to EWS Sim results is to consider the fitness loss, a  22  direct measure of population productivity decrease, assuming other factors remain constant.  This last  23  consideration is very important because the productivity of a population is likely heavily influenced by  24  freshwater and ocean habitat conditions.  How much of the total population productivity is genetically  25  determined is unknown but it is likely to be highly variable. Thus, highly productive populations may be  26  able to incur considerable fitness losses and still remain highly productive, whereas low-productivity  27  populations may be highly impacted by further reductions, making population status a key consideration  28  in determination of acceptable fitness loss.  10 The HSRG modelling differed from ours in that in using effective rather than census pHOS, they explicitly incorporated a specified RRS value for EWS (0.11), whereas in our EWS Sim runs RRS was a function of selection strength and difference between optima. RRS from the EWS Sim runs we deemed biologically plausible averaged 0.17. 1  Steelhead may have more potential for genetic change through selection relative to other Pacific salmon  2  species that have been studied (Araki et al. 2008). Given the uncertainty regarding the magnitude of  3  fitness loss expected, this possible higher susceptibility to selection argues for a conservative approach to  4  determining acceptable fitness loss in the species in general due to gene flow from hatchery programs.   Populations comprising the Puget Sound steelhead DPS vary in viability status, but few could be  6  considered highly productive, which also argues for a generally conservative approach to acceptable  7  fitness loss in these populations.  Although general viability criteria have been developed for the DPS,  8  requiring that a specified proportion of populations in each major population group within the DPS reach  9  viable status, no detailed plans have as yet been developed designating which populations must reach  viable status. This also argues for a conservative approach to acceptable fitness loss.  A final  11  consideration is the conservation value of the programs under consideration.  EWS programs may  12  facilitate steelhead harvest while offering some measure of protection to the natural-origin populations.  13  However, they offer no net benefit to the status of these populations, posing genetic risk with no  14  offsetting demographic benefit.  Currently there are no formal benchmarks for acceptable fitness loss due to gene flow from hatchery  16  programs.  However, the HSRG gene flow guidelines (HSRG 2009; HSRG 2014) can be considered  17  benchmarks by virtue of their widespread dissemination and implementation.  As previously mentioned,  18  the HSRG (2014) recently modeled the long-term fitness loss expected from application of these  19  guidelines, and the fitness loss expected for the highest-level guidelines was approximately 15%.  Given  all the specific considerations just mentioned, 15% long-term fitness loss seems insufficiently  21  conservative for the proposed EWS programs.  At this time, considering the state of scientific knowledge  22  (including uncertainties inherent in the modeling above) and currently undetermined recovery importance  23  of the individual affected populations, the acceptable modeled 25-generation fitness loss for these  24  populations should generally not exceed 10%. We feel this is sufficiently conservative because the model  likely over predicts true fitness loss, fitness change each generation is likely very small, and if future  26  research determines that this value should be lower, the impact of an insufficiently conservative level will  27  have been unsubstantial. It is doubtful that fitness loss will be measurable directly, at least in the short  28  term, so management will have to be based on gene flow estimation.  The modeled 10% fitness loss level  29  corresponds to gene flow of approximately 2%.   1  2.2. Estimation of Gene Flow  2  Gene flow is a seemingly simple concept, but developing straightforward ways to measure it is not  3  simple.  For one thing, gene flow from hatchery fish into natural-origin populations is referred to in many  4  NMFS documents and elsewhere as interbreeding or hybridization. This is an oversimplification.  In  5  reality, gene flow occurs by two processes: hatchery-origin fish spawning with natural-origin fish and  6  hatchery-origin fish spawning with each other.  How well the hatchery-origin fish spawn and how well  7  their progeny survive, determines the rate at which genes from the hatchery population are incorporated  8  into the natural-origin population.  The importance of including the progeny of HxH matings as a  9  potential “vector” for gene flow is illustrated by the observation that these fish may have a considerably  10  longer and later spawning season than hatchery-origin fish (Seamons et al. 2012). An appropriate metric  11  for gene flow needs to measure the contributions of both types of matings to the natural-origin population  12  being analyzed.  Another consideration is temporal scale.  Although there may have been effects from  13  gene flow from earlier, more intensive and widespread hatchery activities, for purposes of analyzing the  14  proposed programs what must be measured is the current rate of gene flow, which is best represented as  15  the proportion of the current naturally produced progeny gene pool:  16  𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤=(2𝑓(𝐻𝐻)+𝑓(𝑁𝐻))/2, where f(HH) is the proportion of naturally produced progeny  17  produced from HxH matings, and f(NH) the proportion of progeny produced by HxN11 matings  18  WDFW has developed two metrics for measuring gene flow in this way.  The first is based on actual  19  genetic data, and is called proportionate effective hatchery contribution (PEHC) (Warheit 2014a),  20  hereafter called the “Warheit method.” WDFW also has developed an alternative demographic method,  21  hereafter called the “Scott-Gill method,” for calculating the expected gene flow that is based on  22  demographic and life history data rather than genetic data  (Scott and Gill 2008).  23  Below we discuss in detail these two methods for estimating gene flow and results from applying them to  24  data on Puget Sound steelhead.  It is important to understand in reading this material that the Warheit and  25  Scott-Gill methods estimate the current rate of gene flow (from recent past practices) and expected rate of  26  gene flow (from future practices and proposed HGMPs), respectively, not cumulative gene flow. In other  27  words, the effects analysis is aimed at how much gene flow is occurring or will occur, not how much may  28  have occurred in the past, nor what the cumulative genetic contribution of EWS to the natural-origin  29  steelhead populations has been.  Our analysis assumes that natural-origin fish in either analysis may have  11 As in earlier usage in this document, this is meant to represent both matings between natural-origin females and  hatchery-origin males, and vice versa.  Appendix B B-14 March 2016  1  some level of hatchery ancestry. In the case of the Scott-Gill method, the natural-origin fish considered in  2  the equation may include the progeny of HxH or HxN matings.  3  2.3. Estimation of Gene Flow using Genetic Data  4  2.3.1. Introduction to Warheit Method  5  Estimation of PEHC in Puget Sound steelhead is difficult because, in terms of genetic markers that can  6  currently be analyzed, the differences between the hatchery-origin fish and natural-origin fish are slight,  7  because of common ancestry and possibly gene flow in the past. WDFW has struggled with this problem  8  for several years, and Dr. Ken Warheit, director of the Molecular Genetics Laboratory at WDFW, has  9  developed a method for estimating PEHC in situations like this.  The method is new, still undergoing  10  refinement, and for that reason has received limited peer review12 .  Because of this, the method has been  11  extensively reviewed by NMFS staff, and refined in response to that review.   12  The Warheit method involves, in part, comparing genotypes of natural-origin and hatchery-origin fish  13  using the Structure program (Pritchard et al. 2000; Pritchard et al. 2010). Structure is one of the most  14  widely used programs for inferring population structure, and has also been used for detecting hybrid  15  individuals, frequently between wild and domestic populations. The WDFW Molecular Genetics  16  Laboratory has many years’ experience using the program.  Structure makes use of each individual’s  17  multilocus genotype to infer population structure (e.g., hatchery versus wild), given an a priori assumed  18  number of groups or populations.  The program will probabilistically assign individuals to populations, or  19  if the admixture option is used, will assign a portion of an individual’s genome to populations.  20  Although Structure is the basic analytical engine of the Warheit method, the full method is far more  21  complex than a basic Structure analysis.  Realizing that assignment portions of an individual’s genome to  22  populations must involve error if the genetic distance between the populations involved in the admixture  23  is small, Warheit first investigated this assignment uncertainty in a study of genetic effects of Skagit early  24  winter steelhead13. He simulated populations of hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish and their hybrids,  25  then applied Structure to determine how well the program classified fish of known ancestry (Warheit  26  2013). He found that depending on the situation, the proportion of hybrid fish could either be seriously  27  over-or underestimated, and concluded that he lacked sufficient power with 15 microsatellite loci to  28  reliably quantify introgression from early winter steelhead into the wild Skagit River winter steelhead  29  populations, or reliably identify pure unmarked hatchery-origin or hatchery-ancestry fish.  Warheit’s  12 Drs. Warheit and Knapp are currently developing a manuscript for submission to a peer-reviewed journal.  13 We refer to the Skagit report only for presenting the historical development of the method. Any results presented  have been superseded by Warheit (2014a).  March 2016 B-15 Appendix B  1  current (2014a) method applies and extends the lessons learned in the Skagit work.  The data set consists  2  of genotypes from up to 192 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci.  Simulation methods were  3  refined to better model the genetic composition of populations.  In addition, Warheit used a likelihood  4  approach to adjust the Structure-based assignment proportions, based on the assignment error from  analysis of the simulated populations.  6  NMFS Northwest Fisheries Science Center (NWFSC) staff reviewed a report provided to us in March  7  2014 that described the method and the results of its application to several Puget Sound steelhead  8  populations (Warheit 2014c).  They commented extensively on many aspects of the document (Hard  9  2014).  Because of these comments and additional discussion with SFD staff, the method was refined and  the document extensively revised.  WDFW provided NMFS with the new draft (Warheit 2014a) in  11  October 2014, which we submitted to NWFSC for review, along with a document by Warheit (Warheit  12  2014b) detailing his responses to the earlier review.  The NWFSC responded with a new review in  13  January 2015 (Ford 2015).  14  Briefly, the NWFSC reviewers found Warheit’s method to be a reasonable, thoughtful, and innovative  effort to address genetic introgression from closely related hatchery populations.  Importantly, Warheit’s  16  approach demonstrated that a naïve application of the Structure program would provide misleading  17  results, probably overestimating introgresion. However, they were concerned, as in their previous review,  18  that Warheit’s approach may overstate the precision and possibly the accuracy of the estimates.  In other  19  words, the confidence intervals may be larger than reported, and point estimates may be biased. They  singled out two potential sources of uncertainty.  The first was uncertainty associated with sampling,  21  which did not seem to have been taken into account.  The second was sensitivity to the many assumptions  22  and choices about model parameters that Warheit used.  23  These NWFSC comments were expected.  The Warheit approach  is an innovative complex method that  24  attempts something very difficult, and necessarily involves many assumptions and sources of uncertainty.   NMFS staff and Warheit discussed the method and revisions to it extensively during the EIS development  26  process.  Confidence intervals were developed, in fact, at the urging of NMFS staff, with the full  27  understanding that they were potentially underestimates. NMFS considers that although sensitivity  28  analysis is necessary, which may spur further refinement of the technique, the Warheit method is not only  29  a reasonable approach to measuring gene flow in this situation, but the best method available.  In response to the comments from NWFSC and others, Warheit and his collaborator Dr. Shannon Knapp  31  (University of Arizona) revised his method (Knapp and Warheit 2016), and WDFW (WDFW 2015a)  1  provided new PEHC estimates and confidence intervals based on the revision.  The revised methodology  2  has not yet been reviewed by NWFSC.  3  2.3.2.  Application of Warheit Method  4  WDFW has applied the Warheit method to the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Snohomish/Skykomish, and  5  Snoqualmie steelhead populations, as well as several other Puget Sound steelhead populations, but has  6  not yet applied it to the Dungeness population because of a lack of genetic data.  Table B-2 reports PEHC  7  information provided by WDFW (2015a) on these steelhead populations based on recent past practices,  8  along with sampling details14 .  It also reports projected PEHC values (Hoffmann 2014), which take into  9  consideration recent program changes that would not have been reflected in the other PEHC estimate.  10  Table B-2. PEHC estimates and confidence intervals (CI) based on recent past practices (e.g., last 5-10  11  years), and projected PEHC estimates from proposed early winter steelhead hatchery programs, and  12  sampling details for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie steelhead populations  13  (WDFW 2015a). No PEHC estimate is available for the Dungeness Basin. The Stillaguamish sample was  14  not 100% winter steelhead (see text). All values presented as percentages.  15  Basin  Listed Population  Sample Size and Details  Recent Past Practices PEHC and 90% CI  Projected PEHC (%) under Proposed HGMPs  Nooksack  Nooksack (W)  246 (2009-2013 adults and juveniles)  1(0-4)  1  SF Nooksack (S)  66 (2010-2011 adults)  0(0-7)  0  Stillaguamish (W)  86 (2006 smolt trap samples)  0 (0-7)  0  Stillaguamish  Deer Cr. (S)  157 (1995+2013 juveniles, few 20122013 adults )  0 (0-3)  0  Canyon Cr. (S)  96 (2013 juveniles)  0 (0-5)  0  Skykomish (W)  21 (2013 adult)  0 (0-20)  0  Skykomish/ Snohomish  Pilchuck (W)  49 (2012 adult)  2 (0-16)  0  N.F. Skykomish (S)  145 (2004, 2012, and 2013 juveniles and adults)  1 (1-3)  1  Snoqualmie  Snoqualmie (W)  166 (2010-2013 juveniles and adults)  4 (0-12)  1  Tolt (S)  74 (2010-2012 juveniles)  1 (0-3)  0  14 The HGMPs also presented this information, but information was updated during the consultation. 1  The projected values rely a great deal on the PEHC estimate, which is subject to imprecision, but are  2  important in that they reflect the proportionate change expected.  3  Before beginning general discussion of results in Table B-2, some discussion of the Stillaguamish winter  4  steelhead sample is warranted.  Warheit (2014a) noted that the Stillaguamish was the most poorly  5  represented system in his analysis. The sample marked in the table as Stillaguamish (W) was a sample of  6  outmigrating smolts at a lower basin smolt trap that undoubtedly collects fish from multiple populations.   7  Assuming that the collection could easily be predominantly winter steelhead smolts, upon NMFS request  8  Dr. Warheit used Structure to determine the run-time composition of the sample.  Of the fish in the  9  sample that were assignable, 86%-94% were assigned to winter steelhead (Warheit 2016a). Based on the  10  new information from Dr. Warheit, , we decided to include data from this sample for estimating PEHC in  11  Stillaguamish winter steelhead, even though WDFW did not proffer it as such.  WDFW has not provided  12  an updated confidence interval for PEHC based on this sample, but because the updated intervals that  13  have been provided tend to be somewhat larger than those originally provided in Warheit (2014a), we  14  assume an updated confidence interval would be wider than that reported in Table B-2. WDFW also did  15  not provide a projected PEHC value, but based on their method, the projected value would have been 0%.  16  However, this sample also yielded a PEHC estimate for influence from early summer steelhead15 (ESS)  17  programs of 18% (Table B-7; Warheit 2014c), which seems to conflict with the classification results  18  described above.  Given the fact that the sample is a smolt-trap sample and is a decade old, the PEHC  19  estimate for EWS effects should be viewed cautiously.  20  For the most part, the PEHC estimates based on recent past practices are 0%, although confidence  21  intervals go up to 16% in the Pilchuck winter steelhead population and 20% in the Skykomish winter  22  population (Table B-2).  Both of these estimates were based on very small samples, and this is likely the  23  major cause of the large confidence interval, but the large confidence is still a concern. Clearly, a new  24  larger genetic sample is needed from the Skykomish.  In the case of the Pilchuck population however,  25  PEHC is projected to be 0% in the future, because no releases have occurred there since 2009, and none  26  are planned under the proposed programs (WDFW 2016).  The largest point estimate, 4% in the  27  Snoqualmie, also has a high upper confidence limit (12%), and is based on a large sample size, indicating  28  a higher level of gene flow than in the other populations affected by the proposed hatchery programs.   15 Early summer steelhead (ESS) are hatchery-origin steelhead of Skamania stock origin. With the exception of the  Dungeness River basin where information is less clear, summer-run and winter-run forms of natural-origin steelhead  exist in the other river basins (Myers et al. 2015). Although the return timing of the summer-run and winter-run  steelhead differs, there is less difference in the time of spawning (although there is typically some spatial  separation). Natural-origin summer-run steelhead may be affected by EWS programs, and natural-origin winter-run  can be affected by ESS programs.  Appendix B B-18 March 2016  1  However, this PEHC estimate was a result of the previous program (recent past practices); the proposed  2  programs differ in several respects from previous operations, including discontinuation of off-station  3  releases and reduction in release from Tokul Creek Hatchery.  The projected PEHC under the proposed  4  programs is 0%.   Overall then, assuming the PEHC estimates are not biased low, and considering the confidence intervals,  6  recent gene flow from EWS programs has been on the order of a few percent, averaging perhaps less than  7  the 2% WDFW standard for populations of high conservation concern, and the expectation is that it will  8  not increase, and significantly decrease in the one population in which the current point estimate exceeds  9  2%.  So these results are encouraging.  Gene flow seems to have generally been low, and it is expected to  be lower.  It must be kept in mind that these results are based on a new method about which there is still  11  considerable uncertainty.  12  In addition to the uncertainty about the Warheit method already expressed in the NWFSC review (Hard  13  2014) we have concerns about sample composition.  As can be seen in Table B-2, Warheit’s analysis  14  largely used pooled samples from multiple years, and multiple life stages.  Given the difficulties inherent  in sampling steelhead, pooling seems reasonable, but it may have implications for PEHC estimates.  We  16  discuss this concern in detail in the section below.   17  2.3.3. Genetic Monitoring  18  A key part of the proposed HGMPs is a genetic monitoring plan described in Anderson et al. (2014),  19  which is intended to verify that PEHC is being maintained at or below stipulated levels.  The plan  includes sampling in several Puget Sound basins.  Table B-3 presents sampling details for the Nooksack,  21  Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie Basins.   22  This level of sampling is impressive, especially coupled with sampling efforts elsewhere in Puget Sound.   23  But the plan lacks important details. The plan commits to sampling a maximum specified number of  24  either smolts or adults on a regular basis, but the numbers are the same in all basins, so it appears that  there is no link between sample size and analytical power.  In the Dungeness River, for example, is a  26  sample of 100 smolts large enough to generate a PEHC estimate of the desired precision and accuracy?  It  27  is also unclear, given that the specified sample sizes are maxima, how many samples can be expected to  28  be actually collected in a season at the various locations.  This would be true even if the traps collected  29  fish from single populations, but most traps can be expected to collect fish from more than one  population.  31  Based on the sample pooling evident in the Warheit report (Warheit 2014a), it seems likely that, because  32  of either analytical demands or sampling difficulties, samples will be pooled.  The implications of this  1  procedure are unclear.  If PEHC is constant over time, then unweighted pooling seems reasonable in  2  principle.  However, PEHC will undoubtedly vary to some degree, possibly necessitating weighting of  3  samples.  In addition, sample sizes may vary widely from year to year.  Perhaps samples should be  4  Table B-3. Genetic sampling plans for Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and  5  Snoqualmie steelhead (Anderson et al. 2014).  6  Basin  Sample Site  Life stage  N  Population(s) Sampled  Nooksack  Mainstem Nooksack R.  Smolts  ≤ 100 annually  Nooksack (W) and (S)  SF Nooksack R.  Adults  ≤ 50 every third year  SF Nooksack (S)  Stillaguamish  Mainstem  Smolts  ≤ 100 annually  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish R.  (W), Canyon Cr.  (S), Deer Cr. (S)  Deer Cr.  Adults  ≤ 50 every third year  Deer Cr. (S)  Dungeness  Mainstem Dungeness R.  Smolts  ≤ 100 annually  Dungeness (S/W)  Skykomish (W)  Mainstem  Smolts  < 100 annually  and N.F.  Skykomish /  Skykomish R.  Skykomish (S)  Snohomish  ≤ 50 every  Pilchuck River  Adults  Pilchuck (W)  third year  Mainstem  Snoqualmie (W)  Smolts  < 100 annually  Snoqualmie  Snoqualmie R.  and Tolt (S)  Snoqualmie R.  Adults  ≤ 50 annually  Snoqualmie (W)  7  8  weighted based on size.  Finally, it makes sense that in a given population, a PEHC estimate based on  9  adults could differ from one based on smolts, simply because the progeny of hatchery-origin are expected  10  to be less fit than the progeny of natural-origin fish and thus some of them may die before they can be  11  sampled as adults.  What then are the implications of pooling adult and juvenile samples?  12  We also note that there is no directed sampling of the Canyon Creek natural-origin summer steelhead  13  population. Summer steelhead are at low levels in the Stillaguamish basin, with no available escapement  Appendix B  B-20  March 2016  1  estimates, but intrinsic potential estimates of capacity for Deer Creek may be ten times higher than that  2  for Canyon Creek.  Canyon Creek fish can be expected to be sampled at low rates at the smolt trap, but at  3  this point sampling this population effectively seems very difficult.  In the monitoring plan WDFW has  4  chosen to sample the Deer Creek population intensively to represent Stillaguamish summer steelhead.   5  This not really a deficiency, but the monitoring plan should deal with this issue in more detail.  6  2.4. Estimation of Gene Flow Using Demographic Methods  7  2.4.1. The Scott-Gill Method  8  The Scott-Gill method for estimating gene flow using demographic and life history data is based on the  9  schematic diagram presented in Figure B-1. The method assumes random mating within mating region,  10  and uses estimates of the proportion of spawners that are of hatchery origin (pHOS16), the proportion of  11  hatchery-origin and natural-origin spawners in Region B, and the relative reproductive success (RRS) of  12  the HxH and HxN mating types to compute the proportion of the offspring gene pool produced by  13  hatchery-origin fish. Dr. Craig Busack (NMFS) developed the equation in 2006 when he worked at  14  WDFW.  Although the value produced by the equation seems to us to be analytically identical to PEHC,  15  we will call it DGF (demographic gene flow) to prevent confusion as to which metric we are discussing,  16  and to distinguish the metric from the concept.  17  Hoffmann (2014) presents DGF estimates for several Puget Sound winter steelhead populations,  18  including the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie populations, along with details on  19  estimation of parameters.  Considerable effort went into population-specific development of the overlap  20  parameters, especially in modeling the timing of natural-origin spawners. In Washington, steelhead  21  spawning surveys are ordinarily not done before March 15.  Hoffmann (2014) used the temporally  22  truncated information to model pre-March 15 spawning.   Because spawning distributions are not known  23  with precision for either the early winter hatchery-origin or natural-origin steelhead populations in most  24  cases, basin specific information on overlap was bracketed with information from the Tokul Creek  25  hatchery population, the best studied winter steelhead hatchery population, and the natural-origin winter  26  steelhead populations in Snow Creek and Clearwater River.  Hoffmann used literature values for the RRS  27  of early winter hatchery steelhead, including a range for HxH matings.  The parameter most susceptible to  28  error is pHOS, which was estimated from spawning ground surveys and from hatchery-origin fish  29  returning to the hatchery.  The total number of fish returning to the hatchery was assumed to be 70-80%  30  of the escapement.  This assumption of 20-30% of the hatchery-origin escapement remaining in the river  31  to spawn was considered to be conservative in comparison to earlier estimates by the HSRG of 10-20%  16 Symbolized by q in the equation in WDFW documents.  (Hoffmann 2014).  The Dungeness population was also analyzed but the Scott-Gill method in the HGMP (WDFW 2014a), but using slightly differing assumptions about proportion of hatchery-origin escapement remaining in the river and RRS.  During the review, an algebraic error was discovered in the Scott-Gill equation (Busack 2014), so all previously published DGF values were slightly inaccurate.  Table B-4 presents updated DGF values for steelhead populations in the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish, Snoqualmie, and Pilchuck Basins computed with the same assumed values about RRS (0.13 for HxH matings and 0.54 for HxN), and pHOS as proportion of hatchery-origin escapement (30%) (Hoffmann 2015a; Hoffmann 2015b).  No Scott-Gill analysis was possible for the summer steelhead populations potentially affected by proposed programs, because these populations are not monitored (WDFW 2014b), and thus no abundance or timing data exist. For information on effects on natural-origin steelhead from summer steelhead hatchery programs, see Section 2.6. 1  Table B-4. DGF values generated from the Scott-Gill equation for the Nooksack, Stillaguamish,  2  Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie winter steelhead populations (Hoffmann 2015a;  3  Hoffmann 2015b). All values are expressed as percentages. For recent past pHOS and DGF, means are  4  reported with maxima in parentheses. Projected pHOS values were calculated based on 2010-2015  5  spawning escapement and smolt-to-adult hatchery rack returns assuming 20% and 30% “stray” rates.  6  Projected DGF values presented as ranges based on combinations of the two assumed stray rates and of  7  the two assumed RRS values for hatchery-origin fish, and as the mean of those four scenarios. Recent  8  past pHOS and DGF values assume the 30% stray rate and higher of the assumed RRS values.  9  Metric/Data  Population  Nooksack  Stillaguamish  Dungeness  Skykomish/ Snohomish  Snoqualmie  Escapement years  2010-2015  2002-15, except 2007  2010-2015, except 2012  2003-2014, except 2007 2009  2002-2015  ON  6.21  1.25  4.33  1.96  2.1  OH  8.38  18.41  16.88  27.9  16.88  Recent past pHOS  3.1 (8.4)  4.8 (17.5)  1.8 (4.2)  8.7 (24.2)  30.0 (56.0)  Recent past DGF  0.37 (1.46)  0.61 (3.07)  0.27 (0.82)  1.21 (4.62)  3.98 (14.91)  Projected pHOS  3.0-5.0  3.0-5.1  1.8-3.0  9.0-14.6  8.4-13.5  Projected DGF  0.46 (0.19-.84)  0.54 (0.27-0.92)  0.36 (0.18-0.59)  1.58 (0.79-2.73)  1.28 (0.55-2.34)  10  11  The DGF results are in contrast to the PEHC results in that they separate the five programs into two  12  groups.  The Nooksack, Stillaguamish, and Dungeness all have a mean projected DGF of approximately  13  0.5%, whereas the two Snohomish programs have mean values 2.5-3 times higher. Because there is not a  14  large difference in overlap values, this distinction seems to be driven by higher pHOS values.  Based on  15  mean DGF, expected gene flow from all five programs are under 2% gene flow limit; under worst case  16  scenario assumptions (mainly the 30% stray rate assumption) the Snohomish programs may exceed the  17  2% level. The 30% stray rate assumption was a “worst case” level included in the HGMPs.  It is unclear  18  how seriously to consider a worst case so far from the assumed HSRG “stray” rate range of 10%-20%  19  quoted by Hoffmann (2014). However, given that the Scott-Gill model assumes that the returnees return  20  only to the stream where they were released, although it is likely some return to neighboring streams,  21  consideration of values somewhat above 20% is certainly reasonable, but 30% may be unrealistically  22  high.  March 2016  B-23  Appendix B  1  Comparison of projected DGF values with the recent past values can be misleading. The recent past  2  values are the mean and maximum reflecting what actually happened, using worst case assumptions (30%  3  stray rate and higher RRS values) and including releases that were under the designed program size. The  4  projected values assume the programs will operate at full size, and the means are based on the four  combinations of RRS and stray rate values.  So the fact that the recent past means are in most cases close  6  to, but slightly lower than, the projected values is to be expected. Possibly a better comparison is the  7  recent past maxima with projected maxima; in all cases, the projected values are considerably lower.  8  The transparency of the Scott-Gill approach offers a look at the mechanics of the gene flow process that  9  makes these estimates more understandable.  For example, in the five-year period 2007-2012, the post- harvest survival rate for returning hatchery fish in the Stillaguamish River was 0.16% (averaging 216  11  adults from an average release of  131,840 smolts) (WDFW 2014a).  Of the estimated 216 fish returning,  12  151 would return to the hatchery and 65 fish (30% of the return) would remain on the spawning grounds.   13  The natural-origin spawning escapement averaged 1,217 fish, so average pHOS was 5%.  Because of  14  temporal segregation only 1.25% of the natural-origin fish and 18.4% of the hatchery-origin fish  coincided temporally (15 natural-origin and 12 hatchery-origin fish).  The other 1,202 natural-origin fish  16  would spawn among themselves, as would the other 53 hatchery-origin fish.  Assuming random mating,  17  this would be expected to result in 94.5% NxN matings, 1% HxN matings, and 4.5% HxH matings.  Only  18  11 natural-origin fish (0.9%) would be expected to mate with hatchery-origin fish. Assuming no  19  differences in success of these matings, the initial proportion of the progeny gene pool originating from  hatchery-origin fish would be 5.0%.  However, because of the expected low RRS of the hatchery-origin  21  fish (e.g., Araki et al. 2008), this percentage would be reduced to 1.1% (assuming RRS of 0.54 for HxN  22  matings and 0.18 for HxH).  23  2.4.2. Sensitivity Analysis  24  This example also illustrates well the chain of logic in using modeled parameter values to generate the  DGF values.  Whatever error exists in the DGF is predominantly due to parameter uncertainty, rather than  26  error associated with assumed statistical distributions, so no confidence intervals are included with the  27  estimates in Table B-4. Hoffmann (2014) used a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effects of parameter  28  uncertainty on the Scott-Gill results. This was a general rather than a basin-or population-specific  29  analysis.  Average parameter values for overlap, pHOS, and RRS17 over all the Puget Sound steelhead  populations were analyzed in the document to arrive at an average DGF. Each parameter average was  17 Hoffmann used two values for the RRS of HxH matings (0.02 and 0.13), so used an average of 0.07 in the  sensitivity analysis.  Appendix B B-24 March 2016  1  then varied individually up and down 50% (Table B-5) to determine the effect on that average DGF  2  estimate (Figure B-2).  Based on this analysis, results seem most sensitive to pHOS, but are reasonably  3  sensitive to RRS and overlap values.  Although this sensitivity analysis is informative, additional  4  sensitivity analysis needs to be done to improve the level of certainty of the DGF estimates.  First,  although basing the analysis on average values makes sense in several ways, it should be done on a  6  population specific basis as well, as the situation for a particular population may deviate considerably  7  from average.  Second, multiple parameters should be varied simultaneously.  We realize that varying  8  combinations of parameters presents a huge number of options, but this can be limited by focusing on  9  those subject to greatest uncertainty or variability.  Third, variation should be done on a biologically  realistic basis rather than using an arbitrary scale such as 150% and 50%, because some variables are  11  more subject to variability/uncertainty than others.  Biological reality may require the dissection of the  12  input parameters into components and investigating their individual variability/uncertainty.  An excellent  13  example is pHOS, which is obviously a function of the estimated number of hatchery-origin and natural 14  origin fish on the spawning grounds.  The former is assumed to be a constant proportion of the  escapement, calculated from the known number returning to the hatchery, and the latter is based on redd  16  counts and assumptions about the proportion of the run that spawns before redd surveys begin, itself an  17  input parameter to the Scott-Gill equation.  Given this, it is unclear that sensitivity analysis based on  18  varying pHOS up and down 50% adequately captures all the uncertainty/variability in pHOS.  Possibly  19  the major source of imprecision and bias is in the redd counts, which are well known to be potentially  subject to error. Another obvious candidate for closer scrutiny for biological reality is overlap.  21  The Seamons et al. (2012) study of performance of EWS at Forks Creek, a small tributary of the Willapa  22  River on the Washington coast, is frequently cited in discussions of risk from naturally spawning EWS,  23  particularly the failure of assumptions about spawning overlap and resulting high proportion of HxN  24  progeny.  Given the high visibility for this work, and the obvious potential for applying the conclusions to  Puget Sound EWS programs, we consider it important to discuss in detail the potential applications of this  26  research to Puget Sound EWS programs.  NMFS requested that WDFW provide supplementary  27  information dealing with this issue (Tynan 2015), and the following discussion is based on WDFW’s  28  response (WDFW 2015b), which should be consulted for additional detail.  In evaluating the Forks Creek  29  study, there are two primary issues: spawning overlap of natural-origin and hatchery-origin fish, and the  presence of HxN hybrids resulting from that overlap.  In the Seamons et al. (2012) study, the median day  31  of arrival for hatchery-origin adults was early to middle January, and the median day of arrival for  32  natural-origin (unmarked) adults assigned by Seamons et al. (2012) to the wild category was middle to  33  late April. There was no overlap between the hatchery and wild distribution quartiles, and very little  1  overlap between the 95% CIs (Seamons et al. 2012, Fig. 5).  Thus, the spawning overlap in Forks Creek  2  does not appear to be different from the values used in the Scott-Gill modelling (Hoffmann 2015a;  3  Hoffmann 2015b). Because there is no evidence for more spawning, the question is -why does the Forks  4  Creek research indicate a considerably larger number of hatchery-wild hybrids than are detected by  5  Warheit in several basins? The most likely explanations are higher pHOS and higher spawner overlap  6  than would be expected in Puget Sound.  Unpublished work in WDFW (2015) indicates that pHOS in  7  Forks Creek is 15%, far higher than in most of the streams in the Proposed Action (Table B-5), so more  8  hybrids would be expected than in lower pHOS systems.  The spawner overlap argument is based on size  9  of the system and hatchery location. Hatchery fish were therefore likely to be attracted back to Forks  10  Creek, increasing the spatial overlap of spawning. Thus, the degree of hybridization seen in Forks Creek  11  may be more similar to small river systems with similar characteristics, systems which are quite different  12  in size and hatchery location from the three dealt with in the Proposed Action.  A final possibility is an  13  upward bias in assignment of fish to the hybrid category.  14  This discussion of the Seamons et al. (2012) is in no way intended to weaken the argument for empirical  15  verification of key biological parameters used in the Scott-Gill modelling.  In fact, by emphasizing the  16  importance of considering program-specific factors, it strengthens the argument.   17  Table B-5.  Input parameter values used in sensitivity analysis of Scott-Gill method applied to Puget  18  Sound steelhead populations (from Table 11 in Hoffmann (2014)).  19  Input parameter  Average value over watersheds and cases  Parameter value at a 50% increase  Parameter value at a 50% decrease  O(N)  3.63%  5.44%  1.81%  O(H)  12.19%  18.29%  6.10%  K1  0.07  0.11  0.04  K2  0.54  0.81  0.27  On Station pHOS  5.05%  7.58%  2.53%  1  Figure B-4. Gene flow values when varying each Scott-Gill parameter in isolation by a 50% increase and  2  a 50% decrease over the input value averaged over all watersheds and all cases (from Figure 11 in  3  Hoffmann 2014).  4  5  2.5. Summary of Results from Both Methods  6  Table B-6 presents PEHC values from recent past practices (e.g., past 5-10 years) and as projected from  7  the proposed programs, and DGF values together for easy comparison. In earlier sections we have  8  discussed at some length the need for additional development of the Warheit method (which is ongoing)  9  and associated sampling plans, and the need for a considerably more thorough sensitivity analysis, along  10  with validation through monitoring, of the input parameters used in the Scott-Gill method.  The space  11  devoted to detailing those issues should not overshadow the fact that for these five proposed programs,  12  two credible and independent approaches indicate that gene flow, measured either as projected PEHC or  13  projected DGF should be under 2% in populations affected by the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, and  14  Dungeness programs and likely under 2% in populations affected by the two Snohomish programs. And  15  although we have concerns about the precision of the genetically based results, and concerns about both  16  precision  1  Table B-6. Summary of analyses of gene flow from early winter hatchery steelhead into listed Nooksack,  2  Stillaguamish, Dungeness, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie steelhead populations. (Data from  3  Table B-2 and Table B-4). DGF values are means, with maxima in parentheses. All values are expressed  4  as percentages.  5  Basin  Listed Population  PEHC (%)  DGF (%)  Past Practices (90% CI)  Projected  Past Practices  Projected  Nooksack  Nooksack (W)  1 (0-4)  1  0.37 (1.46)  0.46 (0.84)  SF Nooksack (S)  0 (0-7)  0  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish (W)  0 (0-7)  0  0.61 (3.07)  0.54 (0.92)  Deer Cr. (S)  0 (0-3)  0  Canyon Cr. (S)  0 (0-5)  0  Dungeness  Dungeness (S/W)  - NA  0.27 (0.82)  0.36 (0.59)  Snohomish/ Skykomish  Pilchuck (W)  2 (0 -16)  0  1.21 (4.62)  1.58 (2.73)  Skykomish (W)  0 (0 -20)  0  N.F. Skykomish (S)  1 (1 -3)  1  Snoqualmie  Snoqualmie (W)  4 (0 -12)  1  3.98 (14.91)  1.28 (2.34)  Tolt (S)  1 (0 -3)  0  6  7  and bias of the demographically based results, we conclude that there would have to have been  8  unreasonably large errors in methods or parameter estimation to have achieved these results if the gene  9  flow was actually larger than the PEHC and DGF estimates. On the basis of this determination, NMFS  10  concludes that the proposed programs as revised do not pose significant risk through gene flow to Puget  11  Sound steelhead, subject to future validation of gene flow values through monitoring and refinement of  12  gene flow estimation methodology.  13  2.6. Early Summer Steelhead Hatchery Programs  14  Steelhead populations in the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie Basins  15  are also potentially subject to gene flow from early summer steelhead (ESS) hatchery programs, and  16  PEHC estimates are available for these impacts.  Table B-7 presents PEHC estimates from both summer  17  and winter programs for listed steelhead populations in these basins. The Nooksack populations were  18  included just for the sake of completeness; no summer steelhead are released in the Nooksack Basin, so  19  no gene flow is expected.  There is an ESS program in the Stillaguamish, and in that basin the estimates  Appendix B  B-28  March 2016  1  are 0% for both summer steelhead populations, but 18% for the winter steelhead population.  However the  2  estimate is based on Table B-7 because it is based on the same sample of smolts discussed in Section  3  2.3.2.  Because of the age of the sample and its mixed composition, we have little confidence that it  4  reflects current gene flow from ESS hatchery fish. However, whatever the past gene flow levels have  5  been, current gene flow levels are likely to be considerably reduced due to the complete cessation of  6  tributary-level outplants of steelhead throughout Puget Sound.  7  The remaining PEHC estimates all pertain to the populations in the Snohomish Basin, which can be  8  influenced by the in-basin Wallace/Reiter ESS program.  During the ESA consultation, a decision was  9  made to downsize the program (Unsworth 2016).  This and the previously mentioned discontinuation of  10  all tributary-level outplants, are expected to substantially reduce this program’s impacts on the Snohomish  11  steelhead populations, and this is reflected in the projected PEHC values in the table.   The most dramatic  12  reduction is in the Tolt summer steelhead population, where WDFW expects PEHC to be reduced from  13  68% to 0%. It should be noted, however, that for both Snohomish Basin summer steelhead populations  14  with high PEHC estimates, Tolt and North Fork Skykomish, the reported values may not truly reflect  15  gene flow, but rather the fact that these two populations have been influenced by past summer steelhead  16  releases, to the point where (Warheit 2014a) considers them “feral” natural-origin populations of ESS.   17  Although accurate estimates of gene flow may be impossible at this time, and perhaps for some time into  18  the future, the program reduction and other programming changes should substantially decrease gene flow  19  over what it has been in the past.  20  For those populations in Table B-7 with reasonable estimated and projected PEHC, gene flow from ESS  21  programs appears to be about the same or less than that from the proposed EWS programs.  1 Table B-7.  PEHC estimates based on recent past practices and projected PEHC estimates for EWS and 2 ESS hatchery programs in the Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish/Snohomish, and Snoqualmie 3 steelhead populations (Unsworth 2016; Warheit 2014a; WDFW 2015a). Basin  Listed Population  EWS  ESS  Recent Past Practices PEHC and 90% CI  Projected PEHC  Recent Past Practices PEHC and 90% CI  Projected PEHC  Nooksack  Nooksack (W)  1(0-4)  1  0 (0-2)  NA  SF Nooksack (S)  0(0-7)  0  0 (0-7)  NA  Stillaguamish  Stillaguamish (W)  0 (0-7)  0  18 (13-25)  NA  Deer Cr. (S)  0 (0-3)  0  0 (0-5)  NA  Canyon Cr. (S)  0 (0-5)  0  0 (0-5)  NA  Skykomish/ Snohomish  Skykomish (W)  0 (0-20)  0  5 (0-31)  2  Pilchuck (W)  2 (0-16)  0  2 (0-14)  0  N.F. Skykomish (S)  1 (1-3)  1  95 (88-99)  NA  Snoqualmie  Snoqualmie (W)  4 (0-12)  1  3 (1-10)  0  Tolt (S)  1 (0-3)  0  68 (55-79)  0  Literature Cited Anderson, J., K. I. Warheit, and B. Missildine. 2014. Genetic monitoring of hatchery-wild introgressive hybridization in Puget Sound steelhead. December 2, 2014. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, Washington. 12p. Araki, H., W. R. Ardren, E. Olsen, B. Cooper, and M. S. Blouin. 2007. Reproductive success of captive-bred steelhead trout in the wild: Evaluation of three hatchery programs in the Hood River. Conservation Biology 21(1):181-190. Araki, H., B. A. Berejikian, M. J. Ford, and M. S. Blouin. 2008. Fitness of hatchery-reared salmonids in the wild. Evolutionary Applications 1:342-355. Baskett, M. L., and R. S. Waples. 2013. Evaluating alternative strategies for minimizing unintended fitness consequences of cultured individuals on wild populations. Conservation Biology 27(1):83-94. Busack, C. 2014. Error in Scott-Gill equation for gene flow. Unpublished report. November 3, 2014. National Marine Fisheries Service, Portland, Oregon. 2p. Chilcote, M. W., S. A. Leider, and J. J. Loch. 1986. Differential reproductive success of hatchery and wild summer steelhead under natural conditions. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 115:726-735. Crawford, B. A. 1979. The origin and history of the trout brood stocks of the Washington Department of Game. Washington Department of Game, Olympia, Washington. 76p. Ford, M. 2015. Memorandum to Craig Busack. Review of updated Warheit steelhead report. January 9, 2015. NMFS Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, Washington. 5p. Ford, M. J. 2002. Selection in captivity during supportive breeding may reduce fitness in the wild. Conservation Biology 16(3):815-825. Grant, W. S. 1997. Genetic effects of straying of non-native hatchery fish into natural populations: Proceedings of the workshop. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFSNWFSC-30. 130p. Hard, J. 2014. Review of "Summary of hatchery-wild introgressive hybridization for northern Puget Sound steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) populations affected by segregated hatchery programs". April 16, 2014. Unpublished Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Memorandum by Kenneth I. Warheit to Tim Tynan and Rob Jones dated March 2014. NMFS Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, Washington. Hard, J. J., and coauthors. 2007. Status review of Puget Sound steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss). U.S. Dept. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-NWFSC-81. 137p. Hausch, S. J., and M. C. Melnychuk. 2012. Residualization of hatchery steelhead: A meta-analysis of hatchery practices. North American Journal of Fisheries  Management 32(5):905-921. Hoffmann, A. 2014. Estimates of Gene Flow for Puget Sound Hatchery Steelhead Programs. Unpublished report. October 10, 2014. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Mill Creek, Washington. 22p. Hoffmann, A. 2015a. Beata Dungeness Gene Flow 6-24-14.xlsx. WDFW, Mill Creek, Washington. Hoffmann, A. 2015b. DRAFT Hoffmann 2014 Gene Flow 11-22-14.xlsx. WDFW, Mill Creek, Washington. HSRG. 2004. Hatchery reform: Principles and Recommendations of the Hatchery Scientific Review Group. April 2004. 329p. HSRG. 2009. Columbia River Hatchery Reform Project Systemwide Report.  Appendix A. White Paper No. 1. Predicted Fitness Effects of Interbreeding between Hatchery and Natural Populations of Pacific Salmon and Steelhead. 38p. HSRG. 2014. On the Science of Hatcheries: An Updated Perspective on the Role of Hatcheries in Salmon and Steelhead Management in the Pacific Northwest. June 2014. 160p. Jones Jr., R. P. 2014. Letter of sufficiency of five updated HGMPs for early winter steelhead programs to Phil Anderson (WDFW) and Lorraine Loomis (NWIFC). NMFS Sustainable Fisheries Division, Portland, Oregon. November 12, 2014. 14p. Knapp, S.,M. and K.I. Warheit. 2016. A description of the second generation method to adjust STRUCTURE assignment proportions for estimating reproductive interaction between hatchery-origin and wild steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) from norther Puget Sound populations-an addendum to Warheit (2014). Unpublished report. February 18, 2016. University of Arizona and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, 10p. McElhany, P., M. H. Rucklelshaus, M. J. Ford, T. C. Wainwright, and E. P. Bjorkstedt. 2000. Viable Salmonid Populations and the Recovery of Evolutionarily Significant Units. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo, NMFS-NWFSC-42. 174p. McMillan, J. R., M. McHenry, and G. Pess. 2010. An Assessment of Risks for Non-Native Hatchery Steelhead in the Elwha River Project. Prepared for the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe. Elwha River Fisheries Restoration Team. Northwest Fisheries Science Center. Seattle, Washington. Myers, J. M., and coauthors. 2015. Identifying Historical Populations of Steelhead within the Puget Sound Distinct Population Segment. U.S. Dept. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-NWFSC-128. 175p. NMFS. 2003. Hatchery Broodstock Summaries and Assessments for chum, coho, and Chinook salmon and steelhead stocks within Evolutionarily Significant Units listed under the Endangered Species Act. Salmon Steelhead Hatchery Assessment Group. National Marine Fisheries Service, Northwest Fisheries Science Center. Seattle, Washington. 326p. Pritchard, J. K., M. Stephens, and P. Donnelly. 2000. Inference of population structure using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 155:945-959. Pritchard, J. K., X. Wen, and D. Falush. 2010. Documentation for structure software: Version 2.3. RIST. 2009. Hatchery Reform Science. A review of some applications of science to hatchery reform issues. April 9, 2009. National Marine Fisheries Service, Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, Washington. 93p. Ryman, N., P. E. Jorde, and L. Laikre. 1995. Supportive breeding and variance effective population size. Conservation Biology 9(6):1619-1628. Schmidt, S. P., and E. W. House. 1979. Precocious sexual development in hatchery-reared and laboratory maintained steelhead trout (Salmo gairdneri). Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 36:90-93. Scott, J. B., and W. T. Gill, editors. 2008. Oncorhynchus mykiss: Assessment of Washington State's Steelhead Populations and Programs. Preliminary draft for Washington Fish & Wildlife Commission. February 1, 2008. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, Washington. 424p. Seamons, T. R., P. Bentzen, and T. P. Quinn. 2004. The mating system of steelhead, Oncorhynchus mykiss, inferred by molecular analysis of parents and progeny. Environmental Biology of Fishes 69:333344. Seamons, T. R., L. Hauser, K. A. Naish, and T. P. Quinn. 2012. Can interbreeding of wild and artificially propagated animals be prevented by using broodstock selected for a divergent life history? Evolutionary Applications 5(7):705-719. Tipping, J. M., A. L. Gannam, T. D. Hilson, and J. B. Poole. 2003. Use of size for early detection of juvenile hatchery steelhead destined to become precocious males. North American Journal of Aquaculture 65:318-322. Tynan, T., (NMFS). 2015. Email to Jim Scott (WDFW). Request for clarification from WDFW regarding proposed EWS hatchery actions and analyses. May 14, 2015. 2p. Unsworth, J. W. 2016. Modifications to steelhead hatchery programs.  Letter to Robert Turner (NMFS). January 19, 2016. Olympia, Washington. Warheit, K. 2016a. Assigning samples from Stillaguamish steelhead collection "2006 Smot Trap" to winter or summer populations.  WDFW unpublished report. Olympia, Washington. January 7, 2016. Warheit, K. 2016b. Revisions to method. Warheit, K. I. 2013. Introgressive hybridization. Pages 88-119 in D. Pflug, editor. Ecological, genetic and productivity consequences of interactions between hatchery and natural-origin steelhead of the Skagit watershed.  Report to Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Program (NOAA). Warheit, K. I. 2014a. Measuring reproductive interaction between hatchery-origin and wild steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) from northern Puget Sound populations potentially affected by segregated hatchery programs. Unpublished final report. October 10, 2014. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, Washington. 92p. Warheit, K. I. 2014b. Response to comments by Northwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA, dated April 16, 2014. Washington Department of Fish and Willdife, Olympia, Washington. Warheit, K. I. 2014c. Summary of hatchery-wild introgressive hybridization for northern Puget Sound steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) populations affected by segregated hatchery programs. March 2014. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, Washington. WDFW. 2008. Statewide steelhead management plan: Statewide policies, strategies, and actions. Olympia, Washington. WDFW. 2014a. Dungeness River Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program (Segregated) HGMP. Early Winter Steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss). July 28, 2014. 69p. WDFW. 2014b. Kendall Creek Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program (Segregated) HGMP. Winter Steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) Early Winter Stock. July 28, 2014. 64p. WDFW. 2014c. Snohomish/Skykomish River Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program HGMP. Steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) Early Winter Stock. November 25, 2014. 69p. WDFW. 2014d. Tokul Creek Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program (Segregated) HGMP.  Winter Steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) Early Winter Stock. November 24, 2014. 66p. WDFW. 2014e. Whitehorse Ponds (Stillaguamish River) Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program (Segregated) HGMP. Winter Steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) Early Winter Stock. July 28, 2014. 65p. WDFW. 2015a. Comments on Draft Environmental Impact Statement to Analyze Impacts of NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed 4(d) Determination under Limit 6 for Five Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound. Olympia, Washington. December 28, 2015. WDFW. 2015b. Response to NOAA's request for clarification. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia, Washington. May 14, 2015. 4p. WDFW, 2016. Wallace/Reter Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Program (segregated) HGMP. Steelhead (Oncohynchus mykiss) Early Winter Stock. February 16, 2016. 64p. 1 Appendix C 2 3 Socioeconomics Methods 4 6 7 8 9 11 12 13 14 16 17 Prepared by TCW Economics 18 19 21 22 23 24 26 27 28 29 31 October 2015 This Socioeconomics Methods appendix describes the methods and data used to describe baseline conditions in Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics, and to conduct the analysis of effects on the socioeconomic resource as described in Subsection 4.5, Socioeconomics, of the Puget Sound early winter steelhead (EWS) draft environmental impact statement (DEIS). The analysis of socioeconomic impacts is based on baseline catch conditions associated with five EWS programs that use eight hatchery facilities located in five Puget Sound river basins (Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie River basins) (Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics). Note the Skykomish River and Snoqualmie River are major tributaries in the Snohomish River basin. The socioeconomic effects of changes in hatchery operations and in affected recreational fisheries are estimated for each alternative analyzed in the DEIS. Effects of changes in production under the alternatives on tribal commercial and ceremonial and subsistence also are considered qualitatively in Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics, and Subsection 4.5, Socioeconomics, of the DEIS. Impact Assessment Methods Estimates of regional economic impacts derived from assessing hatchery production costs and expected fishing effort associated with EWS caught in recreational fisheries are expressed primarily in terms of personal income accruing to households within local areas (county or multi-county regions).  Local personal income is considered a key indicator of economic activity, and is used in economic analysis to evaluate distributional effects on local and regional economies associated with hatchery production. Estimates of local personal income, which the Pacific Fishery Management Council also derives to annually assess the economic effects for its salmon allocation decisions, reflect the wages, profits, and property income associated with expenditures made by sport anglers (and commercial fishers) in their fishing pursuits.  For this analysis, the only effects on fisheries that are quantified are those occurring in freshwater recreational fisheries, which are understood to represent the most substantial fisheries affected by the EWS hatchery programs.  In addition to the personal income generated by angler participation in recreational fisheries affected by EWS hatchery production, EWS hatchery facilities operating in the Puget Sound region also affect local and regional economies by providing employment opportunities for those working at the eight hatchery facilities where EWS are produced, and through the procurement of materials and services needed for operation of the hatchery facilities.  The following four analytical steps were followed to conduct the analysis of socioeconomic effects of the five EWS programs that are the subject of this assessment. 1  2  Step 1: Compile Hatchery Production and Catch Data for the EWS Hatchery Programs  3  Hatchery production information for the five EWS hatchery programs was used to generate statistics on  4  the relative contribution of each of the five programs to the total EWS production and estimated adult  5  returns throughout the Puget Sound region.  This production information is included in Table C-1. Sport  6  catch data (in numbers of fish caught) for EWS reported by the Washington Department of Fish and  7  Wildlife (WDFW) in its annual Sport Catch Report were compiled (Table C-2) and used to estimate a  8  recent 10-year average catch by river basin.  9  10  Table C-1. Summary of EWS releases by river basin, under the DEIS alternatives.  11  River Basin (County)  Hatchery Facilities  Smolt Release by Alternative  1 No Action  2 Proposed Action  3 50 percent Reduction  4 Native Broodstock  Dungeness  Dungeness (Clallam)  River Hatchery Hurd Creek Hatchery  0  10,000  5,000  10,000  Kendall Creek  NF Nooksack (Whatcom)  Hatchery McKinnon Pond  0  150,000  75,000  150,000  NF  Whitehorse  130,000  65,000  130,000  Stillaguamish (Snohomish)  Ponds  0  Wallace  Skykomish (Snohomish)  Hatchery Reiter Ponds  0  256,000  128,000  256,000  Snoqualmie (King)  Tokul Creek Hatchery  0  74,000  37,000  74,000  Total  8  0  620,000  315,000  620,000  12  13  14  Step 2: Convert Estimates of Baseline Catch to Sport Angler Trips  15  The catch data compiled in Step 1 required conversion to angler trips so that the hatchery production of  16  adult steelhead would match the regional economic impact (REI) factors (REI per angler trip) used to  17  estimate total personal income. As mentioned above, quantitative estimates of economic values were only  derived for sport fisheries because the most substantial effect of the EWS hatchery program are understood to be on recreational fisheries. (The relatively limited effect on tribal commercial fisheries was addressed qualitatively in the impact assessment, primarily due to tribal catch data limitations.)  For recreational fisheries, estimated catch was converted to angler trips, considering the influence of catchand-release fishing as part of angler effort.  Then, the REI factors were applied to the estimates of angler effort to calculate personal income effects of total angler effort associated with affected fisheries.  (Note that these estimates of REI include the effect on angler effort from both wild and hatchery fish.). The primary sources of information used for deriving the catch per unit of effort (CPUE) factors for steelhead fishing in the freshwaters of Puget Sound included: 1) state-wide estimates of steelhead sport fishing effort (2,706,340 freshwater steelhead trips, as derived from angler days reported by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Department of Census Bureau, 2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation (personal communication from James Dixon to TCW Economics, September 21, 2015) and 2) estimates of total sport catch of steelhead in statewide freshwaters (152,285 fish, as reported in the WDFW’s Catch Record Report for the 2011-12 winter season. The resulting conversion factor of 17.77 trips per steelhead caught, which is generally consistent with findings by Scott and Gill (2008), was then applied to the 10-year average of winter-run steelhead sport catch (4,412 fish caught; Table C-2) in the affected EWS rivers in the Puget Sound region to estimate the baseline number of sport angler trips (78,400 trips). 1 Table C-2. Sport harvest estimates of early winter steelhead by Puget Sound river basin. 2 River Basin1  Harvest Year (winter of)  2004-05  2005-06  2006-07  2007-08  2008-09  2009-10  2010-11  2011-12  2012-13  2013-14  10-year Average  Dungeness  24  32  38  21  7  19  26  57  93  100  42  Nooksack  447  238  216  69  49  56  106  59  83  104  143  Stillaguamish  733  625  852  521  116  108  105  282  430  266  404  Skykomish  3600  2045  2595  2453  1019  1114  1563  2439  2106  1604  22262  Snoqualmie  3257  1443  1476  1206  800  900  877  1806  1643  985  15972  Total  4412  3  Sources: WDFW final Sport Catch Reports for 2004-05 through 2011-12 (http://wdfw.wa.gov/fishing/harvest/); Preliminary estimates for 2012-13 and 2013-14  4  from WDFW data (J. Dixon, Pers. Comm. with Eric Kraig, WDFW).  5  1 River-basin level harvest estimates include estimated harvest in both the mainstem and tributaries of each river.  6  2 Average totals for the Skykomish and Snoqualmie River basins include the reported catch from the lower mainstem Snohomish River (10-year average of 330),  7  proportionally divided and added to each of the Skykomish and Snoqualmie 10-year averages (52 percent to 48 percent, respectively), based on the baseline  8  hatchery program release sizes in each of the river basins.  9  10  Appendix C C-4 March 2016November 2015 Step 3: Estimate Regional Economic Impacts (Total Personal Income) of EWS Hatchery Production under Baseline Conditions Estimates of regional economic impacts, as measured in terms of total personal income, were developed based on consideration of both hatchery operations, and of the effect on recreational fisheries that are supported by the five EWS hatchery programs.  For estimating REI of hatchery operations, estimates of annual operating costs and employment for the eight hatchery facilities involved in producing EWS were compiled from information in the HGMPs (WDFW 2014a, WDFW 2014b, WDFW 2014c, WDFW 2014d, WDFW 2014e).  (It should be noted that these hatcheries produce species other than EWS so the estimates of annual operating costs [$2.02 million] and employment [19.34 full-time equivalent positions] reflect total hatchery operations, not just for EWS. It was assumed that the EWS programs account for an estimated average of 28 percent of the total annual operating costs of the eight hatchery facilities, or about $561,300, based on the total production at EWS hatchery facilities that is comprised of steelhead (in pounds) (DEIS Table 4). The estimates of operating costs and jobs were then converted to estimates of total personal income based on factors derived from State of Washington hatchery budget information used in a study for Trout Unlimited of the economic contribution of salmonids to the Southeast Alaska economy (TCW Economics 2011). According to this study, wages and other forms of personal income accounted for 57 percent of total operating costs, and procurement of materials and services required for production accounted for 43 percent of total operating costs.  Based on these factors, direct income (i.e., wages and other forms of compensation) generated by the eight hatchery facilities that produce EWS is estimated at $1,114,975.  (Note that the percentages used for this analysis were adjusted to 55 percent for wages and other compensation, and 45 percent for procurement.) Of this total, it is estimated that $312,190 (28%) is related to EWS production. Based on a feasibility study of hatchery improvements at the Leavenworth Hatchery Complex in eastern Washington (McMillan 2015), secondary income effects (i.e., wages generated by the spending of hatchery workers’ income and from procurement of materials and services) accounted for 59 percent of the direct income effects, which represents $657,835 ($1,114,975 * 0.59) of direct income associated with production of all species at the eight hatchery facilities.  Total income generated by production at the eight hatchery facilities where EWS are produced is therefore estimated at $1,772,810 ($1,114,975 + $657,835). Based on an estimated 28 percent share of hatchery operation costs associated with EWS production, the regional economic effect, as measured in personal income, associated with production of EWS-only would be about $496,400 ($1,772,810 * 0.28). For analyzing the regional economic effects of the recreational fisheries supported by EWS production at the eight hatchery facilities, an REI factor of $67.30 per trip for steelhead fishing in freshwaters of Puget Sound was applied to the estimated number of angler trips (78,400 trips) under baseline conditions to estimate regional economic impacts (direct and secondary personal income) of the EWS hatchery programs. This REI factor ($67.30 per trip) reflects the estimated regional economic impact per angler trip, as expressed in 2015 dollars and derived for a preliminary socioeconomic study (The Research Group 2009) prepared for the DEIS on the Columbia River Basin Hatchery Operations and Funding of Mitchell Act Hatchery Programs. The REI factor, originally developed in 2007 dollars, was adjusted to 2015 dollars using the state-wide consumer price index for all goods and services.  Applying this REI factor to the estimate of baseline number of trips (78,400 trips) resulted in an estimate of about $5.28 million in regional income effects. Under baseline conditions, total regional income effects from both hatchery operations (including production of all species at EWS hatchery facilities) and from affected EWS recreational fisheries in Puget Sound are estimated at $7.05 million annually. When hatchery production costs of EWS-only are considered, the total personal income effects are estimated at $5.77 million annually. Step 4: Analyze Effects of Changes in Hatchery Production under the Alternatives on Recreational Fishing Effort and Regional Economic Conditions For the alternatives analysis in Subsection 4.5, Socioeconomics, the baseline conditions described above were used to characterize the expected regional economic effects and associated effects on fisheries under Alternative 2 (Proposed Action) (Subsection 4.5.2, Proposed Action). The effects of implementing Alternative 1 (No Action) would be to eliminate the marginal economic benefits of the contribution of EWS hatchery production to angler trips and associated regional economic effects described under Alternative 2 (Proposed Action).  The baseline conditions described in Subsection 3.5, Socioeconomics, and explained above also would reflect the socioeconomic effects of implementing Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock) because there would be no change in hatchery production under Alternative 4.  Note that there could be some additional production costs associated with the transitioning to native broodstock but the potential socioeconomic effect of this would be expected to be minimal. For analyzing the socioeconomic effects of Alternative 3 (50 percent reduction), the number of steelhead angler trips compared to baseline conditions would be expected to decline.  A number of factors were considered to assess the magnitude of this reduction in angler effort, including the relative contribution of EWS hatchery fish to the overall number of catchable adult steelhead fish; angler perceptions of how a potential reduction in the abundance of adult steelhead populations would affect fishing quality; and how the steelhead fisheries on the affected rivers are managed. Although these and other issues related to potential effects on angler effort from changes in (hatchery) fish abundance are very specific to the affected EWS rivers, the relevant literature does suggest some key conclusions concerning how angler effort could generally be expected to respond to a 50 percent reduction in the number of adults from EWS hatchery programs in the affected Puget Sound rivers.  Based on a review of relevant literature (e.g., Allen and Ahrens 2012; Andrews and Wilen 1988; Hooton 1985; Johnson and Carpenter 1994; Johnson and Adams 1988; Johnson and Adams 1989; Johnston, et al. 2006; Larson and Lew 2013; and Murdock, J. 2001), a key conclusion that can reasonably be drawn is that the relationship between the number of trips taken and the abundance of adult catchable fish is ‘inelastic’, a term indicating that, in most situations ofchanges (increases or declines)in the abundance of adult catchable steelhead over time, the percentage change in the number of angler trips would be expected to change by less than that of abundance. In other words, as abundance goes down, the number of angler trips also would be expected to decline but at a more reduced rate of change. Because of the many site-specific factors that affect this behavioral response, primary research, such as conducting surveys of steelhead anglers on the affected rivers, is the only potentially statistically-valid method to estimate this response.  Conducting angler surveys to estimate angler response to an expected 50 percent reduction in the releases of fish from EWS hatchery programs is beyond the scope of this assessment; however, based on a review of the relevant literature and on expert judgment, a reasonable estimate is that angler effort could be expected to decrease at a rate that is about 50 percent of the rate of change in numbers of EWS hatchery fish.  Assuming this response, the estimated number of angler trips could be expected to decline by about 19,600 trips (78,400*0.5*0.5).  Based on a REI factor of $67.30 per trip, this would result in a personal income reduction of an estimated $1.32 million annually, or 25 percent of the contribution under the baseline condition. 1  In addition to the regional economic effects related to affected recreational fisheries, a 50 percent  2  reduction in the production from EWS hatchery programs also would affect personal income supported by  3  hatchery operations.  Consistent with information described by NMFS (2014), a 50 percent reduction in  4  hatchery production of EWS would not be expected to affect the number of FTE positions at the eight  hatchery facilities because these facilities also produce other fish for other hatchery programs (e.g.,  6  salmon).  However, there would be a reduction in the procurement of materials and services needed.  This  7  reduction in procurement would be expected to correspond with the reduction in production of EWS fish,  8  which would translate to an estimated $65,100 in reduced procurement for materials and services related  9  to EWS hatchery programs, relative to baseline conditions.   References Cited:  11  Allen, M.S. and R. N. M. Ahrens. 2012. Dynamic angling effort influences the value of minimum-length  12  limits to prevent recruitment overfishing. Fisheries Management and Ecology. 2012.  13  Andrews, E. and J. Wilen . 1988. Angler Response to Success in the California Salmon Sportfishery:  14  Evidence and Management Implications.  Marine Resource Economics. 5(2): 125-138.  Hooton, R.S.  1985. A Questionnaire survey of Vancouver Island steelhead anglers’ opinions and  16  preferences on management issues.  Ministry of Environment, British Columbia. Fisheries  17  Management Report No. 84. 1985.   18  Johnson, B.M. and S.R. Carpenter. 1994. Functional and numerical responses: A framework for fish 19  angler interactions? Ecological Applications.  Johnson, N.S. and R.M. Adams R.M. 1988.  Case of the John Day River steelhead fishery. Water  21  Resources Research, Volume 24, No.11, Pages 1839-1846, November 1988.  22  Johnson, N.S., and R.M. Adams. 1989. On the marginal value of a fish: Some evidence from the  23  steelhead fishery. Marine Resource Economics 6(1): 43-55.  24  Johnston, R. J., M. H. Ranson, E. Y. Besedin, and E.C. Helm. 2006. What determines willingness to pay  per fish? A Meta-Analysis of Recreational Fishing Values. National Marine Fisheries Service.  26  Water Resources Economics, Vol. 21, pp. 1-32. 2006  27  Larson, D. M. and D.K. Lew. 2013. How do harvest rates affect angler trip patterns? Marine Resource  28  Economics. 28(2):155-173. June 2013  29  McMillan 2015. Leavenworth fisheries complex alternatives analysis.  Prepared for the U.S. Fish and  Wildlife Service. Draft Report.  January 2015.  1  Murdock, J. 2001. Valuing recreational fishing opportunities while catching un-observed characteristics.  2  Unpublished Research Report, Yale University, New Haven.  3  National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2014. Draft environmental impact statement on two joint  4  state and tribal resource management plans for Puget Sound salmon and steelhead hatchery  programs. National Marine Fisheries Service, West Coast Region, Sustainable Fisheries Division.  6  Lacey, Washington. Appendix I, Socioeconomic Impact Methods.  7  Scott, J.B. and W.T. Gill. 2008. Assessment of Washington State's steelhead populations and programs.   8  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, Washington. February 2008.  9  TCW Economics 2012. Economic contributions and impacts of salmonid resources in Southeast Alaska.  Final Report. Prepared for Trout Unlimited Alaska Program.  January 2011.  11  The Research Group. 2009. Preliminary 2.1 economic and social analysis sections prepared for the  12  Mitchell Act EIS. Prepared for NOAA Fisheries, Northwest Regional Office Salmon Recovery  13  Division. Corvallis, OR. January 2009.  14  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). 2014a. Dungeness River early winter steelhead  hatchery program.  Hatchery and genetic management plan. July 28, 2014. Fish Program.   16  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia, Washington. 69 pages.  17  WDFW. 2014b. Kendall Creek winter steelhead hatchery program.  Hatchery and genetic management  18  plan.  July 28, 2014.  Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia,  19  Washington. 64 pages.  WDFW. 2014c. Whitehorse Ponds (Stillaguamish River) winter steelhead hatchery program.  Hatchery  21  and genetic management plan. July 28, 2014.  Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish  22  and Wildlife.  Olympia, Washington. 65 pages.  23  WDFW 2014d. Snohomish/Skykomish winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic  24  management plan. November 25, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and  Wildlife. Olympia, Washington. 65 pages.  26  WDFW 2014e. Tokul Creek winter steelhead hatchery program. Hatchery and genetic management plan.  27  November 24, 2014. Fish Program.  Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Olympia,  28  Washington. 64 pages.  29  1 2 3 4 Page Intentionally Left Blank 1 Appendix D 2 Public Comment Analysis Summary 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 March 2016 11 12 13 14 Table of Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................D-1 2.0 SUMMARY OF PUBLIC COMMENT PROCESS...................................................................D-1 3.0 SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS.................................................................................................D-2 4.0 RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS....................................................................................D-3 4.1 Analysis of Public Comments ..................................................................................................D-3 4.2 Global Responses to Public Comments....................................................................................D-4 1. Comments Addressing Alternatives Analyzed ..................................................................D-4 1a. Comments stating a preference and/or ideas for the EIS Preferred Alternative ..........D-4 1b. Comments seeking more information on native broodstock programs (Alternative 4 – Native Broodstock)......................................................................................................D-5 2. Comments Addressing NEPA and the EIS Process ...........................................................D-8 2a. Comments asking that the EIS process be expedited ..................................................D-8 2b. Comments asking for additional analyses ...................................................................D-9 2c. Comments asking that comments submitted on previous documents be incorporated  by reference .................................................................................................................D-9 3. Comments Addressing the Range of Alternatives Analyzed .............................................D-9 3a. The EIS should include an alternative that increases production levels and is more supportive of harvest than the existing alternatives.....................................................D-9 4. Comments Addressing the Analysis within the EIS ........................................................D-10 4a. Comments on genetic analyses..................................................................................D-10 4b. Comments on extent of spawner overlap interactions between early winter steelhead and natural-origin steelhead.......................................................................................D-14 4c. Comments on lack of steelhead recovery plan ..........................................................D-18 4d. Comments on role of habitat for steelhead ................................................................D-19 Page Intentionally Left Blank 1 1.0 Introduction 2 This appendix provides a summary of public comments and responses to those comments received on the 3 draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) (80 Fed. Reg. 70206, November 13, 2015). It presents the 4 methodology used by NMFS in reviewing and sorting the comments, and presents a synthesis of all 5 comments that address common themes. 6 2.0 Summary of Public Comment Process 7 1. November 13, 2015 – A Notice of Availability of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement to 8 Analyze Impacts of NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed 4(d) Determination 9 under Limit 6 for Five Early Winter Steelhead Hatchery Programs in Puget Sound was published 10 in the Federal Register (80 Fed. Reg. 70206, November 13, 2015), marking the formal beginning 11 of the public review period for the document.  12 2. November 4, 2015 (on or before this date) – NMFS notified interested tribal organizations, 13 agencies, and the public of the availability of the draft EIS via email and a press release. Compact 14 disc copies of the draft EIS were mailed to agencies and public libraries. 15 3. November 4, 2015 – The draft EIS and all of the appendices were made available for review and 16 download online at the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) West Coast Region (WCR) 17 website at http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/hatcheries/pshatcheries/ps_ews_deis.html 18 4. December 28, 2015 – The 45-day public review period ended. 19 5. January 5, 2016 – Compiled comments on the draft EIS were made available on the project’s 20 website at http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/hatcheries/pshatcheries/ps_ews_deis.html 1 3.0 Summary of Submissions 2 During the public review period, NMFS received a total of 2,086 submissions (email or letter, including 3 form-emails and form-letters) on the draft EIS from the following: 4 Agencies U.S. EPA U.S. Department of Interior Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Tribes and Tribal Organizations Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe Lummi Nation Tulalip Tribes Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission Organizations Wild Fish Conservancy The Conservation Angler Trout Unlimited/Wild Steelhead Initiative Wild Salmon Center Hatchery Scientific Review Group Puget Sound Anglers Coastal Conservation Association Steelhead Trout Club of Washington Ilwaco Charter Association/Westport Charterboat Association Individuals 103 non-form submissions Form-emails –  Puget Sound Anglers (1,193 submissions) Form-emails –  Coastal Conservation Association (632 submissions) Form-emails or form-letters – Other (142 submissions) 5 6 These comments were used to inform development of the final EIS. 7 1  4.0  Response to Public Comments  2  The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires government agencies to include in the final EIS  3  all the substantive comments received on the draft EIS. The final document must include responses to the  4  comments or comment summaries, indication of changes to the draft EIS because of those comments, and  5  an indication of where such changes were made in the document. This appendix provides a synthesis of  6  all public comments that address common themes. Individual comment submissions and responses are  7  available from NMFS and posted on the project’s website at  8  http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/hatcheries/pshatcheries/ps_ews_deis.html.  9  4.1  Analysis of Public Comments  10  Each comment submission on the draft EIS was read to insure that all substantive comments were  11  identified. The term ‘substantive comment’ generally refers to an assertion, suggested alternatives or  12  actions, data, background information, or clarifications relating to the EIS or its preparation. Comments  13  were related to one or more of the eight issue categories listed below.  Issue Category  Description  Alternatives  Alternatives analyzed, preferred alternative  Analysis  Analysis of effects on resources, methods  Comment noted  Comment acknowledged  Cumulative Effects  Analysis of cumulative effects  Data  New data, sources  Editorial  Corrections and clarifying edits  Monitoring  Adaptive management, monitoring, evaluation, research  NEPA  NEPA requirements; NEPA process; relationships to the Endangered Species Act (ESA)  14  15  Substantive comments were identified and responses were developed for each substantive comment and  16  recorded for the project administrative file. Individual comments and responses were also posted to the  17  project’s website identified above. In reviewing comments received on the draft EIS, NMFS found that  18  there were common themes in many of the comments. NMFS has organized the common themes into a  19  series of “global comments.” Rather than responding to these comments individually and likely repeating  20  very similar, if not exact, responses, NMFS has generated a series of global responses to address these  21  commonly themed, global comments. These global responses cover four areas of general comment:   22  1.  Comments addressing alternatives analyzed  23  a.  Comments stating a preference and/or ideas for the EIS Preferred Alternative  March 2016  D-3  Appendix D  1 b. Comments seeking more information on native broodstock programs (Alternative 4 – Native 2 Broodstock) 3 2. Comments addressing the NEPA and EIS process 4 a. Comments asking that the EIS process be expedited b. Comments asking for additional analyses 6 c. Comments asking that comments on previous NEPA documents be incorporated by reference 7 3. Comments addressing the range of alternatives analyzed 8 a. Comments suggesting that an alternative be analyzed that reviews increases in production 9 levels and is more supportive of harvest than the existing alternatives 4. Comments addressing analyses in the EIS 11 a. Comments on genetic analyses 12 b. Comments on extent of overlap/interactions between early winter steelhead and natural-origin 13 steelhead  14 c. Comments on lack of a steelhead recovery plan d. Comments on the role of habitat for steelhead 16 Below are the global responses to each of these comment themes. 17 4.2 Global Responses to Public Comments 18 1. Comments Addressing Alternatives Analyzed 19 a. Comments stating a preference and/or ideas for the EIS Preferred Alternative NMFS did not identify a preferred alternative in the draft EIS. During the public review of the draft EIS, 21 NMFS encouraged reviewers to consider the effects (presented in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5), and comment 22 on how NMFS should formulate a preferred alternative for publication in the final EIS and record of 23 decision (ROD). 24 Many comments identified their preferred alternative. These preferences covered a wide range of ideas, including comments stating a preference for one or more of the alternatives analyzed in the draft EIS, 26 comments on an alternative that increased hatchery production, and comments calling for alternatives 27 outside the scope of this EIS, such as a new fisheries management scheme for Puget Sound steelhead. The 28 Preferred Alternative is identified and discussed in Subsection 2.2.5, Alternative 5 (Preferred Alternative).  1 b. Comments seeking more information on native broodstock programs (Alternative 4 2 – Native Broodstock) 3 Some comments requested more clarity on the characteristics of native broodstock programs 4 (Alternative 4). This response provides additional detail on the nature of that program type. Clarifying text was also added to the appropriate subsections of the EIS. 6 In contrast to the early winter steelhead hatchery programs analyzed in the EIS in which the hatchery7 origin steelhead would be “isolated,” meaning they are intended to be different from the natural-origin 8 steelhead, native broodstock programs (under Alternative 4) would be considered “integrated” programs, 9 which are hatchery programs whereby the natural environment drives the adaptation and fitness of a composite population of fish that spawns both in a hatchery and in the natural environment. In these 11 programs, differences between hatchery-origin and natural-origin fish are minimized, and hatchery-origin 12 fish are integrated with the local populations included in an evolutionarily significant unit (ESU) or 13 distinct population segment (DPS).  14 Information on integrated hatchery programs for steelhead is also found in the Puget Sound Hatcheries Draft EIS (e.g., see Subsection 2.2.2.1, Artificial Production Strategies, Subsection 3.2.7.4.6, Benefits – 16 Viability, and Appendix B, Hatchery Effects and Evaluation Methods for Fish) (NMFS 2014a).  17 Fish from native broodstock programs are intended to spawn in nature and may provide conservation as 18 well as harvest benefits. The fish used for broodstock and produced by the hatchery programs would be 19 included as part of the listed Puget Sound Steelhead DPS.  Best management practices would be applied to ensure that the hatchery-origin fish did not become more than moderately diverged genetically from the 21 natural-origin source stock. 22 There are a number of integrated steelhead programs using native broodstock in Washington, Oregon, and 23 Idaho. The following steelhead native broodstock programs currently operate in Puget Sound: 24  Hood Canal Steelhead Supplementation Project, a recovery program for the Dewatto River, Duckabush River, and South Fork Skokomish winter steelhead 26  Green River Wild Winter Steelhead Program, a recovery program for native winter steelhead in 27 the watershed 28  White River Winter Steelhead Supplementation, a conservation program to rebuild the native 29 White River winter steelhead 1   Lower Elwha Hatchery Native Steelhead, a program implemented initially to preserve and restore  2  the native Elwha steelhead population, but planned for transition when the population is  3  recovered to include Lower Elwha tribal fisheries harvest as a primary objective  4  Native broodstock programs for steelhead may have both positive and negative effects for several  resources, as described in Chapter 4, Environmental Consequences, and as briefly summarized below.  6  Genetic Considerations   7  Returning hatchery-origin steelhead adults that are not harvested and stray into natural-origin steelhead  8  spawning areas would pose lower risks to diversity and fitness to natural-origin steelhead from  9  interbreeding. This is because the hatchery-origin and natural-origin components of the combined  population would largely be interchangeable – similar genetically, and sharing similar behavioral traits,  11  such as adult return and spawn timing.  However, in spite of applying best management practices,  12  unavoidable changes may in time lead to some level of genetic divergence (e.g., through inadvertent  13  hatchery-influenced selection, or domestication). In addition, if the hatchery-origin component of the  14  return is much larger than the natural-origin component, then within-population diversity of the natural- origin population may be reduced over time as the hatchery-origin fish spawn naturally.   16  Potential “Mining” of Natural-origin Steelhead Populations  17  In a native broodstock program, status of the donor natural-origin population is a primary concern  18  because natural-origin spawners are removed (e.g., “mined”) to create and sustain the programs.  19  Removals from natural-origin population would be carefully managed and limited to avoid detrimental  impacts on the naturally spawning component.  In most instances, the production levels from the hatchery  21  programs would have to start out and remain small, until the abundance of the donor natural-origin  22  steelhead populations becomes large enough to sustain removal of larger numbers of fish for broodstock.  23  Native broodstock programs would typically begin with conservation as the primary objective. The  24  programs may transition to also include harvest objectives, after the abundance of the total (hatchery origin and natural-origin) steelhead population increases to a level where the naturally spawning  26  component is healthy enough to support harvest. The time needed for this transition would depend on a  27  wide range of circumstances affecting the abundance of natural-origin steelhead populations (including  28  the condition of freshwater and marine habitats).  1  Fishery Considerations   2  Under the ESA 4(d) Rule for listed salmon and steelhead, hatchery-origin fish that are part of a listed  3  ESU or DPS are marked or tagged so that they can be differentiated from natural-origin fish that are  4  subject to ESA section 9 take prohibitions. This “take” exception exists to allow harvest of listed  hatchery-origin steelhead and salmon that are surplus to hatchery broodstock and natural spawning needs.   6  The types of fisheries that might target hatchery-origin steelhead from native broodstock programs, while  7  minimizing incidental impacts to natural-origin steelhead, include mark-selective catch-and-release  8  recreational fisheries.  Tribal net fisheries might use non-selective gear types (e.g., beach seines, traps,  9  tangle nets) for which live release of incidentally caught natural-origin steelhead is feasible.  For example,  NMFS has authorized fisheries in the Columbia River basin directed at externally marked hatchery-origin  11  steelhead from integrated hatchery programs, while maintaining sufficiently low exploitation rates on  12  natural-origin steelhead (e.g., Wells Summer Steelhead program, and fisheries directed at returns of  13  hatchery-origin steelhead in the upper Columbia River). The four examples of Puget Sound native  14  broodstock programs mentioned above are in their conservation phases.  There are a number of other fishery considerations. These include use of an allowable harvest rate for the  16  comingled natural-origin steelhead in the same fishing areas, and the amount of unintentional fishing 17  related mortality on listed steelhead. Limitations on harvest rates may lead to escapements of hatchery 18  origin steelhead into natural-origin steelhead spawning areas – a desirable result in the early stages of  19  native broodstock programs, when conservation objectives predominate. Fisheries on hatchery-origin  steelhead from the programs would likely occur in March through June, coinciding with the time when  21  natural-origin steelhead return. In some watersheds, and in some years, flow conditions during these  22  spring months may hamper opportunities for successful fisheries, especially for recreational fishers.  23  Regulatory/Administrative Processes   24  As described in Subsection 2.2.4, Alternative 4 (Native Broodstock), NMFS’s ESA section 4(d)  regulations do not provide NMFS with the authority to order changes of this magnitude as a condition of  26  approval of the HGMPs. NMFS must make a determination that the HGMPs as proposed either meet or  27  do not meet these regulatory standards.  28  To initiate native broodstock hatchery programs, the co-managers would need to submit HGMPs for the  29  programs to NMFS for review and approval under the ESA. This would re-initiate several administrative  and regulatory processes. NMFS would have to consider inclusion of the programs proposed in the  31  HGMP(s) as part of the listed Puget Sound Steelhead DPS, so that any viability benefits could be  March 2016 D-7 Appendix D  1  considered in ESA listing and status reviews/decisions for the DPS.  When completed, the new HGMP(s)  2  would be evaluated by the federal agencies for effects on ESA listed fish under ESA section 4(d) and  3  section 7.  4  Cost Considerations   Overall, the costs to develop and implement native broodstock programs should be similar to those of the  6  early winter steelhead hatchery programs. This assumes equivalent in-hatchery egg-to-smolt survival rates  7  and rearing costs; similar smolt-to-adult return levels; and hatchery facility operation and staffing  8  requirements and costs. Costs during the initial stages of the program implementation may be greater due  9  to the need to acquire natural-origin steelhead broodstock (e.g., weirs, traps, seining, gillnetting, snagging,  or hook-and-line actions). In many if not most cases, economic benefits from fishing would likely be less  11  at the outset due to conservation-oriented harvest constraints, but over time and given similar production  12  levels, these benefits would be similar to those associated with early winter steelhead programs.  13  2. Comments Addressing NEPA and the EIS Process  14  a. Comments asking that the EIS process be expedited  Some comments expressed strong interest in the timeliness of the EIS process and asked that it be  16  expedited, because in the view of the commenters, if the process were prolonged it may conclude too late  17  for the juvenile steelhead being reared in the hatchery programs being reviewed to be released into the  18  natural environment and out-migrate to sea. The comments stressed that failure to release the fish would  19  have the fundamental effect of terminating the programs, since adult early winter steelhead would not be  returning in future years to continue the programs after completion of the EIS process.  21  It should be noted that, in contrast, NMFS also received requests to extend the draft EIS public comment  22  period. NMFS did not  provide a comment extension because (1) the draft EIS was available to the public  23  prior to the formal commencement of the comment period, (2) the public had the opportunity to comment  24  on analyses of the hatchery programs covered in the draft EIS previously in response to the draft EIS for  Puget Sound hatcheries, and the draft Environmental Assessment (EA) for three of the hatchery programs  26  considered in this EIS and (3) NMFS was responsive to public interest in making its NEPA and ESA  27  decisions prior to the time when juvenile steelhead reared under the programs would be biologically ready  28  to migrate into the marine environment (spring). In summary, NMFS prepared the final EIS with careful  29  consideration of all public comments and extension requests while balancing responsiveness to the co manager’s request for an ESA 4(d) Rule exemption.  Appendix D D-8 March 2016  1 b.  Comments asking for additional analyses 2 Some comments suggested that the EIS be withdrawn or needed additional analysis. In response, NMFS 3 made text changes in the final EIS (see list in the Summary section of this final EIS). 4 c. Comments asking that comments submitted on previous documents be incorporated by reference 6 Some comments requested that comments they had submitted to NMFS on previous NEPA reviews of 7 salmon and steelhead hatchery programs in Puget Sound (e.g., on the 2014 Puget Sound Hatcheries Draft 8 EIS, and/or the 2015 Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead Draft EA) be considered and incorporated by 9 reference into this final EIS. In addition to the comments submitted on the draft EIS, NMFS considered all comments from those requesting that their previous comments be incorporated by reference using the 11 following approach:  12 13 1. NMFS identified all submissions on the draft EIS that requested that their previous comments 14 on the Puget Sound Hatcheries Draft EIS and the Puget Sound Early Winter Steelhead Draft EA be incorporated by reference.  16 17 2. NMFS then reviewed this set of comments to identify issues raised specific to the scope of 18 analysis in this draft EIS. 19 3. NMFS addressed these draft EIS-related issues, and all other new issues received by other 21 commenters, in this final EIS. 22 3. Comments Addressing the Range of Alternatives Analyzed 23 a. The EIS should include an alternative that increases production levels and is more 24 supportive of harvest than the existing alternatives Several comments suggested that an increased production alternative should be included in the analysis. 26 That potential alternative was discussed in Subsection 2.3, Alternatives Considered But Not Analyzed in 27 Detail, and not evaluated in the EIS because it was expected that it would present incrementally higher 28 environmental impacts on various resources than the Proposed Action. Analysis of such an alternative 29 would not help inform NMFS’ response to the co-managers’ request for an exemption from ESA take prohibitions under the ESA 4(d) Rule, because the ESA and the 4(d) Rule are focused on limiting impacts 31 to ESA-listed species.  1 As described in the draft EIS (e.g., Subsection 1.3, Purpose of and Need for the Proposed Action), the EIS 2 will not document whether the hatchery programs meet requirements of the ESA. Those decisions will be 3 made through processes and reflected in documents consistent with the ESA and applicable regulations. 4 4. Comments Addressing the Analysis within the EIS Comments on the draft EIS’s effects analysis centered on four core issues:  (a) genetic analyses, (b) extent 6 of overlap/interactions between early winter steelhead and natural-origin steelhead, (c) lack of a steelhead 7 recovery plan, and (d) role of habitat for steelhead. 8 a. Comments on genetic analyses 9 Several comments identified concerns related to the analysis of genetic effects in the draft EIS. These concerns covered several aspects of the analysis, including: 11  Effects on genetic analyses from assumptions regarding spawner overlap 12  The reliability of gene flow results 13  Cumulative effects analysis for genetic and demographic effects 14  Methods used in genetic analyses Comments addressing the effect on genetic analyses from assumptions regarding overlap between 16 early winter steelhead spawners and natural-origin spawners 17 Comments identified several assumptions regarding the low estimates of overlap of hatchery-origin and 18 natural-origin steelhead spawners in time and space that WDFW had proposed for use in evaluating the 19 potential for reproductive interaction and potential effects of gene flow. Comments point to NMFS’ acceptance of a WDFW “policy assumption,” as opposed to an informed decision, regarding the 21 distribution of hatchery-origin and wild-origin spawn timing (e.g., no wild spawning occurs prior to 22 March 15, and that little if any hatchery spawning occurs after March 15). These and other similar 23 comments argued that the overlap values analyzed in the EIS likely underestimate the potential for gene 24 flow from early winter steelhead to natural-origin steelhead. The comments may have overlooked the analyses in Appendix B in the draft EIS and as updated in 26 Appendix B, Section 1, Within-population Diversity Effects, and Section 2.4.1, The Scott-Gill Method, of 27 this EIS. The overlap values used in the demographic gene flow (DGF) analysis were generated by a 28 careful extrapolation by Hoffmann (2014) of observed steelhead redd counts into the period before 29 March 15.  NMFS’ examination of Hoffmann’s work suggests, at least for the populations analyzed, that natural-origin fish do not spawn in large numbers before March 15.  If large numbers of steelhead do 1  spawn before March 15, only a strongly bimodal spawning distribution would be compatible with the  2  distributional data present in Hoffman (2014). Such a bimodal distribution is unlikely (see Global  3  Response 4b).  4  NMFS considered the comments and affirmed that the approach used in its analysis is reasonable. See  Global Response 4b for a description of available information on the spawner overlap of early winter  6  hatchery-origin steelhead with natural-origin steelhead.   7  Comments addressing the reliability of gene flow results  8  Some comments questioned the current estimates of hybridization rates and total genetic contribution  9  rates (proportionate effective hatchery contribution, or PEHC) of hatchery-origin fish to the natural-origin  steelhead populations in selected Puget Sound basins, as analyzed in the draft EIS.   11  NMFS has considered comments related to the current genetic analysis and its ability to  12  accurately detect levels of hybridization between hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead  13  populations and finds that the genetic analyses in the EIS are reasonable. It is important to note  14  that the current method being employed by WDFW in the HGMPs is designed to estimate the  current (i.e., not past or cumulative) level of gene flow between hatchery-origin and natural 16  origin steelhead. The older genetic data referred to in comments (e.g., Phillips et al. 1982; Phelps  17  et al. 1994, 1997) was not collected with this intent. The older studies were undertaken with the  18  intent of genetically characterizing steelhead populations within the state of Washington. Given  19  the known history of steelhead stocking in the state, especially in certain regions, the authors of  the studies speculated on the effects on diversity this stocking may have had, but their work was  21  not definitive. These older genetic data from should not be disregarded, but recognized as  22  resulting from far fewer genetic markers and analyzed with less sophisticated technology than  23  techniques used today. Finally, those studies were not intended to address gene flow rates.  24  The key problem in estimating gene flow between early winter steelhead and natural-origin steelhead is  the genetic similarity between the two, both because of possible gene flow in the past but also because of  26  common ancestry.  The first serious “modern” attempt at estimating contemporaneous levels of gene flow  27  was developed in recent work done in the Skagit River basin and referenced in the draft EIS and  28  comments (Pflug et al. 2013; Warheit 2013). This work, while applying more advanced means of  29  processing the information from the DNA markers and with use of the computer program Structure—  which enables assessment of individual fish lineage—showed the large potential for misclassification of  31  individuals in terms of hatchery parentage, as acknowledged in comments.  March 2016 D-11 Appendix D  1  As explained in Appendix B of the EIS, Dr. Warheit modified his method considerably because  2  of his experience with the Skagit River steelhead work. Comments also focused on perceived  3  differences in results between the earlier Skagit work and the Warheit (2014) work that is referred  4  to in the draft EIS, with respect to Finney Creek, a Skagit tributary. The later work by Warheit  (2014), in addition to further development of assignment error correction methods for Structure,  6  showed samples from Finney Creek to be more strongly aligned, proportionally, with the  7  summer-run populations in the Skagit River than the winter-run populations.  When this  8  alignment was taken into account, the previously high levels of presumptive hybridization  9  between the early winter steelhead and the natural-origin population were resolved to much lower  levels.  11  See Global Response 4b for a discussion of information on the overlap between hatchery-origin  12  and natural-origin steelhead spawners, particularly during the early part of the spawning season.  13  Comments regarding cumulative effects analysis for genetic and demographic effects  14  Some comments suggested the analysis should include a cumulative assessment of genetic effects.  Additionally, they expressed concern about the “demographic” effects that the cumulative gene flow rates  16  may have on small natural-origin populations. These concerns, as well as further development of NMFS’  17  analytical methods, have resulted in an expanded analysis of genetic effects in Appendix B of the EIS,  18  including a review of potential cumulative effects. These updated methods were used to develop the  19  results summarized in the EIS (Subsection 3.2.3.1, Genetic Risks, and Subsection 4.2, Salmon and  Steelhead).  Please also see revisions in Section 2.1 of Appendix B.  21  Comments addressing the methods used in the genetic analysis  22  Scott-Gill Method  23  Some comments expressed concerns with assumptions utilized in the evaluation of potential gene flow  24  estimated with the Scott-Gill method (i.e., equation) (Scott and Gill 2008), stating that this method likely  underestimates the potential gene flow rate. These assumptions include the use of the March 15 date for  26  the start of wild fish spawning, not including the impact (cumulative) of the progeny of HxN1and HxH  27  matings coming back to spawn in the next generation, and the lack of analysis of the role that precocial  28  male hatchery-origin early winter steelhead may play in the gene flow rates.  1 H = hatchery-origin, and N= natural-origin.  Appendix D D-12 March 2016  1  See Global Comment 4b for responses related to the potential overlap of hatchery-origin and natural 2  origin spawners, particularly in the early spawning timeframe.  3  The comment is correct that the effects of naturally-produced progeny—from pure HxN or HxH parental  4  matings—and the cumulative effect that they may have when returning to mate as natural-origin adults, is  not evaluated through the use of the Scott-Gill method. In response, NMFS has included new modeling of  6  genetic effects, including the potential cumulative effects on fitness, in Section 1 and Subsection 2.1 of  7  Appendix B. This information was used to develop the results summarized in the EIS (Subsection 3.2.3.1,  8  Genetic Risks, and Subsection 4.2, Salmon and Steelhead).    9  The potential effect that precocial male hatchery-origin early winter steelhead play in interbreeding with  natural-origin steelhead is further evaluated in the response to Global Comment 4b.  11  Warheit Method  12  Comments pointed to several technical areas of concern related to the use of the Warheit method to  13  empirically estimate rates of recent gene flow between hatchery-origin and natural-origin steelhead  14  populations. The primary areas of concern were: 1) the genetic distance (Fst) set between the hatchery- origin and natural-origin steelhead populations in the simulation element of the Warheit method, 2) the  16  criteria established to classify individual fish as to lineage, and 3) the confidence intervals around the  17  PEHC point estimates.  18  1) Some comments questioned Dr. Warheit’s purported use of a pre-hatchery Fst of 0.02 in his  19  modeling.  The comments noted geographic regions (e.g., Puget Sound and the California coast)  where Fst between natural-origin steelhead populations exceeds 0.02.  Intra-region Fst values are  21  expected to vary between different geographic regions because it is a function of distances between  22  populations, population size, and gene flow rates, which can be unique to each region, based on  23  geologic, hydrologic, and, in the case of Puget Sound, recent glaciation processes.    24  The actual pre-hatchery Fst value produced from the MS simulation step of Dr. Warheit’s method  was 0.027, as shown at the bottom of Table S5 (Warheit 2014).  This value (Fst=0.027) represents an  26  average of the 10 highest Fst estimates from the MS simulations, which likely best represents the  27  evolutionary relationship between the early winter hatchery-origin steelhead and the natural-origin  28  populations of steelhead in Puget Sound. The parameters used in the MS simulations (e.g., broadly  29  stated – hierarchical relationships, genetic diversity within populations, genetic differentiation, and  March 2016 D-13 Appendix D  1  the number of single nucleotide polymorphisms) can be found in the Methods section of Warheit  2  2014 (including Table S1).  3  2)  Some comments contend that the decisions Dr. Warheit had to make regarding classification of  4  individual fish as to lineage were policy decisions, and that his decision rules should have been  precautionary in nature to avoid “the worst kinds of mistakes.”  Any classification scheme involves  6  trade-offs between different types of mistakes. Any individual doing the classification has to consider  7  these and develop a rule set. In Dr. Warheit’s case, his rule set was aimed at objectively classifying  8  fish with the intent of being as accurate as possible (Warheit 2014).  9  3)  Some comments expressed concern that the confidence intervals for PEHC are based on the point  estimate (as is common in statistics) , rather than the true value of PEHC, and feel some sort of  11  Bayesian approach involving the distribution of introgression would have yielded more reliable  12  confidence intervals. The difficulty with what the comments propose is that a distribution of  13  introgression, which is unknown, would have to be assumed (called the prior distribution). The  14  resulting statistics would then be very much dependent on this prior distribution. Given what is truly  known about gene flow from early winter steelhead programs, it is doubtful there is a credible way to  16  develop a defensible prior distribution.  17  Another concern some comments raised was the 0.25 confidence interval criterion for labeling a  18  component of PEHC as unreliable. The confidence interval estimation method has been refined since  19  the draft EIS was published, and the analysis no longer uses the 0.25 criterion (Appendix B).  21  b.  Comments on extent of spawner overlap and interactions between early winter  22  steelhead and natural-origin steelhead   23  A number of comments suggested that information in the draft EIS on interactions between early  24  winter steelhead and natural-origin steelhead (especially regarding extent of interbreeding) is flawed  in the context of available field observations and studies. Comments suggested that the draft EIS  26  underestimates spawner overlap resultant hybridization rates. As acknowledged in the draft EIS (e.g.,  27  Subsection 3.2.3.4, Masking, and Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental Fishing Effects) there are differences  28  of opinion about the extent of spawner overlap. After considering comments on the draft EIS, NMFS  29  feels the information used in the EIS is reasonable, for the reasons described here. See also Global  Response 4a for information on genetic aspects of the spawner overlap.  31  Appendix D  D-14  March 2016  1  Overview of observational field studies of spawner overlap  2  Skagit River  3  McMillan (2015a) reported that spawner overlap was substantial in five tributaries in the Skagit River  4  basin based on field observations of estimated redd counts, and personal assignments of the fish  species creating the redds and their origin (hatchery-origin or natural-origin).  The conclusions  6  reached by McMillan (2015a) are extrapolated from observations of very limited numbers of fish. For  7  example, only six natural-origin steelhead were observed during the entire 5-year period surveyed,  8  including one unmarked steelhead (potential natural-origin) that was observed prior to March.  In  9  addition, a total of five hatchery-origin steelhead were observed during the entire 5-year period  surveyed, and none were observed after March 12. Within the 5-year period, no hatchery-origin  11  steelhead were actually observed spawning with natural-origin steelhead.   12  NMFS considered information in McMillan (2015b) from five watersheds in the mid-Skagit River  13  basin. That information suggested that 17 percent of all steelhead redds had been constructed prior to  14  March 15 in the 2014/15 spawning season, and 50 to 67 percent of these early redds were constructed  by hatchery-origin steelhead. This equates to an estimated 8.5 to 5.6 percent of the natural-origin  16  steelhead redds being constructed prior to March 15. However, these results are not likely  17  representative of the entire population. For example, telemetry studies within the Skagit River system  18  (Pflug et al. 2013) indicate that most of the earliest arriving natural-origin steelhead are from the  19  middle Skagit River reach.  WDFW spawning ground survey data indicate that the earliest natural- origin spawners are typically observed in middle Skagit River tributaries such as Finney and Grandy  21  Creeks (Brett Barkdull, WDFW, personal communication cited in Pflug et al. [2013]).  WDFW  22  spawning ground survey data indicate that estimates of redds per mile surveyed are higher from  23  January through February than the first half of March, further suggesting many of the early redds in  24  McMillan (2015a, 2105b) were likely hatchery-origin steelhead. This interpretation is consistent with  the genetic analysis of Warheit (2014) in Finney Creek who found no hybrids in unmarked adult  26  steelhead, and one adult that was the progeny of only hatchery-origin parents. These findings further  27  suggest minimal or no hybridization in Finney Creek.   28  McMillan (2015a) found that large numbers of coho salmon were observed from January through  29  early March, out-numbering observations of steelhead 28:1. However, the estimated number of redds  in McMillan (2015a) from January to mid-March was only 4.7 coho redds per steelhead redd. This  31  over five-fold difference between the ratios of estimated coho salmon to steelhead redds suggests that  March 2016 D-15 Appendix D  1  an error was probably made regarding which species produced which redds. During the years  2  surveyed, the majority (63 percent) of the estimated steelhead redds observed prior to mid-March  3  occurred during a 3-year period when steelhead redds out-numbered coho salmon redds 1.2 to 1, but  4  only coho salmon were observed in the streams. This further suggests McMillan (2015a) erred in the  assignment of redds to species.  6  In further reviewing Skagit River steelhead spawner information, NMFS compared redd count data in  7  McMillan (2015a) to data collected by WDFW (2015) in the same Skagit River tributary locations  8  and during the same time periods. This comparison found substantial differences between survey  9  results. McMillan (2015) reported over three times as many redds observed in three Skagit River  tributaries than observed by WDFW’s professionally trained and experienced spawner survey crews.   11  WDFW’s data indicate that redd count observations of McMillan (2015a) likely overestimated the  12  number of steelhead redds constructed during the years surveyed in common.  13  In Hoffman (2014), river-specific redd data for the Skagit River and Nookachamps steelhead  14  populations and a statistical gamma function were used, indicating that an estimated 4.96 percent of  the redds were constructed prior to March 15.  16  Other Information from Puget Sound  17  Data from other sources and locations in Puget Sound also suggest that the degree to which early  18  winter steelhead and natural-origin steelhead spawners overlap in Puget Sound spawning areas is low.  19  For example, recently collected spawning ground survey data from the Nooksack River indicate that  approximately 5 percent of the steelhead redds were observed prior to March 15 (WDFW,  21  unpublished spawning ground survey data).  In another example, comprehensive spawning ground  22  surveys conducted in 2015 in the Dungeness River basin indicate that approximately 4 percent of  23  observed redds were observed prior to March 15 (Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, unpublished spawning  24  ground survey data).  In 2009, extensive early surveys were conducted in the mainstem Pilchuck  River (tributary to the Snohomish River) and only three redds (2.5 percent of total redds observed)  26  were observed prior to April 10 (WDFW, unpublished spawning ground surveys).  All three redds  27  were observed on February 12, suggesting these redds were likely constructed by hatchery-origin  28  steelhead. Hoffman (2014) used river-specific redd data and a statistical gamma function to estimate  29  that 6.2, 2.1, 1.96, and 1.25 percent of steelhead redds are constructed prior to March 15 in the  Nooksack, Snoqualmie, Skykomish, and Stillaguamish Rivers, respectively.  Appendix D D-16 March 2016  1 Forks Creek, Washington Coast 2 Finally, NMFS also considered Forks Creek (Willapa River tributary) steelhead studies that were 3 emphasized in comments (e.g., Seamons et al. 2012). Comments suggested that over 30 percent of the 4 Forks Creek juveniles appeared to be HxN hybrids. Although there are uncertainties associated with the methods used, the estimate of 30 percent is questionable because it does not appear to consider 6 multiple factors, including: 7  There is no estimate of the Willapa River steelhead population's introgression with early 8 winter steelhead; therefore, any population scale effects are conjecture. 9  Forks Creek is entirely dissimilar to the watersheds being considered in the EIS; it would be expected that a coastal, lowland, rain-dominated watershed like Forks Creek would, in 11 general, have a much earlier spawn-timing than the watersheds within the project area (snow12 melt dominated mid- to late-spring hydrographs). 13  Forks Creek is the source of water for the hatchery; thus the highest possible amount of 14 introgression would be expected in the creek as hatchery-origin adults return to their home stream to spawn.  16  Forks Creek did not operate as an isolated hatchery program; the program incorporated 17 natural-origin broodstock. 18  Forks Creek passed excessive numbers of hatchery-origin steelhead onto the spawning 19 grounds, allowing potential interactions with the earliest natural-origin steelhead.  Forks Creek studies do not track the amount of introgression within the hatchery, which 21 makes it impossible to estimate the amount of introgression that occurred under natural 22 spawning conditions. 23  Forks Creek studies do not consider or discuss the potential effects of multiple generations of 24 off-station releases within the Willapa River basin prior to development of their baseline "wild" population, or how such releases may have resulted in a feral spawning aggregation 26 within the hatchery's water supply stream. 27 Occurrence of residuals and contribution of precocial males 28 Comments suggest that the draft EIS failed to consider effects from residuals and precocial males. As 29 described in Subsection 3.2.3.2, Competition and Predation, residuals are hatchery-origin steelhead that out-migrate slowly, if at all, after they are released. Precocial males are defined in the PS 31 Hatcheries Draft EIS (NMFS 2014a) as juvenile hatchery-origin males that exhibit qualities of sexual 32 maturity at an unusually early age.  1  The draft EIS acknowledges that the spawner “region” shown in Figure 1 in Subsection 3.2.3.1,  2  Genetic Risks, and in Appendix B, assumes that all spawners are returning adults. It also  3  acknowledges that the resident form of steelhead (rainbow trout) and precocious hatchery-origin  4  males may contribute to spawning by adults. However, in a study in an Olympic Peninsula stream,  McMillan (2007) found that residual hatchery-origin males accounted for only 0.35 percent of the  6  observed males attempting to mate. Thus, from this study and other available information that is  7  acknowledged in Appendix B, and in the Puget Sound Hatcheries DEIS (NMFS 2014a), NMFS  8  would expect the effect of precocial males to be negligible.  9  Loss of diversity represented by early returning natural-origin steelhead  Comments suggest that releases of hatchery-origin early winter steelhead (primarily by fisheries  11  targeting early winter hatchery-origin steelhead) hamper what was once a much larger early-timed  12  return of natural-origin early-timed winter steelhead. As described in Subsection 3.2.3.4, Masking  13  (and also see Subsection 3.2.3.5, Incidental Fishing Effects), evidence suggests that historically, there  14  were more early-timed natural-origin steelhead than occur presently, and that diversity is an important  aspect of life history diversity. Information on early-timed natural-origin winter run steelhead and  16  associated spawner overlap with early winter hatchery-origin steelhead is described earlier in Global  17  Comment 4b. Subsection 1.7.12, Recovery Plans for Puget Sound Salmon and Steelhead, identifies  18  how recovery criteria (including diversity as a viable salmon population parameter, along with  19  abundance, productivity, and spatial structure) will be applied. See also Global Comment 4c.  c. Comments on lack of steelhead recovery plan  21  22  Several comments suggest that the lack of a recovery plan for Puget Sound steelhead hampers  23  analysis of the hatchery programs with regard to the potential contribution to recovery of early  24  returning natural-origin steelhead. Environmental review under NEPA requires use of the best  available information. Despite the utility of recovery plans in NEPA analyses, there is no requirement  26  that recovery plans be completed to enable a NEPA “hard look” analysis of effects of the Proposed  27  Action and alternatives to environmental resources. The recovery plan is acknowledged in the draft  28  EIS as a plan related to the action, in Subsection 1.7.12, Recovery Plans for Puget Sound Salmon and  29  Steelhead. NMFS used the best available information, including the most recent 5-year status review  and viability information.  31  32  Appendix D D-18 March 2016  d. Comments on the role of habitat for steelhead Several comments suggested that the draft EIS did not adequately describe the role habitat has played as a factor in the decline, and continues to play in the recovery of, the Puget Sound steelhead DPS, especially when relative to the effects from early winter steelhead hatchery programs. Other comments suggested that habitat for steelhead is in better condition than others have argued, and that the effects from early winter steelhead keep natural-origin steelhead from fully utilizing existing and newly restored habitat. In the context of the Purpose of and Need for the Proposed Action described in Subsection 1.3, the role of habitat is addressed extensively in the draft EIS, for example in Subsection 3.2.1, General Factors that Affect the Presence and Abundance of Salmon and Steelhead, and Chapter 5, Cumulative Effects. 1 2 3 Page Intentionally Left Blank 