U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Railroad Administration  RECORD OF DECISION COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM 1.0 SUMMARY This Record of Decision (ROD) records the decision of the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), an operating administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), with regard to the Coast Corridor Improvements Program (the project) proposed by the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG), the California Department of Transportation Division of Rail (Caltrans DOR), and the Transportation Agency of Monterey County (TAMC), at the initial programmatic phase of environmental review. The state agencies propose to implement physical and service improvements that would extend over the existing 130 miles of railroad between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, California, in order to enhance safety and develop a faster and more reliable passenger and freight rail system that provides added capacity between Los Angeles and San Francisco. FRA is the federal lead agency for the environmental review under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and SLOCOG is the state lead agency for the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (together, Lead Agencies). FRA and the state agencies used a tiered environmental process for this project. With a tiered approach, the program-level or Tier 1 NEPA document evaluates impacts of a broad scale project at the appropriate level of detail which may focus on more qualitative than quantitative impacts on specific resources. Following completion of the program-level NEPA document and the associated decision document, project-level or Tier 2 NEPA documents are developed to evaluate the site-specific environmental impacts of project components. In making this program-level decision, FRA considered the information and analysis contained in the Draft and Final Program Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report (hereinafter Program EIS/EIR). FRA also considered comments from the public and agencies received during the scoping process and the public comment period for the Draft Program EIS/EIR. This ROD has been prepared in accordance with the Council on Environmental Quality's (CEQ) regulations implementing NEPA (40 CFR § 1505.2) and FRA Environmental Procedures (64 Fed. Reg. 28545, May 26, 1999). Specifically, this ROD: . Describes FRA's role in the Coast Corridor Improvements Program and the NEPA tiering process for the project. . States FRA's decision on the proposed Coast Corridor Improvements Program and describes the factors considered by FRA in making this decision. . Provides background on the NEPA process, including a summary of public involvement and agency coordination. . States and reaffirms the project’s Purpose and Need. . Identifies the alternatives considered by FRA, including the environmentally preferable alternative. . Identifies the Selected Alternative for the project. . Summarizes environmental benefits and adverse impacts of the Selected Alternative. . Discusses measures to avoid and minimize environmental harm, and the future evaluation for project-level studies. . Describes compliance with other federal regulations. . Describes some initial next steps in the tiered environmental review process.  This ROD is also being issued with the Final EIS consistent with Section 1319(b) of the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21). 2.0 DECISION The Coast Corridor Program EIS/EIR is the first programmatic phase of a tiered environmental review process. In making this decision on the proposed Coast Corridor Improvement Program, FRA has worked jointly with SLOCOG and the other state agencies to develop the analyses included in the Program EIS/EIR. Based on the analysis in the Programmatic EIS/EIR and in consideration of public comments, FRA selects the Preferred Alternative for further evaluation and consideration in future project-level environmental reviews to be prepared subsequent to the Program EIS/EIR. As described further in Section 5.2.3, the Preferred Alternative modifies the Build Alternative to reduce the potential environmental impacts of the Project and in response to public comments received on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The purpose of and need for the Coast Corridor Improvements Program is to enhance safety and develop a faster and more reliable passenger and freight rail system that provides added capacity in response to increased travel demand between San Francisco and Los Angeles and the intermediate cities along the US 101 corridor. The evaluation in the Program EIS/EIR also indicates that taking no action under the No Build Alternative would not increase the travel capacity, safety and reliability as population continues to grow, and would fail to meet the purpose and objectives of the program which can be met by the Preferred Alternative. The Preferred Alternative would result in safety and transportation capacity improvements that would not be accomplished under the No Build Alternative. In addition to better meeting the purpose and need, the Preferred Alternative would also provide environmental benefits in the form of improved travel conditions, including mobility, safety, reliability, travel times, and connectivity and accessibility; and reduced air pollutant emissions along the existing rail corridor. The Lead Agencies prepared the Program EIS/EIR to allow the federal and state lead agencies to consider a future program of improvements to the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo and to provide information to decide between the No Build and the Build Alternatives. Subsequent tiers of project-level environmental review will evaluate the potential environmental impacts of site-specific components of the Preferred Alternative before they are  advanced for construction. Project-level reviews will also identify specific mitigation measures to address those impacts. These reviews will assess the site characteristics, size, nature, and timing of specific components of the Preferred Alternative to determine if the impacts are significant and if those impacts can be avoided or mitigated. The Program EIS/EIR identifies design practices and mitigation strategies, which are an array of actions that can be applied at the project level to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the types of environmental impacts anticipated as a result of implementation of the Coast Corridor Improvements Program. To minimize potential future environmental harm from implementation of Coast Corridor improvements, FRA adopts the design practices and mitigation strategies identified in this ROD. 3.0 PROJECT INTRODUCTION The project corridor is comprised primarily of a portion of the existing Coast Corridor railroad right-of-way (ROW) between the existing Amtrak stations in Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The project corridor is about 130 miles in length and is located within Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Portions of the corridor traverse several incorporated cities, including Salinas, Soledad, Greenfield, King City, Paso Robles, Atascadero, and San Luis Obispo. The Coast Corridor serves as a transportation link between Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area. Figure 1 shows the entire length of the 470-mile-long Coast Corridor rail line. The Coast Corridor is divided into three segments: . Northern Segment - 77 miles from San Francisco to Gilroy, also known as the Caltrain Corridor . Middle Segment - 171 miles from Gilroy to San Luis Obispo - inclusive of the entirety of the project area considered in this document (Salinas - San Luis Obispo) . Southern Segment - 222 miles from San Luis Obispo to Los Angeles. Corresponds to the northern half of the Pacific Surfliner Corridor, also known as the LOSSAN Corridor1 1 The LOSSAN Corridor is a 351 mile long intercity and commuter rail corridor between San Luis Obispo and San Diego. As of fall 2015, a programmatic EIS/EIR is underway for potential improvements to the LOSSAN North corridor - the segment of the LOSSAN Corridor between Los Angeles and San Luis Obispo Counties. 2 Additional smaller airports exist along the Corridor; those listed are the 4 next largest regional airports. The Coast Corridor is also served by air and highway systems. In terms of seat capacity, the second most heavily traveled air route in the US connects Los Angeles International Airport and San Francisco International Airport. Additional heavily traveled air routes spanning the corridor serve the Oakland, San José, Burbank and Long Beach airports.2 While travel between the ends of the Coast Corridor today is facilitated predominantly by air and automobile, rail plays an increasingly important role in corridor mobility. Current passenger rail services in the corridor include: . Pacific Surfliner intercity service between San Luis Obispo and San Diego, operated by Amtrak and funded by Caltrans . Coast Starlight long distance service between Seattle and Los Angeles, operated and funded by Amtrak . Capitol Corridor intercity service between Placer and Santa Clara Counties, for which a planned service extension to Salinas (by 2019) has completed environmental review and as of Spring 2015 is in design/engineering work3 . Metrolink Ventura County Line commuter rail service, sharing the same route as Pacific Surfliner trains between Los Angeles Union Station and Oxnard, with additional service to East Ventura Station in Ventura . Caltrain commuter rail service between San Francisco and Gilroy 3 The Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) certified an EIR for the Salinas Rail Extension project in 2006 and subsequently adopted a CEQA Addendum for the proposed extension of commuter rail service from San Jose to Salinas. These environmental documents identify proposed physical improvements associated with the planned rail extension. Such improvements would occur between San Jose and Salinas. At present, no NEPA documentation has been completed for this project, but would be required if federal funding were proposed to implement any of the proposed improvements. By 2029, the California High-Speed Rail (CA HSR) system is expected to run from San Francisco to the Los Angeles basin in under three hours, at speeds capable of over 200 miles per hour. The system will eventually extend to Sacramento and San Diego, totaling 800 miles with up to 24 stations. An Initial Operation Section (IOS) between Merced and the San Fernando Valley (Burbank) is projected to open as soon as 2022. While the bulk of the CA HSR alignment will traverse the San Joaquin Valley, the Coast Corridor will provide several connection points to the proposed high speed rail system. None of these potential Coast Corridor/CA HSR connection points are in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor that is the subject of this Program EIS/EIR. To the north, the closest major connection points would be Diridon Station in San José and the Gilroy Caltrain Station. To the south, the closest connection points would be Burbank Airport and Los Angeles Union Station. The Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) operates freight rail services along the Coast Corridor. Currently, the Coast Corridor carries low levels of freight traffic and is primarily considered a “secondary” or “relief” line to the much busier Central Valley line to the east. The Coast Corridor does not see any containerized traffic, but does carry bulk commodities such as fertilizer, lumber, aggregate, fuel, and coal. Several planning and feasibility studies have identified and proposed program of improvements for the Coast Corridor. Amtrak completed the California Passenger Rail System: 20-Year Improvement Plan Technical Report (Amtrak 20-Year Plan) in March 2001. Caltrans DOR coordinated with Amtrak, FRA, and other transportation agencies to complete the Coast Corridor Service Development Plan (SDP) in May 2013. UPRR has recommended a series of improvements it asserts are necessary to allow for increased passenger use of the Coast Corridor. The Preferred Alternative, further described below, was intentionally drawn broadly to encompass all the physical improvements contemplated by these plans and studies. 4.0 NEPA PROCESS Pursuant to NEPA, the Lead Agencies conducted a comprehensive public and agency involvement effort as part of the Program EIS/EIR process. FRA initiated scoping by publishing a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare a Program EIS/EIR in the Federal Register on August 17, 2012. Public scoping meetings were held on August 28 and 29, 2012. During the scoping process, stakeholder briefings were also held in August, October, and November 2012. During the preparation of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, the Lead Agencies conducted agency and tribal outreach in July and August 2013. The Lead Agencies published the Draft Program EIS/EIR on November 14, 2014. The Draft Program EIS/EIR presented the purpose and need for the project, the range of alternatives and the alternatives considered and eliminated, the existing environmental setting, potential adverse and beneficial effects from project implementation, and potential strategies to avoid, minimize or mitigation potential adverse environmental effects, and area of future study. Draft Program EIS/EIR public hearings were held on December 3, 2014 in Salinas and Soledad; December 9, 2014 in King City; and on January 7, 2015 in Atascadero. 4.1 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTION The purpose of the proposed rail improvements to the Coast Corridor is to enhance safety and develop a faster and more reliable passenger and freight rail system that provides added passenger rail capacity in response to increased travel demand between Los Angeles and San Francisco and the intermediate cities along the US 101 corridor. The existing capacity of the Corridor’s transportation system is insufficient to meet existing and future demand, and the current and projected future system congestion will continue to result in reduced reliability, slower travel speeds, increased travel times, and deteriorated air quality. In addition to providing new direct passenger rail service, another purpose of the proposed rail improvements is to foster improved rail connectivity to the proposed CA HSR system. The greater Coast Corridor region from San Francisco to Los Angeles faces significant mobility challenges today. These challenges apply to the portion of the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo and are likely to continue in the future as continued growth in population, employment, and tourism activity is expected to generate increased travel demand. By 2040, statewide population is expected to grow substantially, further straining the existing transportation network. An effective rail system is necessary to meet the future mobility needs of residents, businesses, and visitors. The additional capacity for increased intercity passenger rail service would also allow flexibility for passengers who may prefer other means of transportation over automobiles. Such an increase in service would provide additional transportation system capacity that could relieve some of the projected near- and long-term demand on the highway system, potentially slowing the need to further expand highways and airports in this portion of the corridor, or reduce the scale of those expansions, including their associated cost and impacts on communities and the environment. Reducing vehicle miles traveled (VMT) would have substantial benefits in reducing air pollutant emission and improving air quality in the region. Increasing rail travel capacity could reduce VMT and air pollutant emissions by shifting automobile travel to a more environmentally efficient mode. An investment in rail improvements to the Coast Corridor would complement and support other transportation systems that currently or are planned to interface with the rail service and the future CA HSR system. Like the Coast Corridor, the Pacific Surfliner Corridor and Capitol Corridor experience similar challenges regarding travel demand growth, congestion, and capacity constraints. Because many trips span the service of all these corridors, improvements and upgrades on one corridor would indirectly impact other corridors. The Coast Corridor would offer multiple connections to the future CA HSR system (north and south of the Salinas - San Luis Obispo segment studied here), offering a feeder service to passengers originating in counties without proposed high-speed rail stations (such as Santa Cruz, Monterey, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara and Ventura). New communities would gain access to rail services with the construction of new stations that are not currently served. In all, many communities between San Francisco and Los Angeles would see improved transportation access. Investment in corridor rail service has not kept pace with population and travel demand growth. Particularly within the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the corridor, many tracks, signals, and bridges have not been upgraded or improved in decades – and in some cases are over 100 years old. Aging infrastructure in need of maintenance or replacement can result in a decrease in operating safety and can impede trains from operating at top speeds. Aging infrastructure if not properly maintained can, therefore, translate to longer travel times and decrease the attractiveness of rail as a transportation option. 5.0 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED 5.1 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BUT DISMISSED FROM FURTHER ANALYSIS The list of proposed physical components comprising the action alternatives originated from several previous planning efforts discussed above. These earlier efforts, including the Amtrak 20-Year Plan and the SDP, took into account factors of overall feasibility and constructability, but were intended to yield a comprehensive list of near, medium, and long-term improvements to rail service along the Coast Corridor. These earlier studies dismissed alternative modes of transportation along the Coast Corridor, such as express buses or increased air travel. Such alternative modes would be inconsistent with the purpose and need for the proposed action (improving intercity rail through the Salinas to San Luis Obispo area, ultimately providing improved passenger rail service between San Francisco and Los Angeles) and were therefore not considered in the Program EIS/EIR. These earlier planning efforts also suggested maintaining conventional rail systems and discounted major changes in locomotive technology, such as electrification or conversion of the Coast Corridor to a high-speed rail corridor. Earlier efforts also screened out the potential inclusion of additional passenger rail stations beyond those proposed for Soledad and King City. Soledad and King City are the two largest cities in population along the corridor not currently served by passenger rail. The SDP summarized that adequate population levels, complementary surrounding land uses, and links to other transportation modes are all necessary features for any proposed station to function properly. Communities along the corridor not meeting these criteria would not be considered for new passenger stations. 5.2 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED IN PROGRAM EIS/EIR 5.2.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing passenger and freight rail operations upon the existing physical components of the railroad system. Existing passenger operations consist of one daily roundtrip of the Coast Starlight passenger train through the Salinas to San Luis Obispo area. Existing freight operations consist of 2 daily long-haul trains (80 cars or more) traveling all or the vast majority of the distance between Salinas and San Luis Obispo to points beyond. Local trains are assumed to travel 50 miles or less of the distance between Salinas and San Luis Obispo with origins or destinations within the corridor. The SDP estimates that an average of 2 long-haul freight trains traverse the corridor daily (year 2012) and estimates this number to increase to 4 daily trains by 2020. The SDP does not estimate the number of local trains. The No Build Alternative also includes rail improvement projects anticipated to take place between Salinas and San Luis Obispo with or without the project. Only two rail improvements projects are slated for the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor. 1. TAMC is proposing a series of rail capital improvements, including station, platform, rail yard, and parking improvements between San José and Salinas so that commuter rail service can be extended to Salinas. TAMC has also designated funding for the operating costs of this commuter rail extension. 2. The No Build Alternative also assumes the future installation of a PTC System along the Coast Corridor in compliance with requirements of the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008. 5.2.2 Build Alternative The Build Alternative is comprised of a program of potential physical components, signal upgrades, equipment purchases, and operational changes intended to meet the identified purpose and need. The existing Coast Corridor is characterized by single-track operations, short sidings (or no sidings), manually-thrown switches, and an inefficient (automatic block system or ABS) signaling system, each of which individually and all of which collectively result in lower travel speeds and substandard operating conditions. Various components of the Build Alternative are intended to remedy these conditions and otherwise better enable both existing and proposed future passenger and freight rail services to utilize the corridor. Table 1 identifies the several corridor-wide proposed components. Table 2 lists specific improvements by location. Both corridor-wide and specific area components are further described below.  Table 1 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components – Corridor-Wide Location Component Type Corridor-Wide Extend Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) from Salinas to Soledad; install island CTC from San Lucas to Bradley Corridor-Wide Grade crossing safety and mobility enhancements Corridor-Wide Tie replacement, installation of continuous welded rail (CWR), ballasting, track surfacing, track structure realignment, rehab existing Salinas and Soledad sidings; replace turnouts. Corridor-Wide Rolling stock purchases Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b  Table 2 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components – Site Specific Mile Post (MP) Location Component Type Approximate Length/Acreage of Proposed Component4 Monterey County    114.9 Existing Salinas siding New powered switch NA 121 - 123.4 Spence New siding 1.89 miles; 19.3 acres 130 Existing Gonzales siding New powered switch NA 140 Existing Soledad siding New powered switch NA 140 Soledad New station 1.9 acres 143.9 -151.3 Harlem to Metz Curve/track realignment 3.43 miles; 41.6 acres 147 – 149 Chalone Creek New siding 1.89 miles 14.9 acres 154.3 - 154.7 Coburn Curve/track realignment 2.27 miles; 27.5 acres 160 Existing King City siding Siding extension 2.41 miles; 25.1 acres 160.3 King City New station 3.4 acres 160.3 Existing King City siding New powered switch NA 165 South of King City Curve/track realignment 1.06 miles; 12.8 acres 167.2 -190.74 San Lucas New siding 1.89 miles; 22.9 acres 172 South of San Lucas Curve/track realignment 2.07 miles; 25.1 acres 177 -179 Existing San Ardo siding New powered switch NA 181.5 – 191 Getty to Bradley Curve/track realignment 1.50 miles; 18.2 acres 190 -192 Existing Bradley siding Siding extension 2.68 miles; 50.2 acres 190 -192 Bradley New powered switch NA 4 Reported acreages and lengths of proposed siding extensions take a conservative approach and likely overstate actual values. No specific siding extension plans have been developed to date. All existing sidings could potentially be extended to 10,000 feet by adding track at either their north or south ends. For a more conservative basis of analysis, siding extension areas developed for this EIS/EIR contemplate extensions on both north and south ends. For example, an existing 5,000 foot long siding could be extended to 10,000 feet with a 5,000 foot addition on either end. The siding extensions examined here include both extensions. Therefore, generally speaking, likely siding extension lengths and acreages could be computed by dividing in half the numbers reported in the table above. Mile Post (MP) Location Component Type Approximate Length/Acreage of Proposed Component4 San Luis Obispo County  200 – 207 McKay to Wellsona Curve/track realignment 2.06 miles; 24.9 acres 200 -203 Existing McKay Siding New powered switch NA 205 - 207.6 Wellsona New siding 1.89 miles; 22.8 acres 208.3 - 216.7 Wellsona to Paso Robles Curve/track realignment 0.43 miles; 5.2 acres 217 - 218.59 Templeton Siding extensions 2.78 miles; 46.8 acres 218-223 Templeton to Henry Curve/track realignment 0.47 miles; 5.7 acres 229-232 Henry to Santa Margarita Curve/track realignment 2.19 miles; 26.5 acres 226 - 228 Existing Santa Margarita siding New powered switch NA 233 - 235.62 Cuesta New second mainline 1.89 miles; 25.8 acres Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b . Corridor-wide Track Upgrades: Track improvements intended to improve performance are proposed along the entire rail alignment between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Proposed corridor-wide track upgrades include replacement of existing rail with continuous welded rail (CWR), track structure realignment, track resurfacing, tie replacement, replacing or upgrading ballasting, rehabilitation of existing sidings, and replacement of existing turnouts. CWR reduces the number of joints and thus enables trains to move more quickly and with less friction and noise. . Signal System Upgrades: Rail signal systems communicate vital safety information to train conductors. Conductors rely on clear signals regarding maximum allowable speeds, when to slow down or stop, track obstructions, and the like. The existing signal scheme is a mix of older and newer systems. The remainder of the corridor is under an ABS that uses train warrant control (TWC). This requires a dispatcher to communicate directly with each train crew before the train can obtain authority to proceed through “blocks.” At the end of each block, the train must wait for permission to go forward once again. CTC is managed centrally, but uses remotely controlled signals and switches. CTC reduces the amount of time trains must spend waiting for dispatching instructions. Caltrans estimates that about 40 percent of all delays experienced in the Coast Corridor are the result of signaling issues.5 5 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, p. 9-7 The Build Alternative proposed that CTC be introduced in two locations: 1) from Salinas to Soledad, via the extension of an existing CTC system to the north and 2) an “island” CTC between San Lucas and Bradley (both unincorporated communities in southern Monterey County). . New powered switches: Powered switches are mechanical devices within a railroad track that guide trains from one track to another - such as a siding, or a second mainline. Switching mechanisms include sensors placed on rails/ties and control boxes placed  immediately alongside the railroad within the railroad ROW. Powered switches are generally considered an upgrade over manually thrown switches insofar as they facilitate the speed of transition from one track to another. . Siding extensions/new siding: A siding is a short section of track adjacent to a main track used for passing and dwelling purposes in single track systems. At present, the sidings in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the corridor are generally one mile in length or shorter. Freight trains often exceed one mile in length and sometimes cannot be accommodated in the existing sidings. The proposed siding extensions are generally located within the existing railroad ROW and would lengthen existing sidings so that each would be at least 10,000 feet in length. Sidings could potentially be extended on either their northern or southern ends. For the purposes of the Program EIS/EIR, extensions to existing sidings were contemplated on both their northern and southern ends. The extension lengths are such that either the northern or southern extension area would provide sufficient space to increase the siding to the requisite 10,000 feet in length. In addition to several siding extensions, the Build Alternative also includes entirely new sidings at Chalone Creek near Soledad (MP 147 to MP 149), San Lucas (MP 167.2 to MP 190.4), and Wellsona (MP 205 to MP 207.6). . New second mainline: A second main track is contemplated from South Santa Margarita toward the Cuesta Grade (MP 233 to MP 235), terminating just north of the first tunnel between Cuesta Grade and San Luis Obispo. At present, average train speeds through this portion are some of the slowest for the entire alignment - ranging between 25 and 35 mph. Slow speeds here are to the result of track curvature and deficient train control systems. Moreover, this area is where northbound and southbound Coast Starlight passenger trains typically meet and must pass each other (as one train dwells in a siding). Accordingly, a second mainline here would significantly expand mobility. For the purposes of the Program EIS/EIR, it is assumed that the second mainline would consist of a standard track running within a 60 foot new ROW immediately adjacent to the existing rail alignment. . Curve or other track realignments: The existing Coast Corridor alignment includes some sharp curves that require trains to slow down to reduce the risk of derailment. The Build Alternative contemplated several curve realignments intended to reduce track curvature. If constructed, curve realignments would allow for increased speeds, enhanced safety, and reduced trip times. Such realignments typically result in less wear and tear to tracks, reducing the frequency of repair or maintenance. Most of the curve realignments were initially identified as part of the Amtrak 20-Year Plan, which also contemplated raising top speeds through this segment of the Coast Corridor to 135 miles per hour. (Subsequently, the 2013 SDP assumed that improvements and maintenance was needed to maintain the Coast Corridor as an FRA Class IV railroad, which allows top speeds of no more than 80 mph for passenger service). The Amtrak 20-Year Plan identified milepost-to-milepost starts and stops of curve realignment areas. For the purposes of the Program EIS/EIR, highly generalized and spatially generous curve realignment areas were identified to enable a better understanding of the type and magnitude of any environmental effects that may result from their construction. Curve realignments would in effect relocate the entire railroad ROW some distance from the existing ROW. The average width of the railroad ROW is about 60 feet. For the purposes of this evaluation, a curve realignment area width of 100 feet has been assumed along with surrounding buffer areas of 200 feet on each side. Given the relative narrowness of the existing ROW, every curve realignment considered would require the acquisition of land not currently in the railroad ROW or in transportation use. In many cases, a single named curve realignment consisted of multiple, discontinuous sections of realigned track but were collectively considered part of the same curve realignment.6 6 As discussed below, the Preferred Alternative does not include four curve realignments that were identified as part of the Build Alternative. 7 As discussed below, the Preferred Alternative includes a modified site for the City of King station area, based on plans provided to FRA and SLOCOG subsequent to publication of the Draft EIS/EIR. . Passenger Stations: The Build Alternative contemplates two new passenger stations in Soledad and King City. The existing Coast Corridor alignment passes through the downtowns of each city. Currently, Coast Starlight passenger trains travel through the downtown areas of each city but do not stop. The proposed Coast Daylight train service may include stops in one or both of these cities. In anticipation of the possible future Coast Daylight service, both Soledad and King City have set forth conceptual station area plans as elements of larger plans related to the revitalization of their downtown areas.7 . Grade Crossing and Mobility Improvements: There are numerous existing at-grade railroad crossings of public, paved roads between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, plus several dozen additional crossings of private dirt roads/driveways. Safety provisions at existing crossings of public, paved roads range from passive warning devices (static wood/metal signage) to more active warning devices (e.g., flashing lights and gates). The Build Alternative would install as-yet undefined signal, signage, and other related improvements at as-yet unspecified existing at-grade crossings (potentially public and private). . Coast Daylight Service and new rolling stock: The SDP proposed the reinstitution of Coast Daylight passenger rail service, which was discontinued in 1971. The SDP proposed initial service of 1 daily southbound and 1 daily northbound train between San Francisco and Los Angeles, requiring 2 full trainsets for 2020 service and 2 additional trainsets for 2040 service. Preliminary proposed schedules would have trains leaving San Francisco and Los Angeles in the early morning (approximately 7 a.m.), and arriving at their respective destinations between 6:30 p.m. and 7 p.m. Future expanded service would see the addition of one additional daily southbound and northbound departure. This expanded service would be overnight, leaving San Francisco or Los Angeles in the early evening and arriving at the respective destination early the following morning. Coast Daylight trains would stop at existing Amtrak stations in the Coast Corridor and potentially also at proposed new stations identified in the Build Alternative (Soledad and King City). The proposed Coast Daylight service would require the acquisition of locomotives and passenger railcars. 5.2.3 Preferred Program Alternative – Modified Build Alternative Based upon the analysis conducted in the Draft Program EIS/EIR and public comments received, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR have identified the Build Alternative (with modifications) as the Preferred Alternative for potential future implementation on the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Preferred Alternative modifies the Build Alternative as follows: . Modifications requested by the City of King to siding extension and station area . Exclusion of four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County . Inclusion of “island” Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) between McKay and Santa Margarita 5.2.3.1 Changes Requested by City of King The City of King provided extensive written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, advising that the City had updated its draft plans for the City of King siding extension and passenger station. These updates were not known to FRA, SLOCOG, Caltrans DOR, or TAMC until the City of King provided its comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Siding Extension Draft Program EIS/EIR Analysis: Precise plans for new sidings or siding were not available prior to publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Accordingly, the analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR made reasonable assumptions regarding the extension of the existing sidings. It was assumed that the sidings extensions would result in sidings of about 10,000 feet in length (generally, enough to accommodate a typical freight train) and that this length could potentially be achieved by adding all additional track to either the northern or southern end of each siding. As a result, the Draft Program EIS/EIR examined a larger total area for the sidings than would have been necessary to achieve the desired 10,000 foot length. The existing City of King siding extends from mile post (MP) 159.19 to MP 160.64 and is about 1.45 miles in length (7,650 feet). The Draft Program EIS/EIR analyzed two siding extensions (between MP 158.5 and 159.19 to the north and MP 160.64 and 161.19 to the south). Either the northern or southern extension would have been sufficient to provide a minimum 10,000 foot-long siding. Revised Draft Plans from City of King: Since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR and as noted in the City’s comments, the City of King engaged a railroad engineer (RailPros) to consider modifications to rail facilities in the area. The RailPros study (prepared for and endorsed by the City of King in its comment letter) proposed that the siding extension be greater than 10,000 feet in length and that the extension would most feasibly be achieved by extending the siding on the north side exclusively. The RailPros study considered extending the siding from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length. Passenger Station Draft Program EIS/EIR: The analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR used conceptual plans from adopted City documents that proposed a station site near the intersection of First Street and Broadway. Operating details were assumed to include a station building, parking, and bus pull out areas. Revised Draft Plans from City of King: However, as noted in the City’s comments, the RailPros plan shows a slightly smaller passenger station in generally the same part of downtown, with similar features, and an area set aside for military personnel transfers. The RailPros plan also calls for the relocation of an existing at-grade crossing (at Pearl Street) to move about one block northwest towards Broadway Street.8 8 Such a relocation would be subject to an approval by the California Public Utilities Commission. Analysis Using the analysis included in this Final Program EIS/EIR, FRA has considered the City’s revised draft siding extension and station area plans. After review, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR concur that the City’s proposed revision to the siding extension would avoid or reduce the intensity of several potential environmental effects of the previously identified siding extension discussed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The revised siding extension would avoid the need for a new creek crossing and would also avoid including any portion of the siding extension within a 100-year flood plain. The revised siding would also be located outside of populated areas, so would have reduced potential for any community effects compared to the previously identified siding extension. Because the City’s proposed modification to the siding extension is reasonable and is likely to reduce the impacts of the project, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR agree that it should be included and analyzed in the Final Program EIS/EIR. 5.2.4 Exclusion of Curve Realignments in San Luis Obispo County During the public hearing on the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR at SLOCOG’s board meeting on January 7, 2015, many of the comments from members of the public focused on several of the curve realignments proposed for various locations in San Luis Obispo County. Commenters stated that the curve realignments had the potential to result in property acquisitions, split of parcels, and have other adverse environmental and socioeconomic effects. In response to public comments, the SLOCOG Board adopted a motion requesting SLOCOG staff drop from further consideration the following curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County: 1. McKay/Wellsona 2. Wellsona/Paso Robles 3. Templeton/Henry 4. Henry/Santa Margarita Excluding these curve realignments would not substantially compromise future on-time performance of passenger and freight trains and would reduce the potential impacts identified by the public. As documented in the SDP, an acceptably high rate of on-time performance in near and long-term horizon years was shown to be achievable with the inclusion of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita, which corresponds roughly to the same area in which the excluded curve realignments were contemplated.  Excluding the curve realignments would also eliminate or substantially reduce several potential adverse environmental effects, including: . Land Use: Without these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require fewer property acquisitions than the Build Alternative. . Agricultural Lands: Without the curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require substantially less conversion of agricultural lands than the Build Alternative. . Air Quality: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, constructionrelated emissions (fugitive dust, diesel equipment) for would be lower in the Preferred Alternative than in the Build Alternative. . Noise and Vibration: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would generally retain the existing railroad alignment through San Luis Obispo County. In the Build Alternative, the curve realignments would have altered the railroad alignment relative to the location of sensitive receptors. 5.2.5 Inclusion of “Island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita In the Draft Program EIS/EIR, Build Alternative components were carried forward from the SDP. As noted above, the Build Alternative specified the extension of CTC from Salinas to Soledad, as well as installation of an “island” of CTC from San Lucas to Bradley in southern Monterey County. Analysis in the SDP contemplated an additional “island” of CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). The SDP noted that this 27-mile section of the corridor currently uses track warrant control (TWC), a non-automated signaling system. The four sidings in this section of the corridor using TWC were presumed to contribute substantially to delays that impair overall on time performance of both passenger and freight trains. However, this particular island CTC was not explicitly referenced in the SDP’s list of Build Alternative components. Notwithstanding, SLOCOG and Caltrans DOR have clarified that it was each agency’s intent that this island CTC area be included in the Build Alternative. However, since the Draft Program EIS/EIR did not specifically include this improvement, this Final Program EIS/EIR formally incorporates the island CTC as part of the Preferred Alternative. Analysis The Draft Program EIS/EIR noted that CTC equipment would largely be on trains but that physical equipment on the ground would include signals at to-be-determined locations and underground wiring to train switches. Signals would be structures of about 10-12 feet in height located at periodic intervals. Such equipment would be located within the railroad right-of-way, such that signals would be visible by train conductors. In contemplating potential program-level effects related to CTC at other locations along the corridor, the Draft Program EIS/EIR did not identify any specific substantial adverse environmental effects. It was assumed signaling equipment for CTC would be entirely within the existing railroad right-of-way, so no land outside the railroad right-of-way would be necessary for its installation. The Draft Program EIS/EIR assumed construction-related impacts along the entire corridor, associated with track and signal upgrades generally. Moreover, given that the existing railroad corridor has long been in transportation use as a railroad, the addition of CTC related signaling equipment was not found to cause any substantial adverse visual effects  between Salinas and Soledad and also between San Lucas and Bradley. Accordingly, FRA finds that island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita would similarly not result in any substantial adverse visual effects. Therefore, no further analysis is necessary and no supplemental or recirculated environmental documentation would be required. 5.3 SELECTED ALTERNATIVE The Selected Alternative is the alternative that FRA finds would most closely align with FRA’s statutory mission and responsibilities, giving consideration to economic, environmental, technical and other relevant factors. FRA has selected the Preferred Alternative. FRA rejected the No Build Alternative because it would not meet the project purpose and need, Coast Daylight service would not be re-established and rail, and highway congestion would not be reduced. FRA selects the Preferred Alternative over the Build Alternative because the Preferred Alternative reduces potential environmental effects by incorporating project modifications suggested during the public comment process. Additionally, the Build Alternative would not offer project benefits that would be achieved by the Selected Alternative. 5.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY PREFERABLE ALTERNATIVE CEQ regulations implementing NEPA require that a ROD specify the alternative or alternatives considered to be environmentally preferable. “Environmentally preferable” is defined as “the alternative that will promote the national environmental policy as expressed in the NEPA, Section 101.” In most cases this means the alternative that causes the least damage to the biological and physical environment, but it can also mean the alternative that best protects, preserves, and enhances historic, cultural, and natural resources. The Build and Selected Alternatives offer similar rail operation components that would result in similar levels of reduced regional VMT and reduced emissions of air pollutants. Both would also collectively enhance rail safety and improve overall rail service reliability through a program of corridor-wide track and signal components. Both would foster connectivity with the CA HSR system. The main difference between the Build and Selected Alternatives is that the Selected Alternative excludes four curve realignment areas in San Luis Obispo County. These curve realignments were not found to offer substantial speed or travel time improvements, but the curve realignments had the potential to result in several unique and substantial physical environmental effects. These curve realignments would have resulted in the need to potentially require acquisition of agricultural land, residential property, and potentially biologically sensitive land. Removal of these curve realignments reduces the overall potential of the Selected Alternative to result in significant environmental impacts. Therefore, the Selected Alternative is the environmentally preferable alternative. Although the No Build Alternative would have no potential to result in any substantial construction period effects or acquisition/incorporation of any agricultural or biologically valuable land into the railroad corridor, it does not offer the same potential air quality and transportation benefits as the action alternatives. 6.0 SUMMARY OF POTENTIAL BENEFICIAL EFFECTS The Selected Alternative would result in all of the same beneficial environmental effects identified in the Draft Program EIS/EIR for the Build Alternative. These include a decrease in regional vehicle miles traveled (VMT) particularly on the US 101 corridor, resulting in an associated decrease in the emissions of air pollutants and reduced regional transportation energy consumption. Improvements to the rail system were also projected to result in decreased train idling times, which in turn can reduce localized air pollutant emissions and energy consumption. . Coast Daylight Passenger Rail Service: The Selected Alternative would provide an increase in intercity passenger rail service with the reinstitution of the Coast Daylight passenger rail service. This service would help to create an interconnected, multimodal solution allowing for better mobility throughout the Coast Corridor region, providing added capacity in response to increased travel demand between Los Angeles and San Francisco. With the reinstitution of Coast Daylight trains, rail ridership would be anticipated to increase, and would also allow flexibility for people who may prefer or require alternatives to automobile transportation. This an increase in service would provide additional transportation system capacity that could relieve some of the projected near- and long-term demand on the highway system, potentially slowing the need to further expand highways and airports in this portion of the corridor, or reduce the scale of those expansions, including their associated cost and impacts on communities and the environment. Rail improvements would complement the highway and local transit systems, creating an interconnected, multimodal solution, allowing for better mobility throughout the corridor. . . Enhanced Safety: Many tracks, signals, and bridges within the corridor have not been upgraded or improved in decades – and in some cases are over 100 years old. Aging infrastructure – if not properly maintained – can translate to longer travel times and decrease the attractiveness of rail as a transportation option. Proposed components of the Selected Alternative would maintain/replace aging infrastructure which would provide the benefit of increased operating safety and allow trains to operate at faster speeds. . Economic Development: Soledad and King City have developed passenger rail station plans as part of larger planning and revitalization efforts in each jurisdiction. Passenger stations in these cities would complement and support local planning and revitalization plans through the provision of passenger rail service and complementary station area development. While new passenger rail stations have some potential to introduce new employment and growth opportunities, both Soledad and King City planning efforts are explicitly intended to foster such growth. . Air quality/GHG: The Selected Alternative presents some small potential reductions in emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases (GHG). These reductions would be achieved through implementation of Coast Daylight rail service and its related potential to attract passengers from other travel modes (especially automobile and airplane). The SDP projects that the Coast Daylight service would generate about 100,000 annual person trips by the year 2020. This averages to about 300 trips per day and translates in projected reduction about 11,000 daily VMT for the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region as a whole. The projected expansion of Coast Daylight service by the year 2040 would further reduce VMT in the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region by an additional 15,000 daily miles (26,000 daily miles total). These VMT reductions comprise relatively small amounts of total regional VMT and are, thus, expected to translate to small reductions in criteria pollutants - well below 1 percent of each of the criteria pollutants generated in the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region.9 9 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, pp. 13-4 – 13-7 Upgrading existing tracks (including replacing wooden rail ties with steel ties) would reduce friction and vibration. Improved stabilization would also require less frequent maintenance of the railway infrastructure. Less frequent maintenance would reduce emissions associated with maintenance vehicle trips and idling, as well as maintenance equipment use. The increase in efficiency associated with track upgrades would reduce the severity of localized carbon monoxide and particulate matter emissions, as well as other pollutants. New powered switches and CTC signals would improve the efficiency of train travel and result in better control of the railroad tracks. These features could be expected to reduce the amount of time trains spend waiting for dispatching instructions, improve train safety, and improve the overall reliability of service. Additionally, the proposed realignments would improve train operations by reducing inefficiencies in slowing down to approach a curve, thereby incrementally reducing air pollutant emissions associated with getting back up to speed. Energy: The projected expansion of Coast Daylight service has potential to attract passengers from other travel modes. Accordingly, it is expected that a portion of these passengers would be using the rail service in place of vehicle, bus, or air travel, thus reducing transportation-related energy consumption. These VMT reductions comprise relatively small amounts of total regional VMT and are, thus, expected to translate to small reductions in energy consumption. Additionally, travel by rail is the most energy efficient mode of long-distance, intercity transportation. However, an empty train would not reduce energy consumption. Overall, the displacement of automobile VMT to increased ridership on the railway would result in reduced transportation-related energy consumption. 7.0 SUMMARY OF POTENTIAL ADVERSE EFFECTS The Selected Alternative would result in similar or reduced levels of substantial adverse environmental effects relative to what was described as the Build Alternative in the Program EIS/EIR. Installation of the components comprising the Selected Alternative would result in construction-related effects, such as noise, vibration, the localized emission of air pollutants, one-time energy consumption effects, and potential temporary disruptions to both rail and automobile traffic. Certain components requiring the acquisition of land outside the railroad right of way would, if constructed, result in the conversion of agricultural lands as well as other lands known to include sensitive biological habitats. Construction activities could also expose soils and/or groundwater that are contaminated with hazardous materials. Construction could also potentially affect the eligibility of known and unknown archaeological sites and other cultural resources. Operational effects would include increased localized noise and vibration from additional daily trains, as well as increased levels of roadway traffic in the vicinity of existing and proposed station areas. . Traffic and Travel: The Selected Alternative contemplates two new passenger stations in King City and Soledad. Buildout of the station areas (which includes the opening of the stations themselves, increased passenger rail activity, and buildout of surrounding planned land uses) would result in increased traffic on local streets. . Land Use and Planning, Communities and Neighborhoods, Property and Environmental Justice: Curve realignments and siding extensions that require substantial land conversion/acquisition outside of the railroad ROW would commit the land uses and natural resources for an expanded and realigned railway in some areas. Future implementation of components outside the existing ROW and in populated areas would have the largest impact on existing land uses and communities. Some of the physical components would convert land uses to be incompatible with the general plan. The proposed design and engineering aspects of each component are conceptual at this time and if carried forward in the future, could be refined to avoid some or all potential impacts on existing land uses and communities. . Agricultural and Forest Resources: Components requiring land outside of the existing railroad ROW, such as curve realignments, new sidings, and siding extensions associated with the Selected Alternative would convert Prime Farmland and other protected types of farmland to nonagricultural uses. If the proposed second mainline is carried forward for construction and additional ROW is needed, some or all of the additional ROW (up to 12 acres in all) could include forest land within the Los Padres National Forest, resulting in the conversion of forested land to a non-forest use. The evaluation in this document is based on a review of conceptual plans for proposed project components. Design refinements may result in reduced potential impacts to both agricultural and forest land resources. . Biological and Wetland Resources: Proposed curve realignments, new sidings, and siding extensions have the potential to entail the use of lands outside the existing railroad ROW that are critical habitat areas for several protected species (including California red-legged frog and vernal pool fairy shrimp), habitat of special-status species, sensitive vegetation communities, and wetlands. The evaluation in this document is based on a review of highly conceptual plans for proposed rail components the project components. Design refinements may be able to avoid some or all of the aforementioned potential effects. . Hydrology and Water Quality: Proposed new sidings and siding extensions, curve realignments, and the second mainline have the potential to intersect surface waters, potentially resulting in hydrological and/or water quality effects. Design refinements of the conceptual plans components used in this evaluation could potentially avoid some of all of these hydrology and/or water quality impacts. . Cumulative Impacts: The Selected Alternative, in combination with related transportation and land development projects, could contribute to cumulative impacts to land use, communities, property, and environmental justice. This would be due to conversion of agricultural land or established communities to transportation uses. The conversion would permanently alter the affected areas and could contribute to agricultural conversion effects from other land development projects in the region. The Selected Alternative could also result in a cumulatively significant visual impact if one or more of the curve realignments is ultimately constructed and would convert substantial areas of residential or agricultural land to a transportation use. Project-level design refinements and funding availability will determine if any of the components would ultimately result in any cumulative impact. 8.0 SUMMARY OF AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES AND DESIGN PRACTICES The combined ROD/Final Program EIS/EIR identifies program-level strategies to avoid, minimize, or mitigate for potential adverse effects resulting from the construction or operation of any of the individual Selected Alternative components. Because FRA is not approving any of the sitespecific components for construction at this stage in the environmental review, FRA has not adopted any specific avoidance, minimization, or mitigation measures. However, any projectlevel measures would be informed by the measures presented in Table 3. To minimize potential future harm from implementation of the Selected Alternative, future project-level environmental reviews will prescribe project-specific measures informed by the avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies and design practices identified herein, as well as any analysis conducted at the project level of detail. Notwithstanding, all practicable strategies to avoid or minimize environmental harm from the selected alternative have been identified herein. It is acknowledged that some mitigation strategies may cause other adverse environmental impacts at the same time that they avoid or minimize impacts addressed in this Program EIS/EIR. Future project-level environmental reviews will determine appropriate site-specific mitigation measures. 9.0 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER FEDERAL REGULATIONS 9.1 SECTION 4(F) AND 6(F) To the extent any individual components of the Selected Alternative advance toward construction and involve a major action of a DOT administration, project-level evaluations and findings under Sections 4(f) [49 U.S.C. § 303(c)] and 6(f) [16 U.S.C. § 4601-8] will be prepared as part of project-level environmental reviews. The Program EIS/EIR identifies the potential for uses of these resources for the No Build Alternative, Build Alternative, and Preferred Alternative. There is no certainty of a Section 4(f) use as the state agencies may not choose to move forward with some/any of components of the Selected Alternative. Notwithstanding, the Program EIS/EIR outlines future steps to evaluate potential use of Section 4(f) resources. Future analysis would include, if necessary, analysis to identify all feasible and prudent alternatives to the use of a 4(f) resource. The Program EIS/EIR analyzed the California State Parks Land and Water Conservation Fund grants list for Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties and did not identify any Section 6(f) resources that would be impacted by the Selected Alternative. Similar to Section 4(f), to the extent any individual components of the Selected Alternative are advanced for project-level evaluations and findings under Section 6(f) would be prepared as part of project-level environmental reviews. Although not anticipated, if the project-level environmental analysis finds a conversion of a 6(f) resource, the Project component would engage in the required consultations and identify appropriate mitigation. 9.2 SECTION 404 OF THE CLEAN WATER ACT As detailed plans for specific components have not yet been identified, no formal consultation with the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) was been undertaken to consider potential effects to waters of the US and wetlands. Future project level environmental review may include consultation with USACE and potentially also the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regarding applications for permits under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 9.3 EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 Prior to implementing physical components that would introduce new structures in the study area, such as curve realignments, further evaluation of potential 100-year flood risk areas would be conducted. The Program EIS/EIR determined that some components of the Selected Alternative would be located within a flood zone. To the extent any individual components of the Selected Alternative advance toward construction, project-level environmental review would evaluate whether the design would be located within a flood risk area. Construction of facilities within floodplains would be avoided where feasible, and floodplains temporarily impacted by construction activities would be restored as much as possible so they can function as before. 9.4 EXECUTIVE ORDER 11990 When federal lands are proposed for lease or sale to nonfederal parties, EO 11990 requires that the lease or conveyance contain restrictions to protect and enhance the wetlands on the property. The restrictions of this executive order apply to wetlands on military installations proposed for closure. In this capacity, EO 11990 can affect the sale of federal lands with wetlands. Compliance with Section 404 permit requirements may constitute compliance with EO 11990. The Program EIS/EIR identified wetland resources within or near proposed components of the Selected Alternative. Delineation of jurisdictional waters and wetlands would be conducted during project-level environmental review if any components of the Selected Alternative advance toward construction. The delineation determination would identify the extent of USACE and CDFW jurisdiction. Accordingly, consultation with these agencies to determine appropriate mitigation would occur. 9.5 EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 12898 Executive Order No. 12898 requires all federal agencies to identify and address, as appropriate, any disproportionately high adverse human health and environmental effects of their programs, policies, and activities, on minority populations and low-income populations (environmental justice communities) in the United States. Compliance with EO 12898 involves outreach to the potentially affected minority and/or low-income population to identify issues of importance that may not otherwise be considered. The Program EIS/EIR identified where environmental justice communities are located within or near proposed components of the Selected Alternative. To the extent any individual components of the Selected Alternative advance to construction and involve funding decision or other approval, project-level environmental review would evaluate impacts to environmental justice communities. The Program EIS/EIR outlines future steps to evaluate project-level impacts to environmental justice communities. Future analysis would include outreach to affected communities and identification of any necessary mitigation measures. 9.6 ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT The Program EIS/EIR identified sensitive biological resources located within or near proposed components of the Selected Alternative. To the extent any individual components of the Selected Alternative advance toward construction, project-level environmental review would involve formal and/or informal consultation with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) if potential impacts to federally listed plant or wildlife species are anticipated. This may include the preparation of a biological assessment or assessments, and biological opinions for specific components moving forward into construction. The lead agency of a component will prepare one or more biological assessments to evaluate the impacts on protected species. 10.0 CONCLUSION This Project is needed to serve both better serve existing users, as well as expected growth in population and resulting increases in regional intercity travel demand over the next 20 years and beyond. The existing rail corridor is constrained in terms of capacity and includes outdated infrastructure, collectively resulting in travel delays, safety, and reliability issues. These problems will increase as travel demand in the region continues to grow. The intercity highway system, commercial airports, and passenger rail serving the regional market are currently operating at or near capacity, and cannot be feasibly expanded without large public investments for maintenance and expansion to meet existing and projected travel demands. The evaluation and findings indicate that the Selected Alternative would help meet projected needs for intercity travel in 2020 and 2040, while improving safety, reducing travel time, and improving regional air quality. The evaluation and findings of the Program EIS/EIR also indicate that taking no action under the No Build Alternative would not meet the future intercity travel needs nearly as well as the Selected Alternative, because the rail corridor will continue to be experience delays and reliability issues associated with existing infrastructure, which could in the long term discourage the traveling public from using the rail service. Moreover, the No Build Alternative would result in adverse environmental impacts, but would not offer any of the beneficial travel and environmental effects of the Selected Alternative. FRA, in accordance with CEQ regulations implementing NEPA and FRA’s NEPA Procedures, find that the requirements for NEPA have been satisfied for the Program EIS/EIR for the Coast Corridor Improvements Program. FRA is issuing this ROD for the Coast Corridor Improvements Program based on the analysis included in the Draft Program EIS/EIR dated November 2014, the Table 3 Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing Traffic and Travel    Potential construction interference to traffic and travel (Increased traffic, delays and detours) MIN-TRA-1. During the construction of any railway components selected for design, disruption to existing rail operations would be minimized to the maximum extent feasible by scheduling construction at times to minimize interference. Appropriate construction and operational strategies would be developed for project-level reviews through coordination between FRA, Amtrak, UPRR, Caltrans DOR, and other interested agencies. MIN-TRA-2. Transportation System Management (TSM)/Signal Optimization (including retiming, rephasing, and signal optimization) may would be implemented, as well as other measures including turn prohibitions, use of one-way streets, and traffic diversion to alternate routes, to reduce impacts to roadways and intercity travel. During construction Potential operational effects MIN-TRA-3. Local spot widening of existing curved areas of the railroad would be implemented to allow for geometric improvements that would allow for increased rail speeds without significant right-of-way acquisition. Spot widening could would avoid or minimize some of the effects associated with full implementation of curve realignments. MM-TRA-4. Project-level environmental review would include consultation and coordination with public transit services in order to encourage the provision of adequate bus feeder routes to serve proposed station areas, which could would mitigate potential transit impacts. A-TRA-5. Further develop project design to avoid the need for a new at-grade crossing. The one identified new at-grade crossing is associated with potential track realignment (MP 172, Cattlemen Road). The primary strategy for avoiding the creation of the new at-grade crossing at Cattlemen Road would be to omit the MP 172 Track Realignment all together, or at least any portion that would result in the creation of a new at-grade crossing at Cattlemen Road. No specific layout for that track realignment has been defined to date. MIN-TRA-6. If the MP 172 Track Realignment is carried forward for further design and the design cannot feasibly avoid the creation of a new at-grade crossing, the development process would include a detailed Traffic Study, consultation, and approval from the CPUC, and implementation would be required to follow all pertinent federal, state, and local policies regarding new at-grade crossings. During project design Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing MM-TRA-7. In the event that any of the Build Alternative or Preferred Alternative components are carried forward for funding, design, and construction, and the above measures cannot be successfully employed to avoid or minimize roadway traffic effects, major or minor intersection improvements would be employed to reduce any potential adverse traffic effects. This would likely require significant right-of-way acquisition to accommodate additional left-turn and/or through lanes. Adverse effects from such improvements would be assessed during future project-level review. Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases   Potential effects associated with construction a. MIN-AQ-1. Apply water suppression at least twice a day to all active construction areas to minimize dust. b. MIN-AQ-2. Tarp all trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose materials or require that all trucks maintain at least two feet of freeboard. c. MIN-AQ-3. Pave, apply water three times daily, or apply (non-toxic) soil stabilizers on all unpaved access roads, parking areas and staging areas at construction sites. d. MIN-AQ-4. Use water sweepers to sweep all paved access roads, parking areas and staging areas at construction sites daily. e. MIN-AQ-5. Use water sweepers to sweep all streets daily if visible soil material is carried onto adjacent public streets. f. MIN-AQ-6. Hydroseed or apply (non-toxic) soil stabilizers to inactive construction areas (previously graded areas inactive for ten days or more). g. MIN-AQ-7. Enclose, cover, water twice daily or apply (non-toxic) soil binders to exposed stockpiles (dirt, sand, etc.). h. MIN-AQ-8. Limit traffic speeds on unpaved roads to 15 miles per hour. i. MIN-AQ-9. Introduce appropriate erosion control measures to reduce silt runoff to public roadways. j. MIN-AQ-10. Replant vegetation as quickly as possible to minimize erosion in disturbed areas. k. MIN-AQ-11. Use alternative fuels for construction equipment when feasible. l. MIN-AQ-12. Minimize equipment idling time. MIN-AQ-13. Maintain properly tuned equipment. During construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing Potential effects associated with operation of the project components MIN-AQ-14. Require filters for diesel particulate on locomotives. MIN-AQ-15. Require liquefied natural gas for engines. MIN-AQ-16. Reduce idling time to reduce DPM and other emissions. MIN-AQ-17. Where possible, install anti-idling devices on all locomotives. These devices automatically shut-off the main diesel internal combustion engine that is used for locomotive motive power after a set amount of time when specified parameters (e.g., engine water temperature, ambient temperature, battery charge, railcar brake pressure, etc.) are at acceptable levels. The device can automatically restart the engine when parameters are determined to no longer be at acceptable levels. These can reduce emissions at sidings and while trains dwell at stations. MIN-AQ-18. Retrofit head-end power sources (HEPs) in passenger locomotives with after-treatment technologies to reduce emissions. MIN-AQ-19. Use a combination of lean-NOx catalyst and diesel particulate filter. MIN-AQ-20. Design stations and associated ingress/egress to provide efficient vehicle movements, to reduce idling time and congestion. Prior to, during, and post construction Noise and Vibration   Potential effects associated with construction noise and vibration A-NO-1. Avoid nighttime construction in residential neighborhoods. MIN-NO-2. Use specially quieted equipment with enclosed engines and/or high-performance mufflers. MIN-NO-3. Locate stationary construction equipment as far as possible from noise-sensitive sites. MIN-NO-4. Construct noise barriers, such as temporary walls or piles of excavated material, between noisy activities and noise-sensitive receivers. MIN-NO-5. Re-route construction-related truck traffic along roadways that will cause the least disturbance to residents. MIN-NO-6. Where construction of components requires deep foundations, avoid impact pile driving near noise-sensitive areas, where possible. Drilled piles or the use of a sonic or vibratory pile driver are quieter alternatives where the geological conditions permit their use. If impact pile drivers must be used, their use will be limited to the periods between 8:00 AM and 5:00 PM on weekdays. During construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing Potential effects associated with increased operational noise and vibration MIN-NO-7. Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies for operational noise and vibration impacts would generally be applied to the trains and the path between the train and the receiver or property. . Noise barriers are a common approach to reducing noise impacts from surface transportation sources. Noise walls constructed near the railroad ROW would shield sensitive receptors from train noise as well. Building sound insulation would also be an effective mitigation strategy. . Noise impacts from surface transportation sources. Noise walls constructed near the railroad ROW would shield sensitive receptors from train noise as well. Building sound insulation would also be an effective mitigation strategy. . Sound insulation to improve the outdoor-to-indoor noise reduction has been widely applied around airports and has seen limited application for rail projects. Although this approach has no effect on noise in exterior areas, it may be the best choice for sites where noise barriers are not feasible or desirable, and for buildings where indoor sensitivity is of most concern. Substantial improvements in building sound insulation (on the order of 5 to 10 dBA) can often be achieved by adding an extra layer of glazing to the windows, by sealing any holes in exterior surfaces that act as sound leaks, and by providing forced ventilation and air-conditioning so that windows do not need to be opened. . Localities wishing to reduce train horn noise may take the steps needed to establish a new quiet zone. This would cease the use of train horns at public highway-rail grade crossings. The locality would be required to mitigate the increased risk associated with the absence of a horn before receiving approval of the quiet zone. . Vibration impacts would generally be reduced by vehicle wheel and track maintenance efforts. Additional track work and materials such as rail fasteners with soft and resilient elements would provide greater vibration isolation than standard fasteners. Ballast mats made of rubber-like material can be placed on asphalt or concrete base with the normal ballast, ties, and rail on top. The reduction in ground-borne vibration provided by a ballast mat is strongly dependent on the frequency content of the vibration and design and support of the mat. During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing Energy   Potential increases in energy consumption associated with construction activities MIN-ENG-1. Develop and implement a construction energy conservation plan. MIN-ENG-2. Explore the opportunity to use newer, more energy efficient construction equipment and materials. MIN-ENG-3. Consider, as feasible, acquisition of energy-efficient rolling stock to provide new passenger service. MIN-ENG-4. Implement a program to encourage construction workers to carpool or use public transportation to get to and from active work sites. During construction Potential increases in energy consumption associated with the operation MIN-ENG-5. As feasible, minimize grade changes in steep terrain areas to reduce the use of diesel fuel. MIN-ENG-6. Encourage the development of intermodal transit connections to reduce automobile VMT associated with the railway. During project design Land Use and Planning   Potential effects to the community resulting from property acquisition within the vicinity of environmental justice groups . A-LU-1. As only schematic plans have been developed to date, the level of detailed design that would normally precede construction would avoid or minimize the potential for land use displacement and property acquisition, whether temporary and/or permanent, residential or non-residential. . A-LU-2. Design strategies would be implemented to avoid or minimize the temporary or permanent acquisition of properties to the extent feasible. MM-LU-3. In addition, to the extent displacement of any residence or business occurs, relocation assistance procedures in accordance with the Federal Uniform Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 would be implemented. MIN-LU-4. Efforts would be made during design to minimize any barriers to community and neighborhood interaction. MIN-LU-4. Efforts would be made during design to minimize any barriers to community and neighborhood interaction. MIN-LU-5. Consultation with local governments and planning agencies throughout the design effort would be conducted in order to maintain or enhance neighborhood integrity. During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing MIN-LU-6. If the MP 172 curve realignment is constructed and includes a new at-grade crossing at Cattlemen Road, potential strategies to reduce community effects could would include additional grade separation of rail lines and streets, new pedestrian crossings, new cross-connection points, improved visual quality of project facilities, and traffic management plans that maintain access during and after construction. MIN-LU-7. Temporary construction-period related impacts on neighborhoods and communities would be addressed through site-specific measures. Potential strategies to alleviate or minimize impact to community during construction may include, but would not be limited to, the following: . Provide opportunities for community involvement early in future environmental studies; . Facilitate design workshops within affected neighborhoods to learn from the community which circulation elements (automobile, bicycle, pedestrian) in the impacted area are most critical so that those elements can be preserved; . Develop design standards for facilities, landscape, and public art associated with the project that reflect the character of adjacent affected neighborhoods; . Ensure that key connections (pedestrian/bicycle and vehicular crossings) across the rail corridor are maintained where necessary to maintain neighborhood integrity; . Complete a construction logistics analysis to determine approximate durations, impacts and localized mitigation measures to reduce disruption to communities, activities, traffic and circulation; . Develop traffic management plans that reduce barriers during construction; . Where feasible, maintain connectivity during construction; . Implement measures to maintain high level of visual quality in the neighborhood. Such measures can include visual buffers, trees and other landscaping, architectural design and public artwork; and . Implement procurement specifications and incentives for construction contractors designed to reduce the duration and disruption of construction. Potential requirements include restrictions on construction vehicle traffic and routes, haul routes, hours of permitted construction activity, and advance public notification of all closures or expected travel delays.  Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing A-LU-8. In selecting components of the Preferred Alternative to carry forward for design and potential construction and operation, examine whether the selected components are disproportionately located within environmental justice communities. Environmental justice effects could potentially be avoided if the components carried forward are not disproportionately located within environmental justice communities. MIN-LU-9. EO 12898 requires federal agencies to ensure effective public participation and access to information. Compliance with EO 12898 involves outreach to the potentially affected minority and/or low-income population to identify issues of importance that may not otherwise be considered. Outreach to affected communities would be conducted during the decision-making process and identification of any necessary mitigation measures. MIN-LU-10. DOT Order 5610.2 requires DOT agencies to establish opportunities for meaningful public involvement by members of minority populations during activities including identification of potential mitigation measures. Minority and low-income populations would be provided with access to information about health and environmental impacts, measures to avoid, minimize and/or to mitigate any disproportionately high and adverse effects and offsetting benefits and opportunities to enhance affected communities, neighborhoods, or individuals during an outreach program conducted as part of the decision-making process. MIN-LU-11. As indicated in the Environmental Consequences section above, many of the proposed curve realignments associated with the action alternatives involve multiple segments, some near and some distant from environmental justice communities. A potential avoidance/minimization strategy would be to omit portions of multiple segment curve realignments that include environmental justice communities or where such impacts would be deemed to be disproportionately concentrated. MIN-LU-12. Special attention would be given to any permanent impact categories that are commonly of concern for this type of project and to those that previously have been identified as being of concern. These include: Air quality, Noise and vibration, Public health, Visual resources/aesthetics, Parklands, Relocation Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing Visual Resources   Effects from visual presence of construction equipment and with the permanent transformation of agricultural/residential land into railroad along the alignment MIN-VIS-1. In locations where construction would take place overnight, appropriate light and glare screening measure would be used at construction staging areas, including the use of downward cast lighting. MIN-VIS-2. Where physical components pass through or along the edge of residential or heavily traveled roadways, landscape treatments such as trees and shrubs, would be installed and continuously maintained along the edge of the railroad ROW to provide partial screening of visual changes. MIN-VIS-3. While new sidings/siding extensions can have low visual impacts as noted above, use of sidings for long-term “parking” of train cars can have visual consequences. Mitigation strategies would include limits on the use of sidings for longer-term train car storage, with potential priority to areas of greater visual sensitivity. MIN-VIS-4. Night lighting at stations would be the minimum required for operations and safety. All lights would be hooded and directed to the area where the lighting is required to be on all the time, sensors and timers would be specified. MM-VIS-5. Natural land cover removed or disturbed to implement physical components would be replaced, as feasible. During project design, during construction Agricultural and Forest Resources   Potential disruption of agricultural uses during construction and operation A-AG-1. Careful design practices, such as constructing the second mainline to be completely within existing railroad ROW, would avoid potential impacts to agricultural and forest resources along the Corridor, as feasible. Other Preferred Alternative components would be designed to avoid or minimize farmland effects through similar design approaches. MM-AG-1. All Farmland impacts would be at least partially offset through purchase of conservation easements that would permanently maintain lands in agricultural use. These conservation easements would be acquired over agricultural lands of equal quality to those affected. With regard to Williamson Act contracts, specific conflicts with Williamson Act contracts would need to be identified prior to implementation of any Preferred Alternative component.  During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing MIN-AG-2. When there is a need to acquire and convert land enrolled in a Williamson Act contract, the Department of Conservation would be notified and requirements of Government Code Section 51290- 51295 and 51296.6 would be met. To the extent the second mainline would require either temporary or permanent use of land outside the existing railroad ROW that traverses the Los Padres National Forest, the Forest Service would be consulted to identify appropriate and feasible means to avoid, minimize, or compensate for any forest land impacts. MM-AG-3. To the extent forest land use could not be fully avoided, potentially feasible mitigation measures include land swaps, fee mitigation, or other similar measures that would compensate for loss of forest lands. Public Utilities and Services   Potential effects to utilities from construction and operation A-PS-1. Adapt rail components to accommodate existing utility facilities and transmission lines. A-PS-2. During project-level planning and design, refer to each utility owner/provider to best avoid potential impacts on existing and planned utilities through adjustments to design features. MIN-PS-3. Where avoidance is infeasible, utility transmission lines and facilities would be relocated or protected in place throughout all phases of construction and operation, and in compliance with the involved utility owners/providers. MIN-PS-4. Implement solar powered CTC in remote areas where utility connections would be difficult. During project design, during construction Hazardous Materials and Waste   Potential effects associated with construction and operation MIN-HAZ-1. Detailed investigation of soils for contamination as part of an environmental site assessment (ESA), and if appropriate a Phase II ESA, for each component prior to implementation would be conducted. Where conditions warrant a Phase II ESA, such ESAs shall include the following: . A work plan that includes the numbers and locations of proposed soil borings/monitoring wells, sampling intervals, drilling and sampling methods, analytical methods, sampling rationale, site geohydrology, field screening methods, quality control/quality assurance, and reporting methods. . A site-specific Health and Safety Plan (HSP) signed by a Certified Industrial Hygienist. . Necessary permits for encroachment, boring completion, and well installation. During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing . A traffic safety plan. . Sampling program (fieldwork) in accordance with the work plan and HSP. Fieldwork shall be completed under the supervision of a geologist registered in the State of California, as appropriate. . Hazardous materials testing through a certified laboratory. . Documentation to include field procedures, boring logs/well diagrams, tables of analytical results, cross-sections, an evaluation of the levels and extent of contaminants found, and conclusions and recommendation regarding the environmental condition of the site and the need for further assessment. Recommendations may include additional assessment or handling of the contaminants found though the contaminated soil contingency plan. If the contaminated soil contingency plan is inadequate for the contamination found, a remedial action plan shall be developed. Contaminated groundwater shall generally be handled though the NPDES/dewatering process. . Disposal process including transport by a state-certified hazardous material hauler to a state-certified disposal /recycling facility licensed to accept/treat the identified waste. Where contaminated groundwater is encountered, the project sponsor shall obtain a NPDES permit prior to the issuance of a permit to construct. The NPDES permit shall specify site-specific testing and monitoring requirements and discharge limitations. Additionally, available agency files for moderate and high risk properties should be reviewed prior to demolition, grading, or construction. If the file review indicates a low likelihood of contaminants being present beneath or adjacent to a project feature (rail alignment, station, etc.), additional assessment/mitigation may not be recommended and the property could be reclassified as low risk. MIN-HAZ-2. Surveys for lead-based paint and asbestos containing materials would be required prior to demolition of any buildings or structures. MIN-HAZ-3. A Site Management Program/Contingency Plan would be required prior to construction to address known or potential hazardous material issues such as contaminated soil or groundwater, health and safety plan for construction workers and the public, and procedures to protect workers and the public if buried contaminants are encountered. MIN-HAZ-4. Construction contractors would dispose of all hazardous or solid wastes and debris encountered or generated during construction and demolition activities in accordance with all applicable Federal regulations. Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing MM-HAZ-5. A Hazardous Materials Management Plan for all facilities that use, store, or dispose of hazardous materials should be prepared. Facilities emitting toxic air emissions shall submit inventories and plans to the appropriate air quality management district and be subject to permitting and monitoring regulations of the district. All necessary local, state and federal permits for the installation and operation of any above or below ground chemical or fuel storage tanks prior to installing such tanks would be obtained.  Cultural and Paleontological Resources   Potential effects to historic properties, cultural, archaeological and paleontological resources from construction and operation MIN-CUL-1. Recordation: The lead agency(s) would ensure that cultural resources adversely affected by the Preferred Alternative are recorded and documented in a similar manner to a Historic American Building Survey (HABS) or Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) to be coordinated with the SHPO. MIN-CUL-2. Design Guidelines: The lead agency would ensure that design guidelines are developed for appropriate and compatible construction with regard to aesthetics. Design guidelines would meet HABS and HAER standards and would be reviewed by SHPO and other agencies. MIN-CUL-3. Interpretive/Educational Materials: The lead agency may prepare interpretive and/or educational materials regarding affected historic properties or resources. The focus of this mitigation would be the historic themes of this resource. A-CUL-4. Relocation: Historic properties or resources that would be demolished because of the project should be relocated and rehabilitated. The lead agency would prepare a removal plan, including site plans for the new locations and placing them on new foundations. MIN-CUL-5. Monitoring: Project construction documents and new construction would be monitored to ensure they confirm to the design guidelines. A professional would monitor construction to identify conditions that would conflict with the mitigation measures. MIN-CUL-6. Minor Repairs and Reconstruction: The lead agency would ensure that inadvertent damage to historic properties or resources would be repaired in accordance Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties. MIN-CUL-7. Salvage: The lead agency would ensure that selected decorative or architectural elements of any adversely affected historic properties or resources should be reviewed for feasibility of salvage to During project design, during construction, post construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing mitigate loss or destruction. Where possible, these elements would be retained and reused in construction. Where not possible, selected salvaged elements would be made available for educational purposes. MIN-CUL-8. Paleontological Resources: Mitigation measures for paleontological resources would be identified prior to implementing specific elements of the Preferred Alternative, such as education of workers, recovery of fossils found during reconnaissance, monitoring construction. Furthermore, mitigation strategies would include establishing protocols for recovering fossils during construction for identification, dating, interpreting, and preserving at appropriate facilities. Geology and Soils   Potential adverse effects from ground shaking. MIN-GEO-1. Infrastructure would be designed to withstand strong ground motion. Designs typically include additional ductility in the structure. The design needed to reduce ground shaking would be determined upon for structures during subsequent stages of development, when detailed design plans are created. MIN-GEO-2. Liquefaction potential would be reduced through site-specific methods such as soil densification or structural design. During project design Potential impacts associated with fault crossings. MIN-GEO-3. Techniques to monitor track alignment as routine maintenance and the installation of ground motion warning systems would be used to reduce the effects of fault crossings. During project design Potential Impacts associated with natural and constructed slope failure. A-GEO-4. Geotechnical studies during subsequent site-specific evaluation would assist in determining the potential for failure of natural and constructed slopes and identifying temporary and permanent slope reinforcement and protection measures where appropriate. During project design Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing Potential hazards associated with shrink/swell, and corrosive soils. A-GEO-5. A site-specific subsurface evaluation would be performed by a qualified geologist to evaluate the extent of soils susceptible to shrink-swell present in the area of the physical component. Where expansive soil conditions are found and would be detrimental to physical component, measures recommended by the geologist would be implemented in project design. . MIN-GEO-6. A subsurface evaluation would be performed prior to design and construction to evaluate the potential for corrosive soil and identify recommendations to minimize or avoid any potential effects related to the presence of such soils (including but not limited to corrosion of rails or ties). During project design Impacts associated with the potential migration of hazardous gases. A-GEO-7. The use of safe and explosion-proof equipment during construction and testing for gases regularly. A-GEO-8. Active monitoring systems and alarms would be required in underground construction areas and facilities where subsurface gases are present. During project design Potential proximity related impacts to mineral resources. A-GEO-9. Important mineral sites will be identified as early as possible during detailed project-level reviews and avoided where possible. During project design Hydrology and Water Resources   Potential construction and operation related impacts to surface waters A-HYD-1. Where feasible, project-level design would avoid adverse impacts to water resources. For example, siding extension impact areas were analyzed assuming one mile extension areas could occur entirely on one side or the other. In the event that one end of a siding extension would impact a surface water body, the siding extension would be designed on the opposite side and away from the water resource area. MIN-HYD-2. NPDES permits and Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPP) would be obtained prior to implementing components of the Preferred Alternative. NPDES permit requirements would be followed and BMPs would be implemented as mandated. These would include measures to provide permeable surfaces, where feasible, and to retain and treat stormwater onsite using catch basins and treatment wetlands. The SWPPP would include BMPs to minimize potential sediment transport due to construction activities, including obligatory erosion control techniques, stormwater management, and channel dewatering for all stream/river crossings. The SWPPP would also include measures to control the During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing overall amount and quality of stormwater runoff to regional systems. Potential BMPs may include the following: . Practices that minimize contact between construction materials, equipment, and maintenance supplies with stormwater; . Practices that reduce soil erosion including watering for dust control, perimeter silt fences, placement of rice straw bales, sediment basins, and soil stabilization; and . Practices that maintain water quality including filtration, detention, and retention systems, constructed wetland systems, biofiltration/bioretention systems, grass buffer strips, ponding areas, organic mulch layers, planting soil beds, sand beds, or vegetated systems (biofilters) such as vegetated swales and grass strips designed to convey and treat either shallow flow (swales) or sheerflow (filter strips) runoff. MM-HYD-3. The project sponsor would obtain permits required under Sections 401 and 404 of the CWA and comply with mitigation measures required in the permits. Mitigation measures may include compensation for habitat loss involving habitat restoration, reconstruction onsite, or habitat replacement offsite, with the ultimate goal of ensuring minimal impact to surface water quality. MIN-HYD-4. If required, the project sponsor would comply with any permit conditions required under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act. MIN-HYD-5. If required, the project sponsor would secure a Lake or Streambed Alteration Agreement for any work that would take place along the banks of surface water bodies. MIN-HYD-6. The project sponsor would manage potential fuel or other spills and a spill prevention and emergency response plan would be developed and implemented.  Potential construction and operation related impacts to floodplains A-HYD-7. Prior to implementing physical components that would introduce new structures in the study area, such as curve realignments, further evaluation of potential 100-year flood risk areas would be conducted. Construction of facilities within floodplains would be avoided where feasible, and floodplains temporarily impacted by construction activities would be restored as much as possible so they can function as before.  During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing MIN-HYD-8. Where avoidance is infeasible, the footprint of facilities within the floodplain would be minimized to the extent possible. All opportunities for redesign or modification to minimize flooding risk and potential harm to or within the floodplain would be assessed. For instance, siding extensions can be designed to either extend from the north or south end of the existing siding, potentially avoiding a floodprone area. Potential construction and operation related impacts to groundwater A-HYD-9. Design facilities that are elevated and/or permeable so as to not affect recharge potential where construction is required in areas of potentially substantial groundwater discharge or recharge. MIN-HYD-10. Minimize development of facilities in areas that have substantial groundwater discharge or that would affect recharge. MM-HYD-11. Obtain waste discharge permits where required. MIN-HYD-12. Obtain a NPDES permit and implement permit requirements, as well as BMPs that would control the release of contaminants near areas of surface water or groundwater recharge. MIN-HYD-13. Consider use and retention of native materials with high infiltration potential at the ground surface in areas that are critical to infiltration for groundwater recharge. During project design, during construction Biological Resources and Wetlands   Potential construction and operation related impacts to biological resources MIN-BIO-1. Field surveys would be conducted to determine the extent and type of general and sensitive biological resources, including focused surveys following resource agency protocols for special- status species. MM-BIO-2. Biological Resources Management Plans (BRMP) would be prepared to specify the design and implementation of biological resources mitigation measures, including habitat replacement and revegetation, protection during construction, performance (growth) standards, maintenance criteria, and monitoring requirements. USFWS, CDFW, and USACE would review Draft BRMPs. The primary goal of a BRMP is to ensure the long- term perpetuation of the existing diversity of habitats in the study area and adjacent urban interface zones. BRMPs will contain the following: . Specific measures to ensure the protection of sensitive amphibian, mammal, bird, and plant species during construction activities. . Identification and quantification of habitats that will be removed, as well as the locations where these habitats are to be restored or relocated. During project design, during construction Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing . Procedures for vegetation analyses of adjacent protected habitats to estimate their relative composition; site preparation (clearing, grading, weed eradication, soil amendment, topsoil storage); irrigation, planting (container plantings, seeding); and maintenance (weed control, irrigation system checks, replanting). This information would be used to determine the requirements for revegetation areas. . Proposed sources of plant materials and methods of propagation. . Specific parameters for the determination of the amount of replacement habitat for temporary disturbance areas. . Specification of parameters for maintenance and monitoring of re-established habitats, including weed control measures, frequency of field checks, and monitoring reports for temporary disturbance areas. . Specification of performance standards for growth of re-established plant communities and cut-andfill slopes. . Remedial measures to be taken if performance standards are not met. . Procedures and requirements to monitor all restoration/replacement efforts. . Measures to preserve topsoil and control erosion control. . Design of protective fencing around Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) and construction staging areas. . Identification of location and quantities of gallinaceous guzzlers (catch basin/artificial watering structures, if needed); specification of monitoring of water levels in guzzlers. . Location of trees that are designated as protected for wildlife habitat (roosting sites) and locations for planting of replacement trees. . Identification of the purpose, type, frequency, and extent of chemical use for insect and disease control operations as part of vegetative maintenance within sensitive habitat areas. . Specific monitoring programs for sensitive species during construction. . Specific procedures to ensure the protection of sensitive species identified for preservation. These measures may include, but are not limited to, erosion and siltation control measures, protective Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing fencing guidelines, dust control measures, grading techniques, construction area limits, and biological monitoring requirements. . Provisions for biological monitoring during construction activities that ensure the compliance and success of the proposed protective measures. The monitoring procedures would (1) identify specific locations of wildlife habitat and sensitive species to be monitored; (2) identify the frequency of monitoring, monitoring methodology (for each habitat and sensitive species to be monitored); (3) list required qualifications of biological monitor(s); and (4) identify reporting requirements. MM-BIO-3. Mitigation techniques to protect plant and wildlife species would include, but would not be limited to on- and/or off-site revegetation/restoration of plant species, and purchase of credits from existing mitigation banks. Requirements for mitigation ratios would vary depending on the character of the impacted plant community and whether or not it provides notable habitat for sensitive plant or wildlife species. Regulatory agencies would be consulted to determine appropriate mitigation ratios. Relocation of plants, seed collection, plant propagation, out-planting to a suitable mitigation site, and participation in an existing HCP would be employed to mitigate for impacted plant species. Restoration of suitable breeding and foraging habitat, purchase of credits from an existing mitigation bank, and participation in an existing HCP would mitigate for impacted wildlife species. Whenever possible, on-site mitigation would be preferred to off-site. Off-site mitigation would be located within the same watershed or in close proximity to the impact area, where feasible. MIN-BIO-4. Minimization measures would include, but not be limited to, pre- construction focused surveys and construction monitoring. Prior to construction, focused surveys would be conducted for sensitive plant and wildlife species identified as occurring in the study area. Locations of sensitive plant/wildlife species observed would be mapped on construction drawings. Research would must be conducted on appropriate methods to use on a species-by-species basis (i.e., transplantation, germination from seed, greenhouse propagation), and construction could would be phased around the breeding season for sensitive wildlife species (See also BRMP information above.) MIN-BIO-5. Specific measures would be developed to minimize or avoid the propagation of weeds during construction and operation. Potential preventive measures during construction could include identification of areas with existing weed problems and measures to control traffic moving out of those areas (e.g., cleaning of construction vehicles, limitations on movement of fill). Mitigation for operational impacts would be developed similarly.  Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing MIN-BIO-6. Field studies would identify locally significant wildlife movement/migration corridors beyond those discussed in this programmatic document and provide data to assist in the design of bridges and wildlife crossings at crucial travel route points. Wildlife crossings would be designed to mimic natural corridors and must be sufficiently attractive to encourage wildlife use. Where feasible, overcrossings and undercrossings for wildlife would be appropriately vegetated to afford cover and other species requirements. Functional corridors would be established to provide connectivity to protected land zoned for uses that provide wildlife permeability. Corridors would be designed using the following procedure: . Identify the habitat areas the corridor is designed to connect; . Determine several species of interest from the species present in these areas; . Evaluate the relevant needs of each selected species; . For each potential corridor, evaluate how the area will accommodate movement according to the needs of each species of interest; . Map the corridors; . Design a monitoring program. MM-BIO-7. Delineation of jurisdictional waters and wetlands would be conducted to determine the extent of USACE and CDFW jurisdiction, and consultation with these agencies to determine appropriate mitigation would occur. . The amount of mitigation required would be assessed on an acreage basis, with ratios depending upon the nature and condition of the jurisdictional areas located within the impact areas. Whenever appropriate and feasible, on-site mitigation would be preferred. Off-site mitigation should be located within the same watershed or as close in proximity to the area of impact as possible. Mitigation options for unavoidable impacts to state and federal jurisdictional waters would include on- or off-site restoration, creation, or enhancement, mitigation banking, or in-lieu fee payments, as described below: . Restoration – Return degraded habitat to a pre-existing condition. . Creation – Conversion of a persistent non-wetland habitat into wetland (or other aquatic) habitat. The created habitat may be self-sustaining or dependent upon artificial irrigation.  Environmental Impacts Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies Timing . Enhancement – Increase one or more functions of a replacement habitat through activities such as plantings or non-native vegetation eradication. . Passive Revegetation – Allow a disturbed area to naturally revegetate without intervention or plantings. . Mitigation Banking – Purchase of units of previously restored or enhanced wetland or waters habitat within a larger managed conservation area. These units are often known as “credits” and are typically sold by the acre. . In-Lieu Fee Program – A monetary payment would be made to an entity approved by an agency that provides habitat conservation or restoration. For example, the Nature Conservancy may receive inlieu fee payments for impacts in all watersheds. . Current federal and state policy emphasizes a "no net loss" of wetlands habitats policy, which is usually achieved through restoration of areas subject to temporary impacts or creation of wetlands to offset permanent impacts. However, according to the January 27, 2003, Special Public Notice for Mitigation and Monitoring Guidelines, USACE favors the use of approved mitigation banks or in-lieu fee programs in the event that these programs would result in a net increase in regional or watershed benefit over on-site compensatory mitigation. Approved mitigation and in-lieu fee programs include measures designed to ensure the no net loss of wetlands policy is met. Growth Inducement   Potential adverse impacts to growth and development along the alignment. MIN-GR-1. New station development would be coordinated early in project-level reviews with local jurisdictions. This would ensure that land use plans and controls can be revised and implemented in conjunction with any new station development. During project design                        Page intentionally left blank. This page intentionally left blank.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY This document is the Final Program Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report (EIS/EIR) for the Coast Corridor Improvements project. The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG), the California Department of Transportation Division of Rail (Caltrans DOR), and the Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) identify the Preferred Alternative in this document. The Preferred Alternative is a modification of the Build Alternative analyzed in the Draft Program EIR/EIS. The Final Program EIS/EIR includes an evaluation of the potential impacts of the No Build Alternative, the Build Alternative, and Preferred Alternative (herein referred to as the action alternatives), and identifies reasonable mitigation strategies. This Final EIS/EIR also includes responses to substantive comments received on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and describes subsequent analysis that would occur as part of project-level environmental analysis. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. Modifications to the Draft Program EIS/EIR, made in response to comments, are reflected in this Final Program EIS/EIR and are shown using “strikethrough” to designate deletions and “underline” to designate additions. Minor corrections and editorial changes from the Draft Program EIS/EIR are also included in this Final EIS/EIR but are not shown in strikeout and underline. OVERVIEW OF STUDY AREA The project corridor is comprised primarily of the existing Coast Corridor railroad right-of-way (ROW) between the existing Amtrak stations in Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The project corridor is about 130 miles in length and is located within Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Portions of the corridor traverse several incorporated cities, including Salinas, Soledad, Greenfield, King City, Paso Robles, Atascadero, and San Luis Obispo. The project corridor includes both the existing railroad ROW, as well as substantial “buffer” areas where possible physical components associated with the action alternatives may be located. PURPOSE AND NEED The project purpose is to increase the frequency, speed, and reliability of passenger rail while fostering greater passenger connectivity to the proposed California High- Speed Rail (CA HSR) System and enhancing safety with minimal disruption to existing and proposed freight rail operations. Implementation of the Build action alternatives would help to create an interconnected, multimodal solution allowing for better mobility throughout the Coast Corridor region, providing added capacity in response to increased travel demand between Los Angeles and San Francisco. The Coast Corridor region is faced with transportation challenges associated with anticipated population growth, constrained travel options, aging rail infrastructure, safety issues, and a need for increased travel capacity without impacting air quality and natural resources. These challenges are likely to continue in the future as continued growth in population, employment, and tourism activity is expected to generate increased travel demand. STUDIES LEADING TO THE PROGRAM EIS/EIR Several planning and feasibility studies have identified and proposed components for the Coast Corridor. Amtrak completed the California Passenger Rail System: 20- Year Improvement Plan Technical Report (Amtrak 20-Year Plan) in March 2001. Caltrans DOR coordinated with Amtrak, FRA, and other transportation agencies to complete the Coast Corridor Service Development Plan (SDP) in May 2013. The Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) has recommended a series of components it asserts are necessary to allow for increased passenger use of the Coast Corridor. The Build action alternatives, further described below, were intentionally drawn broadly to encompass all the physical improvements contemplated by these plans and studies above. ALTERNATIVES No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical component expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of positive train control (PTC) along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. This will provide the baseline for analysis of potential components. For the purposes of this Program EIS/EIR whose purpose and need is limited to potential physical rail system components and expansion of passenger rail service, the No Build Alternative includes other planned and programmed rail improvement projects for the Coast Corridor in the vicinity of the Salinas to San Luis Obispo region. Build Alternative The Build Alternative assumes the restoration of “Coast Daylight” passenger service, which would initially consist of 2 trains per day traveling between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, increasing to 4 trains per day by the year 2040. The Build Alternative includes an exhaustive list of potential physical components between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, some number of which may be found necessary to accommodate increased Coast Daylight service. The extent of needed physical components has not been identified at this time, but is expected to be determined outside the context of the California Environmental Quality Act/National Environmental Policy Act (CEQA/NEPA) environmental review. The Build Alternative looks broadly at each physical component contemplated for the area to provide decision-makers additional information in identifying which, if any, conceptual physical components should be carried forward. Notwithstanding the above considerations, for the purposes of this programmatic review, the Build Alternative has the potential to adversely affect biological resources, existing farmlands, cultural resources, hydrologic resources, localized traffic near stations, land use and community impacts resources, visual impacts resources, noise level increase, hazardous material sites, and air quality pollutant emissions during construction. However, this programmatic document Program EIS/EIR includes mitigation strategies to be applied as one or more components of the Build Alternative move forward for design and potential implementation. To the extent these strategies can be translated into used as project-level mitigation, adverse effects can be reduced or avoided entirely. In addition, the Build Alternative will have beneficial environmental effects, such as economic growth, air quality improvements during operation, and energy consumption improvements during operation. Table S-1 below summarizes the comparable effects of the Build Alternative and the No Build Alternative for the Coast Corridor project. Preferred Alternative Based upon the analysis conducted in the Draft Program EIS/EIR and public comments received, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR have identified the Build Alternative (with modifications) as the Preferred Alternative for potential future implementation on the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Preferred Alternative modifies the Build Alternative as follows: . Modifications requested by the City of King to siding extension and station area . Exclusion of four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County . Inclusion of “island” Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) between McKay and Santa Margarita Modifications Requested by City of King The City of King provided extensive written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, advising that the City had updated its draft plans for the City of King siding extension and passenger station. These updates were not known to FRA, SLOCOG, Caltrans DOR, or TAMC until the City of King provided its comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Siding Extension Precise plans for new sidings or siding were not available prior to publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Accordingly, the analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR made reasonable assumptions regarding the extension of the existing sidings. It was assumed that the sidings extensions would result in sidings of about 10,000 feet in length (generally, enough to accommodate a freight train)and that this length could potentially be achieved by adding all additional track to either the northern or southern end of each siding. As a result, the Draft Program EIS/EIR examined a larger total area for the sidings than would have been necessary to achieve the desired 10,000 foot length.  The existing City of King siding extends from mile post (MP) 159.19 to MP 160.64 and is about 1.45 miles in length (7,650 feet). The Draft Program EIS/EIR analyzed two siding extensions (between MP 158.5 and 159.19 to the north and MP 160.64 and 161.19 to the south). Either the northern or southern extension would have been sufficient to provide a 10,000 foot long siding. Since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR and as noted in the City’s comments, the City of King engaged a railroad engineer (RailPros) to consider modifications to rail facilities in the area. The RailPros study (prepared for and endorsed by the City of King in its comment letter) proposed that the siding extension be greater than 10,000 feet in length and that the extension would most feasibly be achieved by extending the siding on the north side exclusively. The RailPros study considered extending the siding from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length. After review, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR concur that the City’s proposed revision to the siding extension would avoid or reduce the intensity of several potential environmental effects of the previously identified siding extension discussed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The revised siding extension would avoid the need for a new creek crossing and would also avoid including any portion of the siding extension within a 100-year flood plain. The revised siding would also be located outside of populated areas, so would have reduced potential for any community effects compared to the previously identified siding extension. Because the City’s proposed modification to the siding extension is reasonable and is likely to reduce the impacts of the project, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR agree that it should be included and analyzed in the Final Program EIS/EIR. Passenger Station The analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR used conceptual plans from adopted City documents that proposed a station site near the intersection of First Street and Broadway. Operating details were assumed to include a station building, parking, and bus pull out areas. However, as noted in the City’s comments, the RailPros plan shows a slightly smaller passenger station in generally the same part of downtown, with similar features, and an area set aside for military personnel transfers. The RailPros plan also calls for the relocation of an existing at-grade crossing (at Pearl Street) to move about one block northwest towards Broadway Street. Exclusion of Curve Realignments in San Luis Obispo County During the public hearing on the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR at SLOCOG’s board meeting on January 7, 2015, many of the comments from members of the public focused on several of the curve realignments proposed for various locations in San Luis Obispo County. Commenters stated that the curve realignments had the potential to result in property acquisitions, splits of parcels, and other adverse environmental and socioeconomic effects. In response to public comments, the SLOCOG Board adopted a motion requesting SLOCOG staff drop from further consideration the following curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County: 1. McKay/Wellsona 2. Wellsona/Paso Robles 3. Templeton/Henry 4. Henry/Santa Margarita Excluding these curve realignments would not substantially compromise future ontime performance of passenger and freight trains and would reduce the potential impacts identified by the public. As documented in the SDP, an acceptably high rate of on-time performance in near and long-term horizon years was shown to be achievable with the inclusion of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita, which corresponds roughly to the same area in which the excluded curve realignments were contemplated. Excluding the curve realignments would also eliminate or substantially reduce several potential adverse environmental effects, including: . Land Use: Without these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require fewer property acquisitions than the Build Alternative. . Agricultural Lands: Without the curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require substantially less conversion of agricultural lands than the Build Alternative. . Air Quality: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, construction-related emissions (fugitive dust, diesel equipment) would be lower in the Preferred Alternative than in the Build Alternative. . Noise and Vibration: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would generally retain the existing  railroad alignment through San Luis Obispo County. In the Build Alternative, the curve realignments would have altered the railroad alignment relative to the location of sensitive receptors. Inclusion of “Island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita In the Draft Program EIS/EIR, Build Alternative components were carried forward from the SDP. As noted above, the Build Alternative specified the extension of CTC from Salinas to Soledad, as well as installation of an “island” of CTC from San Lucas to Bradley in southern Monterey County. Analysis in the SDP contemplated an additional “island” of CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). The SDP noted that this 27-mile section of the corridor currently uses track warrant control (TWC), a non-automated signaling system. The four sidings in this section of the corridor using TWC were presumed to contribute substantially to delays that impair overall on time performance of both passenger and freight trains. However, this particular island CTC was not explicitly referenced in the SDP’s list of Build Alternative components. Notwithstanding, SLOCOG and Caltrans DOR have clarified that it was each agency’s intent that this island CTC area be included in the Build Alternative. However, since the Draft Program EIS/EIR did not specifically include this component, this Final Program EIS/EIR formally incorporates the island CTC as part of the Preferred Alternative. AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The Draft Program EIS/EIR defines program-level strategies to minimize potential impacts resulting from the project. The discussion will include design and construction practices that would avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts if employed as project-level plans are advanced in subsequent stages. These strategies range from minimal to extensive activities dependent upon the individual features of the project and the resulting impacts relative to the package of components ultimately chosen. COORDINATION WITH THE PUBLIC AND OTHER AGENCIES The Draft Program EIS/EIR and Final Program EIS/EIR has been prepared with extensive public and agency involvement, which is summarized in Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination. NEXT STEPS IN ENVIRONMENTAL PROCESS It has yet to be determined what physical components are needed for proposed expansion of passenger rail service (so that existing freight and passenger service would not be unduly affected). Once physical components are selected, review under pertinent NEPA and CEQA requirements of such proposed components would occur. Table S-1 Comparative Effects, Build Alternatives versus No Build Alternative Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Traffic and Travel    Result in substantial disruption to freight and passenger rail services None expected Construction of Build Alternative physical components would temporarily disrupt freight and passenger rail traffic. Installation of “island” CTC from MP 202.3 to 229.6 was found to enable on-time performance for existing and proposed future passenger and freight rail. Same as Build Alternative Result in substantial traffic increases to local roadways None expected Project traffic would contribute to traffic impacts near existing and proposed station areas. Same as Build Alternative Result in significant delays any existing or new at-grade crossings None expected Additional train traffic and frequency would result; One new at-grade crossing could be created from the MP 172 curve realignment, which could occur on a public roadway. Improved warning devices would be installed at some existing at-grade crossings, which would result in improved safety at these locations. Some minor additional delays would result occurring from increased train traffic as passing of each Coast Daylight train would take approximately one minute. Similar to Build Alternative, with the exception of the King City Multimodal Transportation Center (MMTC), which would shift an existing at-grade crossing one block to the north. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions   Construction None expected Emissions are expected to result from the use of heavy machinery, delivery of construction materials, construction worker vehicle trips, and idling trains resulting from service interruptions. Similar to Build Alternative, but with slightly lower construction emissions due to the exclusion of curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. Rail Operations None expected 11,000 daily VMT reduction projected by 2020, and total of 26,000 daily VMT reduction expected by 2040 in the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region as a whole. Increased efficiency of trains would decrease localized emissions, decrease train idling, reduce required maintenance, and may increase ridership, all reducing emissions and other pollutants. Same as Build Alternative New Train Stations None expected Emissions may result from deceleration, acceleration, and idling at new stops along the route. Regional emissions may be offset by increased train ridership. Same as Build Alternative Noise and Vibration    Noise Compatibility Variable Varies depending on location; considered low for many curve realignments, particularly low for the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment proposed to occur near the Big Sandy Wildlife Area, and others occurring in residential areas. High compatibility in agricultural areas, and moderate at new station areas. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment, creating fewer new effects in this area. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Vibration Compatibility Variable Varies depending on location; generally low compatibility for curve realignments (particularly in residential areas), moderate at new passenger stations, and high throughout agricultural portions Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County, creating fewer new effects in these areas. . Energy    Construction Energy Consumption Unknown  Energy required for manufacturing of materials, construction activities, travel of construction workers, and from traffic delays/detours resulting from construction activities. Similar to Build Alternative, but with slightly lower construction energy expenditures since the Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. Operations Energy Consumption Unknown Increasing service would increase train-related energy consumption, increased ridership would likely reduce energy consumption by decreasing automobile VMT (VMT expected to decrease by 26,000 daily miles by 2040). Increased train efficiency associated with the components would reduce required maintenance, reduce friction, reduce time spent idling, and increase train speeds Same as Build Alternative Land Use and Planning, Communities and Neighborhoods, Property and Environmental Justice Land Use Compatibility and Property High High near proposed station areas and within the existing ROW. Low through Los Padres National Forest and components requiring land outside of the existing ROW. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, land use impacts in San Luis Obispo County would likely be lower. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Communities and Neighborhoods High High in most areas along alignment, low where few curve realignments/siding extensions require land in residential use. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, impacts to communities and neighborhoods in San Luis Obispo County would likely be lower.  Environmental Justice (EJ) None expected Up to 137 EJ census blocks (for race and poverty) crossed by rail alignment and facilities. Impacts vary depending on component. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County and modifies the King City siding and station location. Therefore, Preferred Alternative would cross fewer EJ block groups (up to 129).  Aesthetics and Visual Resources    Construction None expected Visual impacts to passing motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, and rail passengers will occur resulting from construction equipment, light and glare from nighttime work, and newly disturbed land cover. Will be more significant where construction occurs outside of existing ROW. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, potential visual impacts in San Luis Obispo County would likely be lower. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Operation None expected Medium to high generally where new stations are proposed and curve realignments/siding extensions would occur; low where upgrades to the existing alignment would occur, and where siding extensions and new powered switches are proposed. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, potential visual impacts in San Luis Obispo County would likely be lower. Agricultural and Forest Resources    Acres of Permanent Impacts to Prime Farmland None expected Up to 78 Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment. Therefore, Preferred Alternative would reduce potential permanent impacts to Prime Farmland by 1 acre. Acres of Temporary Impacts to Prime Farmland None expected Up to 290 Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative modifies the King City siding. Overall, Preferred Alternative would potentially affect up to 297 acres of Prime Farmland Acres of Permanent Impacts to Forest Lands  None expected Up to 12 Same as Build Alternative Acres of Temporary Impacts to Forest Lands  None expected Up to 20 Same as Build Alternative Convert Williamson Act Contract land to nonagricultural use  None expected Likely to occur in Monterey County Same as Build Alternative Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Public Utilities and Services    Utility Usage None expected Construction-related uses are expected be low; however, water will be required as part of standard construction best practices. Operation of new stations, signal upgrades, and new powered switches would require some electricity and water and wastewater services (stations), but not expected to be significant. Same as Build Alternative Public Services None Expected Some temporary access disruptions associated with construction expected. No impacts associated with operation expected as the components are not expected to encourage substantial population growth.  Same as Build Alternative Utility Conflicts:    Transmission Line Impacts None expected Up to 0.2 miles of operation-related conflicts, up to 1 mile of construction-related conflicts Similar to the Build Alternative; however, the modified King City siding location would increase the potential for construction-related conflicts with transmission lines by an additional 2 miles; operationrelated conflicts with transmission lines would not change. Natural Gas Pipeline Impacts None Expected Up to 2.5 miles of operation-related conflicts, up to 1 mile of construction-related conflicts, and 6 pipeline crossings Same as Build Alternative Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Water Transmission Lines None Expected Nacimiento Water Project pipeline would likely be impacted to some degree from Paso Robles to San Luis Obispo Similar to the Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, potential impacts to water transmission lines in San Luis Obispo County would likely be reduced. Telecommunications None Expected Fiber-optic transmission lines would likely be impacted to some degree within Monterey and San Luis Obispo County Similar to the Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, potential impacts to telecommunication lines in San Luis Obispo County would likely be reduced. Hazardous Materials and Wastes    Corridor-Wide Hazardous Materials and Wastes Unknown Construction activities may encounter contaminated soil containing pesticide or herbicide residue, aerially deposited lead, or other soil or groundwater contaminants. If demolition of existing facilities or structures occurs, construction activities may encounter asbestos or lead-based paint materials Similar to the Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment, which would have required potential demolition. Therefore, hazards from asbestos/lead-based paint would likely be reduced. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Number of “Active Status” Hazardous Sites Unknown Up to 4; one near location for upgrades to the existing alignment section #1 and three near the King City siding extension Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative reflects a modified location for the King City siding extension. The modified location does not include any recorded hazardous waste sites; therefore, potential impacts would be reduced. Cultural and Paleontological Resources    Number of Known Archaeological Sites Unknown Up to 27 sites Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, potential impacts to known archaeological resources decrease to 21 sites. Paleontological Sensitivity Unknown Generally low, high in San Luis Obispo County from the proposed Cuesta second main track into San Luis Obispo Same as Build Alternative Number of Potential Historical Structures Unknown Up to 59 structures Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County, so total number of potentially affected historical resources would decrease to 47. Geology and Soils    Expected Likelihood of Surface Fault Rupture Unknown Varies depending on location, highest near Santa Margarita Same as Build Alternative Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Expected Likelihood of Ground Shaking Unknown Varies depending on location, highest near Salinas Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, overall potential risk of ground shaking would likely be lower. Liquefaction Potential Unknown Varies depending on location, highest throughout San Luis Obispo County Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Therefore, liquefaction potential would likely be lower. Expected Likelihood of Landslides Unknown Varies depending on location, highest near Bradley and between Templeton and Santa Margarita Same as Build Alternative Soil Shrink-Swell Potential Unknown Varies depending on location, highest near Salinas, Soledad, San Lucas, Bradley, and near the existing alignment in San Luis Obispo Same as Build Alternative Soil Corrosivity Unknown Varies depending on location, Steel highest throughout Monterey County, concrete highest near existing alignments 2-5 and Cuesta grade. Same as Build Alternative Soil Erosion Potential Unknown Varies depending on location, highest near existing alignments 2-5 and Cuesta grade. Same as Build Alternative Oil and Gas Fields Unknown Three crossed; two occur at upgrades to the existing alignment near San Lucas, and one by the Templeton/Henry curve realignments Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the Templeton/Henry curve realignment. Therefore, potential impacts of crossing oil and gas fields would be reduced. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Hydrology and Water Resources    Linear feet of permanent impact to water resources Unknown Up to 2,264 linear feet Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment and shifts the King City Siding. Therefore, permanent impacts to surface waters would be reduced to up to 1,859 linear feet. Permanent acres within a 100- year floodplain Unknown Up to 29 acres Similar to Build Alternative; however, King City siding extension would no longer be extended south near San Lorenzo Creek, and Preferred Alternative excluded all of the curve realignments in San Luis Obispo. Therefore, permanent impacts to 100-year floodplain would be reduced to up to 23.8 acres.  Number of surface water crossings Unknown Up to 117 Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment and shifts the King City Siding. Therefore, impacts to surface water crossings would be reduced to 111 crossings.  Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Erosion Potential Unknown Generally low, moderate potential near Bradley (Bradley siding and Getty/Bradley curve realignments occur near steep slopes) Same as Build Alternative Potential Groundwater Impacts Unknown Low Same as Build Alternative Biological Resources and Wetlands   Wetlands Affected None Expected Varies by location; construction activities at the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment and the Wellsona new siding account for the majority of impacts to wetlands. Few permanent impacts are expected, and the majority are also expected to occur at Mckay/Wellsona component areas Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment. Therefore, impacts to wetlands would likely be reduced. Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters Affected None Expected Construction activities associated with the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment and the Cuesta second main track are expected to impact the most non-wetland jurisdictional waters (almost 6,000 linear feet each). Permanent impacts are also expected to occur at these component locations, and at a few other realignments/siding extensions, including the Getty/Bradley curve realignment Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment and shifts the King City siding location. Therefore, impacts to non-wetland jurisdictional waters would likely be reduced. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Critical Habitat Areas Affected None expected California red-legged frog and south-coast California Steelhead habitats would be affected during construction associated with the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment and the Cuesta second mainline. Permanent impacts to California red-legged frog habitat would occur near the Cuesta second main track. South-coast steelhead and Vernal pool fairy shrimp habitat may also be permanently impacted by the Bradley siding extension and the Wellsona new siding. Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment. Therefore, impacts to critical habitat areas would likely be reduced. Sensitive Vegetation Communities Affected None Expected Temporary and permanent impacts are expected associated with components occurring outside of the existing railroad ROW, particularly the curve realignments and the second main track. The Preferred Alternative excludes 4 curve realignments, thus overall impacts to sensitive vegetation communities would be reduced. Special-Status Species Affected None Expected Several plant and animal special-status species would be impacted at components occurring outside of the existing railroad ROW (new sidings/siding extensions, curve realignments, and the second main track). Similar to the Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative modifies the location of the King City siding extension and excludes curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. Therefore reducing potential impacts to special-status species. Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Section 4(f) and 6(f)    Section 4(f) Resources Affected None expected Varies by location, generally low given the proximity of 4(f) resources to the existing railway and adjacent highways and roadways. A portion of the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment may require the acquisition of lands within Big Sandy Wildlife Area which could result in a permanent use of a Section 4(f) property Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment. Therefore, potential uses of Section 4(f) resources would be reduced. Section 6 (f) Resources Affected None expected None identified Same as Build Alternative Class I Areas Affected None expected Class I areas identified are at a distance from the train tracks and no significant air quality/visual degradation is expected Same as Build Alternative Growth Inducement    Permanent and Temporary Employment Opportunities None expected Potential for growth inducement related to temporary employment dependent upon size and complexity of Build Alternative carried forward. Additional service would require some permanent employees to operate stations and service trains; however, no railroad maintenance facilities are located between Salinas and San Luis Obispo; little to no growth is expected in either Monterey or San Luis Obispo station areas Same as Build Alternative Environmental Topic No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Residential Property None expected Adverse growth-related effects limited to acquisition and permanent conversion of residential areas into transportation uses. Few residential takes are expected. May occur with the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment; however, this area is not densely populated, growth related impacts would be low Similar to Build Alternative; however, Preferred Alternative excludes the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment. Therefore, potential residential acquisitions would be reduced. New Station Areas None expected New passenger stations and increased service may increase economic activity resulting in population growth and development; receiving cities have endorsed stations as engines of economic revitalization in their respective communities. Same as Build Alternative Source: Circlepoint, 2014  Coast Corridor Improvements Record of Decision (ROD) and Final Program Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)/ Environmental Impact Report (EIR) From Salinas, CA to San Luis Obispo, CA SCH# 2012081045    Prepared by the U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Railroad Administration and the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments In Cooperation with the Transportation Agency for Monterey County and the California Department of Transportation Division of Rail and Mass Transportation November 2015        This Page Intentionally Left Blank General Information About This Document What’s in this document? The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG), and the Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) have prepared this Final Program Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report (Final Program EIS/EIR), analyzing the potential environmental impacts of alternatives for physical and service improvements that would extend over the existing 130 miles of railroad between Salinas, California and San Luis Obispo, California. The project is located in Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties, California. The Final Program EIS/EIR describes why the project is being proposed, the existing environment that could be affected by the project, the potential impacts, and avoidance, minimization, and/or mitigation strategies. The Draft Program EIS/EIR was published and circulated for public review for 55 days from November 14, 2014, to January 7, 2015. Four public hearings occurred along the Coast Corridor during the public review period. SLOCOG and FRA addressed all substantive comments received on the Draft Program EIS/EIR in this Final Program EIS/EIR. FRA has identified the Build Alternative with modifications as the Preferred Alternative for potential future rail improvements on the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Preferred Alternative is the same as the Build Alternative analyzed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR with the modifications listed below. These modifications are described in greater detail in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives and are adopted in the Final Program EIS/EIR based on comments received from local governments and the public. In general, the modifications will reduce the potential impacts of the project and can be categorized as follows: . Changes requested by the City of King to siding extension and station area . Exclusion of four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County . Inclusion of “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita This document also includes FRA’s Record of Decision (ROD) for the project. In the ROD, FRA selects its Preferred Alternative, which is the Build Alternative with modifications as described above. FRA’s ROD signifies completion of the programmatic NEPA review for the project. For CEQA compliance, this document will serve as a Final Program EIR and will be available to individuals, elected officials, and agencies that commented on the Draft Program EIS/EIR for 30 days. Following this period, if SLOCOG decides to certify the environmental document and approve the Preferred Alternative, SLOCOG will publish a Notice of Determination.  Copies of the Final Program EIS/EIR will be available at www.slocog.org and the following locations: San Luis Obispo Council of Governments Office 1114 Marsh Street San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 805-781-4219 Transportation Agency for Monterey County 55-B Plaza Circle Salinas, CA 93901 831-775-0903  Copies of the document will also be available at several public libraries along the Coast Corridor. Refer to Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, for a list of locations. What happens next? This is a programmatic environmental review that considers a comprehensive list of potential physical rail improvements, in addition to increased passenger rail service. Discussions and negotiations between SLOCOG, TAMC, FRA, other agencies, and the railroad owner (Union Pacific Railroad) will determine which physical improvements are carried forward. Further design refinements will also be necessary to inform any required project-level environmental reviews. Only after such further design and environmental reviews could construction proceed.   For individuals with sensory disabilities, this document can be made available in Braille, large print, on audiocassette, or computer disk. To obtain a copy in one of these alternate formats, please call or write to Caltrans, Attn: Joe Valdez, Division of Rail and Mass Transportation, P.O. Box 942873, MS 74, Sacramento, CA, 94273-0001; (916) 654-7188, or use the California Relay Service TTY number, dial 711.       This Page Intentionally Left Blank TABLE OF CONTENTS RECORD OF DECISION .............................................................................................................. 1 1.0 Summary ................................................................................................................... 1 2.0 Decision ..................................................................................................................... 2 3.0 Project Introduction .................................................................................................. 3 4.0 NEPA Process ............................................................................................................ 5 5.0 Alternatives Considered............................................................................................ 6 6.0 Summary of Potential Beneficial Effects ................................................................. 16 7.0 Summary of Potential Adverse Effects ................................................................... 17 8.0 Summary of Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies and Design Practices .................................................................................................................. 19 9.0 Compliance with Other Federal Regulations .......................................................... 19 10.0 Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 21 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... S-1 1.0 PURPOSE AND NEED ................................................................................................. 1-1 1.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................................1-1 1.2 Purpose and Need For Improved Intercity Rail Transportation Between Salinas and San Luis Obispo ...............................................................................................1-4 1.3 Anticipated Environmental Tiering ........................................................................1-8 1.4 Relationship to California High-speed Rail...........................................................1-10 1.5 Issues Raised During Scoping ...............................................................................1-10 2.0 ALTERNATIVES .......................................................................................................... 2-1 2.1 Background and Planning ......................................................................... 2-2 2.2 Alternatives ................................................................................................ 2-4 3.0 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT, ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES .............................................................................................................. 3-1 3.1 Traffic and Travel ............................................................................................... 3.1-1 3.2 Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions ....................................................... 3.2-1 3.3 Noise and Vibration ........................................................................................... 3.3-1 3.4 Energy ................................................................................................................ 3.4-1 3.5 Land Use and Planning, Communities and Neighborhoods, Property and Environmental Justice ........................................................................................ 3.5-1 3.6 Aesthetics and Visual Resources ........................................................................ 3.6-1 3.7 Agricultural and Forest Resources ..................................................................... 3.7-1 3.8 Public Utilities and Services ............................................................................... 3.8-1 3.9 Hazardous Materials and Wastes ...................................................................... 3.9-1 3.10 Cultural and Paleontological Resources .......................................................... 3.10-1 3.11 Geology, Soils, and Minerals ............................................................................ 3.11-1 3.12 Hydrology and Water Resources ..................................................................... 3.12-1 3.13 Biological Resources and Wetlands ................................................................. 3.13-1 3.14 Growth Inducement ......................................................................................... 3.14-1 3.15 Cumulative Impacts Evaluation ....................................................................... 3.15-1 3.16 Next Steps in Project Development ................................................................. 3.16-1 3.17 Unavoidable Adverse Environmental Impacts/CEQA Conclusions .................. 3.17-1 4.0 FINAL PROGRAMMATIC SECTION 4(F)/6(F) EVALUATION ........................................... 4-1 4.1 Introduction ...........................................................................................................4-1 4.2 Coordination ..........................................................................................................4-7 4.3 Purpose and Need .................................................................................................4-9 4.4 Alternatives ............................................................................................................4-9 4.5 Section 4(f)/6(f) Properties (Parks, Wildlife Refuges, and Historic Sites) ............4-16 4.6 Preliminary 4(f) Use Assessment .........................................................................4-20 4.7 Preliminary Section 4(f) Finding ...........................................................................4-31 4.8 Preliminary Section 6(f) Finding ...........................................................................4-33 5.0 COMMENTS AND COORDINATION ............................................................................. 5-1 5.1 Scoping Process .....................................................................................................5-1 5.2 Other Scoping Meeting Notification ......................................................................5-2 5.3 Formal Comment Summary ...................................................................................5-2 5.4 Stakeholder Outreach ............................................................................................5-4 5.5 Tribal Outreach ......................................................................................................5-6 5.6 Other Agency Outreach .........................................................................................5-7 5.7 Draft Program EIS/EIR Distribution List .................................................................5-7 5.8 Response to Comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR .......................................5-10 6.0 REFERENCES ............................................................................................................. 6-1 7.0 LIST OF PREPARERS ................................................................................................... 7-1 LIST OF APPENDICES Appendix A Scoping Summary Appendix B Union Pacific Railroad Recommendations Appendix C Coast Corridor Service Development Plan Appendix D Compendium of Spatial Data Appendix 1 Technical Data for City of King Improvements Appendix 2 Public Comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR                              LIST OFIGURES Figure 1 Project Location Map ......................................................................................... 43 Figure 1-1 Coast Corridor .................................................................................................1-13 Figure 1-2 State Passenger Rail System ...........................................................................1-14 Figure 2-1 Project Location Map ......................................................................................2-22 Figure 2-2 Section of Rail .................................................................................................2-23 Figure 2-3 Typical Signal Tower........................................................................................2-24 Figure 2-4 Typical Powered Switch ..................................................................................2-25 Figure 2-5 Siding Extension Diagram ...............................................................................2-26 Figure 2-6 Curve Realignment Diagram ...........................................................................2-27 Figure 3.2-1 Regional Air Basins ...................................................................................... 3.2-24 Figure 3.3-1 Examples of Typical Outdoor Noise Exposure ............................................ 3.3-31 Figure 3.3-2 Typical Ground-Borne Vibration Levels and Criteria .................................. 3.3-32 Figure 3.5-1a-h Generalized Existing Land Uses................................................................... 3.5-33 Figure 3.5-2a-h Environmental Justice Communities .......................................................... 3.5-34 Figure 3.6-1 Existing Landscape Type: Agricultural ......................................................... 3.6-20 Figure 3.6-2 Existing Landscape Type: Urban/Suburban ................................................ 3.6-21 Figure 3.6-3 Existing Landscape Type:Industrial/Institutional ........................................ 3.6-22 Figure 3.6-4 Existing Landscape Type: Open Space/Undeveloped ................................. 3.6-23 Figure 3.6-5 Monterey County Visual Resource Areas ................................................... 3.6-24 Figure 3.6-6 San Luis Obispo County Visual Resource Areas .......................................... 3.6-25 Figure 3.6-7 Centralized Traffic Control .......................................................................... 3.6-26 Figure 3.7-1a-f Important Farmland in Monterey County .................................................. 3.7-21 Figure 3.7-2a-c Important Farmland in San Luis Obispo County ......................................... 3.7-22 Figure 3.10-1 Monterey County Archaeological Sensitivity ............................................ 3.10-31 Figure 3.11-1 Active Fault Zones in Monterey County.................................................... 3.11-25 Figure 3.11-2 Active Fault Zones in San Luis Obispo County .......................................... 3.11-26 Figure 3.11-3 Monterey County Liquefaction Potential ................................................. 3.11-27 Figure 3.11-4a-c San Luis Obispo Liquefaction Potential ..................................................... 3.11-28 Figure 3.11-5 Monterey County Landslide Potential ...................................................... 3.11-29 Figure 3.12-1a-h Surface Waters in the Study Area ............................................................. 3.12-25 Figure 3.12-2 Groundwater Resources in the Project Area ............................................ 3.12-33 Figure 3.12-3a-h Special Flood Hazard Areas ....................................................................... 3.12-34 Figure 3.13-1a-i Sensitive Vegetation Communities ........................................................... 3.13-61 Figure 3.13-2a-i Critical Habitat .......................................................................................... 3.13-62 Figure 3.13-3a-i Wetlands and Jurisdictional Waters ......................................................... 3.13-63 Figure 4-1 Clean Air Act Designated Class 1 Areas ...........................................................4-34 Figure 4-2 Section 4(f) Properties ....................................................................................4-35 LIST OF TABLES Table 1 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components – Corridor-Wide ................. 8 Table 2 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components – Site Specific ...................... 8 Table 3 Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies ............................................. 23 Table S-1 Comparative Effects, Build Alternatives versus No Build Alternative ................... S-9 Table 1-1 Public Scoping Meetings ......................................................................................1-11 Table 2-1 Existing At-Grade Crossings of Public, Paved Roads between Salinas and San Luis Obispo Stations ......................................................................................2-12 Table 2-2 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components – Corridor-Wide ............2-14 Table 2-3 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components – Site Specific .................2-14 Table 2-4 Potential Maximum Speed Increases for Build Alternative Components ...........2-16 Table 3.1-1 Coast Corridor Passenger Station Ridership, 2012 ............................................ 3.1-5 Table 3.1-2 Traffic and Vehicle Data for US 101 (2012)........................................................ 3.1-7 Table 3.1-3 Summary of Existing Paved Public Road At-Grade Crossings ............................ 3.1-8 Table 3.1-4 Existing and Projected Station Arrivals for 2020 ............................................. 3.1-14 Table 3.1-5 Existing and Projected Station Arrivals for 2040 ............................................. 3.1-14 Table 3.1-6 Existing, 2020, and 2040 Ridership Forecasts .................................................. 3.1-17 Table 3.2-1 General Conformity De Minimis Thresholds ..................................................... 3.2-3 Table 3.2-2 Ambient Air Quality Standards ........................................................................ 3.2-11 Table 3.3-1 Noise Screening Distances ................................................................................. 3.3-7 Table 3.3-2 Vibration Screening Distances ........................................................................... 3.3-9 Table 3.3-3 Typical Construction Equipment Noise Levels ................................................. 3.3-14 Table 3.3-4 Noise Compatibility of Build Alternative ......................................................... 3.3-15 Table 3.3-5 Vibration Compatibility of Build Alternative .................................................... 3.3-20 Table 3.3-6 Noise Compatibility of Preferred Alternative .................................................. 3.3-26 Table 3.3-7 Vibration Compatibility of Preferred Alternative ............................................ 3.3-27 Table 3.4-1 Construction-Related Energy Consumption Factors .......................................... 3.4-4 Table 3.4-2 2020 and 2040 Annual forecasts for Coast Daylight Service Options ............... 3.4-7 Table 3.4-3 Passenger Travel and Energy Use, 2011 ............................................................ 3.4-8 Table 3.5-1 Compatibility of Land Use Types ....................................................................... 3.5-9 Table 3.5-2 Rankings of Potential Property Impacts ............................................................ 3.5-9 Table 3.5-3 Build Alternative: Potential Impacts to Land Use, Property, and Environmental Justice ...................................................................................... 3.5-20 Table 3.5-4 Preferred Alternative: Potential Impacts to Land Use, Property, and Environmental Justice ...................................................................................... 3.5-28 Table 3.6-1 Potential Visual Impacts .................................................................................. 3.6-15 Table 3.7-1 Build Alternative: Construction-Period Effects of Project Components to Farmlands (in acres) ......................................................................................... 3.7-10 Table 3.7-2 Build Alternative: Operational Effects of Project Improvements to Farmlands (in acres) .......................................................................................................... 3.7-14 Table 3.7-3 Preferred Alternative: Construction-Period Effects of Project Components to Farmlands (in acres) ......................................................................................... 3.7-18 Table 3.8-1 Potential Utility Impacts - No Build, Build, and Preferred Alternatives ........... 3.8-17 Table 3.9-1 Hazardous Sites and Materials in the Coast Corridor ........................................ 3.9-9 Table 3.10-1 Geologic Unit and Paleontological Sensitivity ............................................... 3.10-10 Table 3.10-2 Summary of Potential Impacts to Cultural and Paleontological Resources .. 3.10-25 Table 3.11-1 Types of Potential Impacts from Geologic and Soil Conditions ..................... 3.11-11 Table 3.11-2 Summary of Potential Geologic and Soil Impacts - Build Alternative ............ 3.11-12 Table 3.11-3 Summary of Potential Geologic and Soil Impacts - Preferred Alternative .... 3.11-22 Table 3.12-1 Build Alternative: Potential Proximity Impacts to Surface Waters ................ 3.12-10 Table 3.12-2 Build Alternative: Acreage of Proposed Improvements within 100-Year Floodplain ...................................................................................................... 3.12-15 Table 3.12-3 Summary of Changes in Potential Impacts to Hydrology and Water Quality ................................................................................................. 3.12-19 Table 3.13-1 Special-Status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in Coast Corridor Study Area ...................................................................................................... 3.13-10 Table 3.13-2 Special-Status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in Coast Corridor Study Area ...................................................................................................... 3.13-23 Table 3.13-3 Build Alternative: Potential Construction-Period Biological Resource Impacts........................................................................................................... 3.13-39 Table 3.13-4 Build Alternative: Potential Operational Biological Resources Impacts ........ 3.13-48 Table 3.13-5 Preferred Alternative: New Potential Construction-Period Biological Resource Impacts ........................................................................................... 3.13-54 Table 3.13-6 Preferred Alternative: New Potential Operational Biological Resource Impacts........................................................................................................... 3.13-55 Table 3.15-1 Planned and Programmed Transportation Improvements, Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties ................................................................................. 3.15-4 Table 4-1 Section 4(f) and 6(f) Evaluation Consultation Summary ........................................4-8 Table 4-2 Summary of Potential Impacts to Section 4(f) Resources – Preferred Alternative ...........................................................................................................4-24 Table 5-1 Scoping Meetings ...................................................................................................5-1 Table 5-2 August 28th – Salinas .............................................................................................5-3 Table 5-3 August 29th – San Luis Obispo ...............................................................................5-3 Table 5-4 Index of Master Responses ..................................................................................5-11 Table 5-5 Index of Comments ..............................................................................................5-18 Table 7-1 List of Preparers of the Program EIS/EIR ...............................................................7-1 LIST OF ACRONYMS AB – Assembly Bill ABS – Automatic Block System ARB – Air Resources Board ARRA – American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Authority – California High-Speed Rail Authority CAA – Clean Air Act CAFE – Corporate Average Fuel Economy CA HSR – California High-Speed Rail Caltrain – Peninsula Corridor Joint Powers Board Caltrans – California Department of Transportation CDFW – California Department of Fish and Wildlife CEC – California Energy Commission CEQ – Council on Environmental Quality CEQA - California Environmental Quality Act CNEL – community noise equivalent level CO – carbon monoxide CPUC – California Public Utilities Commission CRCC – Coast Rail Coordinating Council CSRP – California State Rail Plan CTC – Centralized Traffic Control CWR – continuous welded rail dB - decibels DOR – Caltrans Division of Rail and Mass Transportation DPM – diesel particulate matter EIS/EIR – Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report FAA – Federal Aviation Administration FERC – Federal Energy Regulatory Commission FHWA – Federal Highway Administration FRA – Federal Railroad Administration FTA – Federal Transit Administration FTI – Freight Train Interference GHG – greenhouse gas GIS – geographic information system HC - hydrocarbons HSC – Health and Safety Code I-5 – Interstate 5 JPA – Joint Powers Authority LOSSAN – Los Angeles—San Diego—San Luis Obispo LOSSAN North – San Luis Obispo—Los Angeles Rail Corridor LOSSAN South – Los Angeles—San Diego Rail Corridor MP – mile post MBUAPCD – Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District MSAT – mobile source air toxics NAAC – Native American Advisory Committee NAAQS – National Ambient Air Quality Standards NAICS – North American Industry Classification System NEPA -- National Environmental Policy Act NO2 – Nitrogen Dioxide NOI – Notice of Intent NRCS – National Resource Conservation Service O3 - ozone OTP – on-time performance Pb – lead PM10 – Respirable Particulate Matter PM2.5 – Fine Particulate Matter PTC – Positive Train Control PTI – Passenger Train Interference RailOPS – ridership projections and operations modeling ROW – right-of-way RTC – Rail Traffic Controller RTIP – Regional Transportation Improvement Plans RTPA – Regional Transportation Planning Agency RTP – Regional Transportation Plans RWCQB – Regional Water Quality Control Board VMT – Vehicle Miles Traveled SDP – Service Development Plan SIP – State Implementation Plan SLOCOG – San Luis Obispo Council of Governments SLORTA – San Luis Obispo Regional Transit Authority SLOAPCD – San Luis Obispo Air Pollution Control District SR – State Route STB – Surface Transportation Board STIP – State Transportation Improvement Program TAC – toxic air contaminant TAMC – Transportation Agency for Monterey County TAZ – transportation analysis zones TOD – Transit Oriented Development TSM – Transportation System Management TWC – Train Warrant Control US – United States US 101 – US Highway 101 USACE – US Army Corps of Engineers US EPA – US Environmental Protection Agency UPRR – Union Pacific Railroad USC – US Code USDA – US Department of Agriculture USDOT – US Department of Transportation USFS – US Forest Service USFWS – US Fish and Wildlife Service       Appendix 1 Technical Data: City of King      Appendix 1.1 Agricultural and Forest Resources Data  2015 Analysis City of King Siding - East Analysis Scenarios Temporary 25ft Buffer Assumption Temporary 50ft Buffer Assumption FMMP Type Acres FMMP Type Acres Grazing Lands 0.25 Grazing Lands 0.5 Prime Farmland 8.51 Prime Farmland 17.02 2013 Analysis King City Siding - East Side Only Row Labels Sum of polygon_ac Original King City Siding 4.85 Temporary 25 ft Buffer 1.62 Grazing Land 0.16 Prime Farmland 1.46 Temporary 50 ft Buffer 3.24 Grazing Land 0.32 Prime Farmland 2.92 Grand Total 4.85 Los Padres National Forest is comprised of Federal and Private ownership. Impacts are Row Labels Sum of Acreage (blank) Not in Forest Lands (blank) (blank) (blank) Grand Total     Appendix 1.2 Biological Resources and Wetlands Data   Row Labels Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area (acres) Sum of Permanent Impacts (acres) Sum of Temporary Impacts (acres) Siding City of King Annual Grassland 17.6 2.7 3.0 Cropland 226.2 24.6 32.0 Urban 20.5 2.4 0.0 Siding Total 264.3 29.8 35.0 Station Soledad Station Barren 0.1 0.0 0.0 Urban 20.0 1.9 2.1 King City Station Cropland 4.6 0.0 0.0 Urban 16.9 3.4 2.1 City of King Station Cropland 0.6 0.0 0.0 Urban 24.5 2.4 2.9 Station Total 66.8 7.8 7.2 Grand Total 331.1 37.5 42.2 Row Labels Sum of Existing Wetland Acreage in Study Area Sum of Permanent Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected Siding City of King Riverine 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.07 City of King Total 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.07 Siding Total 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.07 Grand Total 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.07 No wetland impacts associated with Original 2013 King City Station, 2015 King City Station or Soledad Station Study_Area Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanen t Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected City of King Siding (2015) Fish and Wildlife American badger 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Burrowing owl 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California condor 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California horned lark 243.8 27.3 35.0 181.5 California red-legged frog 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California tiger salamander 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 coast horned lizard 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Ferruginous hawk 243.8 27.3 35.0 181.5 golden eagle 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Grasshopper sparrow 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Merlin 243.8 27.3 35.0 181.5 prairie falcon 243.8 27.3 35.0 181.5 Salinas pocket mouse 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 San Joaquin kit fox 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 silvery legless lizard 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 tricolored blackbird 243.8 27.3 35.0 181.5 western spadefoot toad 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 White-tailed kite 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Plants recurved larkspur 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 King City Station (2013) Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 Ferruginous hawk 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 Merlin 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 prairie falcon 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 tricolored blackbird 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 City of King Station (2015) Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Ferruginous hawk 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Merlin 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 prairie falcon 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 tricolored blackbird 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Type (All) <---Click to Select Upgrade Type *Units are in Acres Study Area Land Cover Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanen t Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected City of King Siding (2015) Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Burrowing owl 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California condor 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California horned lark 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California red-legged frog 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 California tiger salamander 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 coast horned lizard 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Ferruginous hawk 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 golden eagle 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Grasshopper sparrow 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Merlin 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 prairie falcon 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Salinas pocket mouse 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 San Joaquin kit fox 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 silvery legless lizard 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 tricolored blackbird 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 western spadefoot toad 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 White-tailed kite 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Plants recurved larkspur 17.6 2.7 3.0 11.9 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 226.2 24.6 32.0 169.6 Ferruginous hawk 226.2 24.6 32.0 169.6 Merlin 226.2 24.6 32.0 169.6 prairie falcon 226.2 24.6 32.0 169.6 tricolored blackbird 226.2 24.6 32.0 169.6 Plants none 226.2 24.6 32.0 169.6 Soledad Station Barren Fish and Wildlife none 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Urban Fish and Wildlife none 20.0 1.9 2.1 15.9 King City Station (2013) Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 King City Station (2013) Cropland Fish and Wildlife Ferruginous hawk 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 Merlin 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 prairie falcon 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 tricolored blackbird 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 Plants none 4.6 0.0 0.0 4.6 Urban Fish and Wildlife none 16.9 3.4 2.1 11.4 City of King Station (2015) Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Ferruginous hawk 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Merlin 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 prairie falcon 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 tricolored blackbird 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Plants none 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Urban Fish and Wildlife none 24.5 2.4 2.9 19.2 Study_Area (Multiple Items) Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanen t Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected Fish and Wildlife American badger 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 693.7 bank swallow 93.1 10.3 24.5 58.4 Burrowing owl 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 693.7 California condor 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 693.7 California horned lark 2,135.6 249.6 594.2 1,291.9 California linderiella 550.7 84.4 146.2 320.0 California red-legged frog 1,299.2 168.3 357.6 773.4 California tiger salamander 919.8 121.1 252.0 546.7 coast horned lizard 1,508.4 187.9 421.3 899.1 Coast range newt 358.6 41.5 108.2 209.0 Conservancy fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 320.0 Ferruginous hawk 2,175.0 254.2 610.6 1,310.2 Foothill yellow-legged frog 71.7 0.8 11.7 59.3 golden eagle 1,539.8 195.4 434.4 910.0 Grasshopper sparrow 1,197.7 154.8 330.9 712.0 great blue heron 142.4 27.5 51.7 63.2 hoary bat 421.4 51.4 126.2 243.9 least Bell's vireo 126.1 13.6 35.6 76.9 Lompoc grasshopper 650.2 101.2 165.4 383.5 Merlin 2,135.6 249.6 594.2 1,291.9 pallid bat 421.4 51.4 126.2 243.9 prairie falcon 2,175.0 254.2 610.6 1,310.2 purple martin 302.2 38.4 98.5 165.3 Salinas pocket mouse 895.7 113.1 238.5 544.0 San Joaquin kit fox 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 693.7 San Joaquin pocket mouse 650.2 101.2 165.4 383.5 San Joaquin whipsnake 1,182.3 152.1 327.9 702.3 Fish and Wildlife San Luis pyrg 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 silvery legless lizard 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 693.7 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 71.7 0.8 11.7 59.3 tricolored blackbird 2,330.8 280.5 661.1 1,389.2 two-striped garter snake 140.9 18.1 43.1 79.7 vernal pool fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 320.0 western pond turtle 140.9 18.1 43.1 79.7 western spadefoot toad 1,230.1 151.0 326.2 752.9 White-tailed kite 1,242.0 161.0 337.2 743.8 yellow warbler 73.2 10.1 20.3 42.8 Plants Abbott's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Blochman's dudleya 46.0 10.0 12.3 23.6 Brewer's spineflower 203.6 19.7 60.6 123.4 caper-fruited tropidocarpum 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 chaparral ragwort 136.1 12.4 29.6 94.2 Chorro Creek bog thistle 155.3 19.7 34.1 101.5 Davidson's bushmallow 66.3 7.5 18.5 40.4 dwarf calycadenia 303.2 44.0 103.1 156.1 dwarf soaproot 6.0 0.0 6.0 Eastwood's larkspur 224.2 30.8 67.0 126.3 Hardham's eveningprimrose 233.9 22.8 68.2 142.9 hooked popcornflower 471.5 53.6 153.9 264.0 Hoover's bent grass 328.4 38.0 103.1 187.3 Hutchinson's larkspur 2.2 0.0 2.2 Indian Valley bushmallow 3.5 0.2 3.3 Indian Valley spineflower 120.2 21.2 41.7 57.3 Jared's pepper-grass 53.0 7.0 13.2 32.8 Jolon clarkia 70.6 5.8 21.8 43.1 Jones' layia 42.6 8.9 10.2 23.5 La Panza mariposa-lily 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 Plants Lemmon's jewel-flower 619.7 61.4 168.7 389.6 mesa horkelia 239.5 24.6 74.0 140.9 Monterey spineflower 401.5 42.3 119.7 239.5 most beautiful jewelflower 425.6 50.8 125.5 249.2 mouse-gray dudleya 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 pale-yellow layia 349.5 41.9 115.3 192.3 Palmer's monardella 176.5 15.8 48.4 112.4 Pecho manzanita 7.8 1.2 2.1 4.5 recurved larkspur 94.5 10.4 33.3 50.8 robust spineflower 18.1 1.5 5.7 10.9 round-leaved filaree 547.4 68.3 180.9 298.2 San Benito fritillary 6.0 0.0 6.0 San Luis mariposa-lily 185.0 26.1 67.0 91.9 San Luis Obispo County lupine 176.5 15.8 48.4 112.4 San Luis Obispo sedge 189.4 26.1 67.0 96.3 Santa Cruz microseris 324.0 56.6 66.5 201.0 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 84.3 14.2 26.5 43.5 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 206.1 22.8 52.9 130.4 Santa Lucia manzanita 176.5 15.8 48.4 112.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 205.2 19.2 60.5 125.5 shining navarretia 718.2 110.2 188.3 419.6 straight-awned spineflower 232.3 23.1 72.7 136.5 Toro manzanita 2.2 0.0 2.2 woodland woollythreads 280.3 36.8 90.6 153.0 yellow-flowered eriastrum 212.4 20.7 61.8 129.9 Study_Area (Multiple Items) Land Cover Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanen t Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 Burrowing owl 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 California condor 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 California horned lark 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 California linderiella 550.7 84.4 146.2 California red-legged frog 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 California tiger salamander 892.2 113.1 237.5 coast horned lizard 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 Conservancy fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 Ferruginous hawk 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 golden eagle 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 Grasshopper sparrow 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 Lompoc grasshopper 650.2 101.2 165.4 Merlin 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 prairie falcon 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 Salinas pocket mouse 892.2 113.1 237.5 San Joaquin kit fox 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 San Joaquin pocket mouse 650.2 101.2 165.4 San Joaquin whipsnake 1,140.7 147.5 311.5 silvery legless lizard 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 tricolored blackbird 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 vernal pool fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 western spadefoot toad 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 White-tailed kite 1,158.4 150.2 314.5 Plants Blochman's dudleya 38.2 8.9 10.2 caper-fruited tropidocarpum 113.7 13.3 44.5 Chorro Creek bog thistle 38.2 8.9 10.2 dwarf calycadenia 147.2 15.6 45.6 Eastwood's larkspur 213.2 30.1 63.8 hooked popcornflower 246.1 30.8 87.1 Hoover's bent grass 151.9 22.2 54.7 Jared's pepper-grass 53.0 7.0 13.2 Jones' layia 38.2 8.9 10.2 La Panza mariposa-lily 38.2 8.9 10.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 619.7 61.4 168.7 Monterey spineflower 382.4 40.8 113.9 most beautiful jewel-flower 213.2 30.1 63.8 Annual Grassland Plants mouse-gray dudleya 38.2 8.9 10.2 none 154.1 16.2 54.3 pale-yellow layia 151.9 22.2 54.7 recurved larkspur 94.5 10.4 33.3 round-leaved filaree 322.1 36.8 99.1 San Luis mariposa-lily 151.9 22.2 54.7 San Luis Obispo sedge 151.9 22.2 54.7 Santa Cruz microseris 324.0 56.6 66.5 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 206.0 22.8 52.9 shining navarretia 552.0 84.8 133.2 woodland woollythreads 147.2 15.6 45.6 Barren Fish and Wildlife none 115.8 23.1 30.4 Plants none 115.8 23.1 30.4 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 119.2 13.0 27.6 Coast range newt 119.2 13.0 27.6 golden eagle 119.2 13.0 27.6 hoary bat 119.2 13.0 27.6 pallid bat 119.2 13.0 27.6 Plants Brewer's spineflower 35.1 2.4 5.4 chaparral ragwort 35.3 2.4 5.4 Chorro Creek bog thistle 35.1 2.4 5.4 Davidson's bush-mallow 8.5 1.3 dwarf calycadenia 61.6 8.5 17.1 Hardham's evening-primrose 62.7 4.8 12.8 hooked popcornflower 54.3 4.8 11.4 Hoover's bent grass 35.1 2.4 5.4 Indian Valley bush-mallow 0.1 Indian Valley spineflower 51.2 8.5 14.9 Jolon clarkia 6.4 1.3 La Panza mariposa-lily 35.1 2.4 5.4 mesa horkelia 49.0 4.5 9.1 Monterey spineflower 0.1 most beautiful jewel-flower 49.0 4.5 9.1 mouse-gray dudleya 35.1 2.4 5.4 pale-yellow layia 35.1 2.4 5.4 Palmer's monardella 35.1 2.4 5.4 robust spineflower 0.1 round-leaved filaree 75.5 10.6 20.9 San Luis Obispo County lupine 35.1 2.4 5.4 Blue Oak Woodland Plants Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 42.4 6.1 11.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 35.1 2.4 5.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 42.0 3.0 7.9 shining navarretia 77.7 10.6 20.9 straight-awned spineflower 42.0 3.0 7.9 woodland woollythreads 61.6 8.5 17.1 yellow-flowered eriastrum 49.0 4.5 9.1 Blue Oak-Foothill Pine Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 58.4 6.1 25.2 Coast range newt 58.4 6.1 25.2 golden eagle 58.4 6.1 25.2 hoary bat 58.4 6.1 25.2 pallid bat 58.4 6.1 25.2 purple martin 58.4 6.1 25.2 Plants Brewer's spineflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 Hardham's evening-primrose 56.5 6.1 25.1 hooked popcornflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 Hoover's bent grass 56.5 6.1 25.1 mesa horkelia 58.4 6.1 25.2 most beautiful jewel-flower 58.4 6.1 25.2 pale-yellow layia 56.5 6.1 25.1 Palmer's monardella 56.5 6.1 25.1 round-leaved filaree 58.4 6.1 25.2 San Luis Obispo County lupine 56.5 6.1 25.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 56.5 6.1 25.1 Santa Margarita manzanita 58.4 6.1 25.2 shining navarretia 2.0 0.1 straight-awned spineflower 58.4 6.1 25.2 yellow-flowered eriastrum 58.4 6.1 25.2 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 118.2 13.4 35.2 Coast range newt 160.1 21.5 50.6 golden eagle 160.1 21.5 50.6 hoary bat 160.1 21.5 50.6 pallid bat 160.1 21.5 50.6 purple martin 160.1 21.5 50.6 Plants Brewer's spineflower 72.5 6.7 16.4 chaparral ragwort 71.0 6.7 15.0 Coastal Oak Plants Chorro Creek bog thistle 67.7 6.7 14.8 dwarf calycadenia 71.6 12.7 27.9 Hardham's evening-primrose 102.2 11.3 28.8 hooked popcornflower 102.2 11.3 28.8 Hoover's bent grass 72.5 6.7 16.4 Indian Valley bush-mallow 3.4 0.2 Indian Valley spineflower 69.0 12.7 26.8 Jolon clarkia 2.4 0.1 La Panza mariposa-lily 67.7 6.7 14.8 mesa horkelia 87.5 8.8 22.7 Monterey spineflower 3.4 0.2 most beautiful jewel-flower 87.5 8.8 22.7 mouse-gray dudleya 67.7 6.7 14.8 pale-yellow layia 72.5 6.7 16.4 Palmer's monardella 72.5 6.7 16.4 robust spineflower 2.4 0.1 round-leaved filaree 91.4 14.8 35.7 San Luis Obispo County lupine 72.5 6.7 16.4 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 41.8 8.1 15.4 Santa Lucia manzanita 72.5 6.7 16.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 87.4 8.8 22.6 shining navarretia 86.6 14.8 34.1 straight-awned spineflower 87.4 8.8 22.6 woodland woollythreads 71.6 12.7 27.9 yellow-flowered eriastrum 87.5 8.8 22.7 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 32.7 3.9 13.2 Ferruginous hawk 32.7 3.9 13.2 golden eagle 32.7 3.9 13.2 Grasshopper sparrow 32.7 3.9 13.2 prairie falcon 32.7 3.9 13.2 Salinas pocket mouse 3.5 0.0 0.9 San Joaquin whipsnake 30.5 3.9 13.1 Plants Blochman's dudleya 3.4 1.2 2.1 Brewer's spineflower 27.1 3.9 12.2 chaparral ragwort 19.0 2.7 7.7 Chorro Creek bog thistle 3.4 1.2 2.1 Davidson's bush-mallow 3.3 0.9 Hutchinson's larkspur 2.2 0.0 Jolon clarkia 19.1 1.5 6.5 Coastal Scrub Plants mesa horkelia 27.1 3.9 12.2 Monterey spineflower 15.7 1.5 5.6 pale-yellow layia 27.1 3.9 12.2 Pecho manzanita 3.4 1.2 2.1 robust spineflower 15.7 1.5 5.6 San Luis mariposa-lily 27.1 3.9 12.2 San Luis Obispo sedge 27.1 3.9 12.2 straight-awned spineflower 27.1 3.9 12.2 Toro manzanita 2.2 0.0 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 977.2 99.3 279.7 Ferruginous hawk 977.2 99.3 279.7 Merlin 977.2 99.3 279.7 prairie falcon 977.2 99.3 279.7 tricolored blackbird 977.2 99.3 279.7 Plants none 1,262.1 135.0 408.0 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 63.0 17.1 29.1 California tiger salamander 24.9 7.8 13.3 great blue heron 63.0 17.1 29.1 San Luis pyrg 11.2 1.4 3.4 tricolored blackbird 63.0 17.1 29.1 two-striped garter snake 63.0 17.1 29.1 western pond turtle 63.0 17.1 29.1 Plants Chorro Creek bog thistle 0.2 0.1 dwarf calycadenia 22.9 7.2 12.6 none 41.3 10.5 17.0 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 52.8 3.5 15.2 tricolored blackbird 52.8 3.5 15.2 Plants Jolon clarkia 1.7 0.1 0.2 none 51.1 3.4 15.0 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 6.1 0.3 2.3 California tiger salamander 2.7 0.2 1.1 Coast range newt 6.1 0.3 2.3 great blue heron 6.1 0.3 2.3 tricolored blackbird 6.1 0.3 2.3 two-striped garter snake 6.1 0.3 2.3 western pond turtle 6.1 0.3 2.3 Plants none 6.1 0.3 2.3 Mixed Chaparral Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 4.4 0.0 0.0 Coast range newt 4.4 0.0 0.0 golden eagle 4.4 0.0 0.0 Mixed Chaparral Fish and Wildlife San Joaquin whipsnake 4.4 0.0 0.0 Plants Blochman's dudleya 4.4 Brewer's spineflower 4.4 chaparral ragwort 4.4 Chorro Creek bog thistle 4.4 dwarf soaproot 4.4 Eastwood's larkspur 4.4 Hardham's evening-primrose 4.4 hooked popcornflower 4.4 Hoover's bent grass 4.4 Jones' layia 4.4 La Panza mariposa-lily 4.4 mesa horkelia 4.4 most beautiful jewel-flower 4.4 mouse-gray dudleya 4.4 Palmer's monardella 4.4 Pecho manzanita 4.4 San Benito fritillary 4.4 San Luis mariposa-lily 4.4 San Luis Obispo County lupine 4.4 San Luis Obispo sedge 8.8 Santa Lucia manzanita 4.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 4.4 straight-awned spineflower 4.4 yellow-flowered eriastrum 4.4 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 22.4 0.5 4.5 California red-legged frog 71.7 0.8 11.7 Foothill yellow-legged frog 71.7 0.8 11.7 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 71.7 0.8 11.7 two-striped garter snake 71.7 0.8 11.7 western pond turtle 71.7 0.8 11.7 western spadefoot toad 71.7 0.8 11.7 Plants none 71.7 0.8 11.7 Unknown Shrub Type Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 6.7 0.7 3.3 Ferruginous hawk 6.7 0.7 3.3 golden eagle 6.7 0.7 3.3 Grasshopper sparrow 6.7 0.7 3.3 prairie falcon 6.7 0.7 3.3 Unknown Shrub Fish and Wildlife San Joaquin whipsnake 6.7 0.7 3.3 Plants Brewer's spineflower 1.6 0.0 dwarf soaproot 1.6 0.0 Eastwood's larkspur 6.7 0.7 3.3 Hardham's evening-primrose 1.6 0.0 hooked popcornflower 1.6 0.0 Hoover's bent grass 1.6 0.0 mesa horkelia 6.7 0.7 3.3 most beautiful jewel-flower 6.7 0.7 3.3 Palmer's monardella 1.6 0.0 San Benito fritillary 1.6 0.0 San Luis mariposa-lily 1.6 0.0 San Luis Obispo County lupine 1.6 0.0 San Luis Obispo sedge 1.6 0.0 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 0.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 1.6 0.0 Santa Margarita manzanita 6.6 0.7 3.3 straight-awned spineflower 6.6 0.7 3.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 6.7 0.7 3.3 Urban Fish and Wildlife none 412.1 59.6 91.9 Plants none 412.1 59.6 91.9 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 70.8 9.8 20.0 great blue heron 73.2 10.1 20.3 hoary bat 73.2 10.1 20.3 least Bell's vireo 73.2 10.1 20.3 pallid bat 73.2 10.1 20.3 purple martin 73.2 10.1 20.3 tricolored blackbird 73.2 10.1 20.3 White-tailed kite 73.2 10.1 20.3 yellow warbler 73.2 10.1 20.3 Plants Abbott's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 Davidson's bush-mallow 54.6 7.5 16.2 Jolon clarkia 41.0 4.1 13.5 none 9.3 2.3 2.3 Valley Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 10.4 0.6 2.4 Coast range newt 10.4 0.6 2.4 hoary bat 10.4 0.6 2.4 pallid bat 10.4 0.6 2.4 purple martin 10.4 0.6 2.4 White-tailed kite 10.4 0.6 2.4 Plants Brewer's spineflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 Valley Oak Plants chaparral ragwort 6.4 0.6 1.5 Chorro Creek bog thistle 6.4 0.6 1.5 Hardham's evening-primrose 6.4 0.6 1.5 hooked popcornflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 Hoover's bent grass 6.4 0.6 1.5 La Panza mariposa-lily 6.4 0.6 1.5 mesa horkelia 6.4 0.6 1.5 most beautiful jewel-flower 6.4 0.6 1.5 mouse-gray dudleya 6.4 0.6 1.5 none 4.0 0.9 pale-yellow layia 6.4 0.6 1.5 Palmer's monardella 6.4 0.6 1.5 San Luis Obispo County lupine 6.4 0.6 1.5 Santa Lucia manzanita 6.4 0.6 1.5 Santa Margarita manzanita 6.4 0.6 1.5 straight-awned spineflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 yellow-flowered eriastrum 6.4 0.6 1.5 123456789 A B C D E Study_Area Species Common Name Total CNDDB Ocurrences in Study Area CNDDB Occurreces Potentially Directly Impacted (Permanent or Temporary) CNDDB Occurrences Potentially Indirectly Affected City of King Siding (2015) bank swallow 1 1 1 City of King Station (2015) American badger 1 0 1 King City Station (2013) American badger 1 0 1 Soledad Station None 0 0 0 Species Common Name CNDDB Ocurrences in Coast Corridor Project Area CNDDB Occurreces Potentially Directly Impacted (Permanent or Temporary) CNDDB Occurrences Potentially Indirectly Affected American badger 1 1 1 American peregrine falcon 1 1 1 No Change from 2013 anaylsis bank swallow 2 2 2 California condor 1 1 1 Cambria morningglory 1 0 1 Congdon's tarplant 1 1 1 dwarf soaproot 1 1 1 golden eagle 3 3 3 Hardham's eveningprimrose 1 0 1 least Bell's vireo 1 1 1 Lemmon's jewelflower 1 1 1 mesa horkelia 2 2 2 pale-yellow layia 1 0 1 prairie falcon 16 16 16 San Benito fritillary 1 1 1 San Joaquin kit fox 3 3 3 San Joaquin pocket mouse 1 1 1 San Joaquin whipsnake 1 1 1 Santa Margarita manzanita 1 1 1 tricolored blackbird 1 0 1 western pond turtle 1 0 1 western spadefoot 1 1 1 white-tailed kite 1 1 1 yellow warbler 1 1 1 Study Area Species with Critical Habitat Existing in Study Area (acres) Permanent Impacts (acres) Temporary Impacts (acres) Area Potentially Indirectly Affected (within 250 feet of disturbance) City of King Siding (2015) NONE 0 0 0 0 City of King Station NONE 0 0 0 0 King City Station (2013) NONE 0 0 0 0 Soledad Station NONE 0 0 0 0 Acreage Grand Total 0 0 0 0 Study Area Existing Stream Length in Study Area (linear feet) Permanent Impacts to Streams (linear feet) Temporary Impacts to Streams (linear feet) Number of Stream Crossings in Study Area Notes Species Potentially Occurring in Stream City of King Siding (2015) 142 0 0 1 Unnamed Intermittent Stream Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, twostriped garter snake, and western pond turtle City of King Station (2015) 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A King City Station (2013) 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A Soledad Station 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A Second Mainline 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A Grand Total 142 0 0 1     Appendix 1.3 Cultural Resources Data  P-number Trinomial Site Type Recordation Date Author HRI Built Enviro- ArchHist POS-Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Eligible CRHR Only Eligible Local Only Eval N-E Recorded - No Eval Outside Temp/Perm Boundary Permanent/City of King Siding Temporary/King City Siding P-27-002971 Historic - BE Oct-08 M. Millett and J. Glover X 1883-1923 Southern Pacific Railroad (King City) X No X ICF-ID APN Est. Year Built if known Resource Type Upgrade Type Upgrade Name Impact IND-1 026292002000 1952 Industrial Station City of King n/a IND-6 Unkown Unkown Industrial Station City of King Permanent IND-7 026293003000 Unkown Industrial Station City of King Permanent ICF-ID APN Est. Year Built if known Resource Type Upgrade Type Upgrade Name Impact Type IND-1 026292002000 1952 Industrial Station City of King n/a IND-6 Unkown Unkown Industrial Station City of King Permanent IND-7 026293003000 Unkown Industrial Station City of King Permanent     Appendix 1.4 Environmental Justice Data  Row Labels Product of % Minority Count of Greater then 50% below Poverty % Minority Population Higher than 10% Over County Percentage (1=EJ) Notes: *Percent Living Below Poverty Monterey - 44.41% San Luis Obispo - 17.39%  Monterey County Station City of King Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.02 58.42% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.03 31.94% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.02 52.23% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.03 39.98% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.04 56.12% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.02 48.99% 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.04 47.80% 1 Row Labels  % Minority  Greater then 50% Minority (1=EJ) % Minority Population Higher than 10% Over County Percentage (1=EJ) Notes: *Percent Living Below Poverty Monterey - 44.41% San Luis Obispo - 17.39%  Monterey County Sidings City of King Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.02 58.42% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.02 52.23% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.04 56.12% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.04 47.80% 1 Row Labels Percent Population Living Below Poverty  Greater then 25% below Poverty (1=EJ)  Tracts 10% greater then the County Poverty Percentage* (1=EJ) Notes: *Percent Living Below Poverty Monterey - 15.10% San Luis Obispo - 13.20%  Monterey County Station City of King Census Tract 113.02 27.50 1 1 Census Tract 113.03 4.70 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 Row Labels Percent Population Living Below Poverty  Greater then 25% below Poverty (1=EJ)  Tracts 10% greater then the County Poverty Percentage* (1=EJ) Notes: *Percent Living Below Poverty Monterey - 15.10% San Luis Obispo - 13.20%  Monterey County Sidings City of King Census Tract 113.02 27.5 1 1 Census Tract 113.04 10.3     Appendix 1.5 Geology and Soil Data  Monterey Shrink Swell Potential Row Labels Sum of Acreage Siding  62.360 City of King 62.360 Permanent 27.350 High 18.360 Moderate 8.990 Temporary 35.010 High 22.750 Moderate 12.260 Station 2.440 City of King 2.440 Permanent 2.440 Moderate 2.440 Grand Total 64.800 Monterey Corrosivity to Steel Row Labels Sum of Acreage Siding  62.360 City of King 62.360 Permanent 27.350 High 27.350 Temporary 35.010 High 35.010 Station 2.440 City of King 2.440 Permanent 2.440 High 2.440 Grand Total 64.800 Monterey Corrosivity to Concrete Row Labels Sum of Acreage Siding  62.360 City of King 62.360 Permanent 27.350 Low 27.350 Temporary 35.010 Low 35.010 Station 2.440 City of King 2.440 Permanent 2.440 Low 2.440 Grand Total 64.800 Monterey Erosion Hazard Row Labels Sum of Acreage Siding  62.360 City of King 62.360 Permanent 27.350 Slight 27.350 Temporary 35.010 Slight 35.010 Station 2.440 City of King 2.440 Permanent 2.440 Slight 2.440 Grand Total 64.800 Seismic Shaking Hazard Row Labels Sum of Acres California Potential Shaking Ranges from Low (0-0.83), Medium (0.83-1.66) and High (1.66-2.50). Siding  62.36 City of King 62.36 Permanent Low (0.55) 27.35 Temporary Low (0.55) 35.01 Station 2.44 City of King 2.44 Permanent Low (0.65) 2 .44 Grand Total 64.80 Monterey Landslide Potential Siding City of King Temporary Low Potential Station City of King Permanent Low Potential Monterey Liquefaction Siding City of King Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Station City of King Permanent Moderate Potential     Appendix 1.6 Hazards and Hazardous Materials Data  No Hazard Impacts to City of King Siding or Station     Appendix 1.7 Hydrology and Water Resources Data  100yr Flood Impacts Sum of Acres Siding 0.00 City of King 0.00 Station 0.00 City of King 0.00 Grand Total 0.00 No impacts associated with 100yr floodplain 2015 City of King Analysis Sum of Length_ft Siding 0.00 City of King 0.00 Permanent 0.00 Temporary 0.00 Station 0.00 City of King 0.00 Permanent 0.00 Grand Total 0.00 No Impacts to Streams <------Updated <------Updated <------Updated Study Area Number of Stream Crossings in Upgrade Area Sidings City of King 0 Stations City of King 0 Grand Total 0     Appendix 1.8 Land Use Data  GP Land Use Sum of Acreage Siding  56.848 City of King Siding 56.848 Permanent 22.360 Agriculture 22.360 Temporary 34.487 Agriculture 34.487 Station 1.309 City of King Station 1.309 Permanent 1.309 Commercial 1.309 Grand Total 58.157 Land Ownership Sum of Acreage City of King Siding  62.364 Private 62.364 City of King Station 2.435 Private 2.435 Grand Total 64.799     Appendix 1.9 Mineral Resources Data  No Mineral Resources within City of King Siding or Station     Appendix 1.10 Section 4(f) and 6(f) Data  No associated 4(f) or 6(f) disturbances associated with the City of King station/siding     Appendix 1.11 Public Utilities and Services Data  Pipeline Impact Row Labels Sum of Length No Impacts Grand Total Transmission Line Impact Row Labels Linear Ft City of King Siding  14,192.00 Permanent 372.19 Coburn to Oilfields 69 kV 83.09 Coburn to San Ardo 69 kV 152.20 Panoche to Coburn 230 kV 68.59 Moss Landing to Coburn 230 kV 68.31 Temporary 13,819.81 Coburn to Oilfields 69 kV 121.59 Coburn to San Ardo 69 kV 218.45 Coburn to Basic Vegetable 69 kV 13,279.35 Panoche to Coburn 230 kV 100.40 Moss Landing to Coburn 230 kV 100.01 Grand Total 14,192.00 Study Area Number of Pipe Line Crossings in Upgrade Area Number of Transmission Line Crossings in Upgrade Area Sidings City of King 0 13 Grand Total 0 13     Appendix 2 Public Comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR  Next Speaker: Thank you, Maurice. Uh, just really quickly, uh, **** council members. I like the, the City Manager's, uh, **** on the City. I have sat in the past and currently I'm the Executive Legal Advocacy Committee. Uh, I will be their, uh, **** available, so, if you can go, uh, go and participate, it's a good learning process, and **** that process. Thank you.  Next Speaker: Thank you. Okay. And now we're going to go to the, uh, the public hearing, Item B, which is joint with the Planning Commission. Um, Michael ****.  Next Speaker: So, this evening we have, uh, under Item 2B, we have a joint meeting of the Planning Commission. I will note in our minutes that the planning, that the meeting will be convened, um, presently; that the members of the Planning Commission are present. It would be appropriate, though, for the Chair of the Planning Commission to formally convene the meeting before we go on.  Next Speaker: Thank you, uh, ****. Uh, I'd like to call the meeting of the Planning Commission to come to order.  Next Speaker: And so this evening's, uh, the purpose of this evening's public hearing is to conduct a public hearing regarding the environmental impact statement, environmental impact report for the Coast Corridor Improvements Draft, uh, program, and out of that, we expect that the council this evening will receive public testimony, receive testimony from City staff, as well as TAMC, uh, staff and consultants, and authorize the Mayor to sign the letter attached to the staff report, um, as well as provide additional comments and information to TAMC and the consultants on the project, and with that, I will turn it over to Doreen, and she will give you an overview of the project, and then we have TAMC staff, Ann, available as well.  Next Speaker: Um, Mayor and members of the City Council, uh, reporting this evening is the Coast Corridor draft program for environmental impact statement and environmental impact report. The, um, reason for this is you have an environmental impact statement, which **** in ways that the national Environmental Protection Act. It's a national program, **** program, and then, of course, the environmental impact statement, which complies with the California Environmental Quality Act. This is actually a Power Point presentation. **** and **** is going to present. What I'm going to do is just ****. Christina will talk a little more in detail about the EISEIR. Uh, what staff had an opportunity to do was review the EISEIR for compliance. We are not **** to, the City is not ****. Um, that is the lead agency. That means that they are the agencies responsible for actually coordination the processing of this document. The re-, public review period for the **** ends January 7, 2015. During this period of time, this is, uh, the public's opportunity to review the document and provide comments. As you look at your, uh, staff report, you'll notice that there is a chart that's included in the document that has a number of comments. Um, we've looked up the EISEIR, and provided comments. One are the purposes for this document, and future use of the document is to tier off the environmental document so that when the City comes forward with a ****, uh, project in more detail, we hope to use that environment **** so that we don't have to spend a lot of money on generating environmental information ****. So, it's extremely important that the information is accurate and that there is, uh, information that is current and not stale. We did have an opportunity to speak with, uh, TAMC staff last night, **** staff last night, and Circle Point staff, uh, last night. Circle Point is the environmental consulting company that prepared the document. We reviewed the chart with them, and they clarified some information. Uh, they acknowledged that much of the information they had was based on, uh, information from 2012, and that they were more than willing to update the environmental document to incorporate our current project description of the multi- ****, uh, transportation center. Um, as well, we mentioned that we were still reviewing the **** document, and one of our recommendations is that certainly the, the Mayor signed the letter, uh, to TAMC, but also that we continue to look and re-, look at the **** document. We'd like to refine the chart based on our conversation last night, uh, with TAMC, ****, um, and Circle Point. Um, so with that, what I would recommend is **** would be happy to answer the questions, is to allow Christina Watson to come forward and give her presentation of the overview of the document.  Next Speaker: Okay, thank you, yeah, let's have, let's do the presentation first, and then all of ****.  Next Speaker: Stand here?  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Where, wherever you feel more comfortable.  Next Speaker: Where do you feel comfortable?  Next Speaker: I'm okay here.  Next Speaker: That's –  Next Speaker: So, just tell us what you –  Next Speaker: ****, why do you want ****.  Next Speaker: Okay. ****.  Next Speaker: Will do. Thank you. Okay, good evening, I'm Christina Watson, Transpor-, Transportation Planning with the Transportation Agency for **** County, and, can you all hear me okay?  Next Speaker: You need to shout.  Next Speaker: I need to shout?  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Yeah, the people in the back can't hear you.  Next Speaker: Good, yeah. Okay. Just, uh –  Next Speaker: Yeah, that'll be good.  Next Speaker: At the podium a little bit.  Next Speaker: There you go.  Next Speaker: **** to everybody in the audience.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Okay, um, good evening. I am Christina Watson, Transportation Planner with the Transportation Agency from Monterey County. We call ourselves TAMC, and I'm here to present as, Doreen said, the Coast Corridor Draft Program environmental impact statement and environment impact report, which we call EISEIR for shorthand. Uh, this is the third of four hearings that we're holding on this topic. I presented this document at the TAMC Board, uh, last Wednesday, and then to the City of Soledad City Council, um, that same day, and the final here will be at the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, or SLOCOG meeting, in Atascadero on January 7th, 2015, and I would like to, uh, note that in the audience with me today you have Joe Valdez from the Cal-, CalTrans. Um, he's a rail transportation associate, ****, um, the lead at CalTrans on this, uh, project. Pete Rogers, which is SLOCOG's ****, uh, director, and he's the lead at SLOCOG on this project. Um, the Federal Railroad Administration and SLOCOG are the lead agencies for the, from the environmental perspective, and Virginia Barillo, who is –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – who is an assistant transportation planner at TAMC, and she's here with us as well. Um, the, I'm just gonna go ahead and give the presentation.  Next Speaker: Yep.  Next Speaker: Uh, so the purpose of the hearing today is just to present the Coast Corridor project and its environmental effects as, uh, described in this draft document, and to receive public comment. Any comments received, uh, during the hearing today, will be responded to in the final environmental document that we expect to be publishing in the spring. Am I, am I talking loudly enough now?  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: Okay. Um, great, so, uh, TAMC, the City of Soledad, and the City of King are all responsive, uh, resp-, or responsible, responsible agencies on this document, which is why we're holding a hearing to ****, and, um, as Doreen said, we, we had a call yesterday with City staff to discuss this long list of, uh, concerns described in a staff report that I saw yesterday for the first time, and we, uh, will be coordinating with City staff to make amendments to, uh, be incorporated into the final environmental impact report in response to the new information regarding the location of the ****, um, which will be north of where it's indicated currently in the draft document, and also information, new information about the station that we didn't pass, uh, in the draft document. Our mutual understanding is that these changes do not represent a new significant impact that will require the recirculation of the draft document, but will be able to incorporate the changes into the final document. Um, uh, we, uh, we have common goals for this project. We all would like to see the restoration of the Coast Daylight Train Service to, uh, the Central Coast of California, and we'd all like to see a station in the City. So, go ahead and proceed to the next slide. Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't see you'd already done that. Thank you. Uh, the draft program, EISEIR examines all possible improvements under consideration of the budget, so it's a universe of projects that might not eventually all get implemented. Um, there would be a separate process, uh, that will determine which of these improvements will actually be constructed that is dependent upon negotiations, uh, between CalTrans and Union Pacific, primarily, and then additional project level and **** review will be done on each of those individual projects as necessary. Um, some projects may be so minor as to merit a categorical exclusion from **** review. Next slide please. So, the corridor under evaluation is the 130 miles between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. It is mostly single track through that corridor, and, uh, existing uses on the corridor include Union Pacific freight trains, and, uh, Amtrak Coast Starlight train, which is, uh, one round trip per day from LA to Seattle. Existing stations on the line are in Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo, and this project is proposing two new stations, one in Soledad, and one here in the City of King. So, the project purpose for this document is to improve passenger rail frequency, speed, and reliability; to enhance safety; to improve mobility in the Coast Corridor region; to improve passenger connectivity, um, including to the eventual high-speed rail system; and to ensure that the projects are eligible for future fel-, federal funding via the Passenger Corridor Investment Plan, of which this is a part. Next slide please. So, the project in-, includes, um, six sort of categories of projects, and I'll go into each one of these in, in detail. So, the first is the train service, the Coast Daylight proposed train service. Two new passenger stations in Soledad and King City, curb corrections and track realignment, sighting extension, a second traffic questa grade, and other system-wide improvements. So, the Coast Daylight is service that is being proposed as an extension of the Pacific Surfliner, which is the train that currently goes between Los Angeles and San Luis Obispo, or San Diego and San Luis Obispo, and it would extend up to San Francisco and have one daily round trip up to San Francisco. So, this would be a, uh, CalTrans, uh, state-supported inner-city train service. Uh, new passenger stations in the City of King and Soledad would improve connectivity with local transit, it would improve mobility, and it would provide connections to Fort Hunter Liggett and Pinacles National Park. The purpose of curb corrections and traffic alignments is to increase train speeds, to enhance safety, and to improve reliability and on-time performance for the trains. And, sighting extensions are a lower-speed, second line, that will enable safe passing, one train over the other, over short distances, in order to improve reliability of all services, and a second at the questa grade is recommended in order to improve speeds between Santa **** and the top of the Questa Grade, which is in San Luis Obispo County. Speeds through this segment are some of the lowest, as tri-, trains climb and descend the, s-, uh, south side of the Questa Grade railroad tracks. And other system-wide improvements includes, uh, power switches and centralized traffic control, uh, which will also help accomplish the goal of increasing speeds and on-time reliability for the trains. So, the sources of these proposed investments and, and improvements, um, in this corridor started with a 2001, 20-year plan done by Amtrak, that included this project. Uh, Union Pacific Railroad did, uh, some capacity studies along the rail line that reflected, uh, some improvements that they thought would be necessary to allow for increased passenger service on the line. CalTrans completed a service development plan just last year, and then, of course, we're also including input from the City of Soledad and the City of King's, uh, plans that you have for the station **** train line. So, this is the geographic context. It's fairly difficult to see on the slide, but, on the web site for SLOCOG and for TAMC both have links to a Google map where you can zoom in and see the exact, um, uh, location and, uh, information about each one of the improvements up and down the corridor. So, the environmental document, uh, came up with some, uh, potential adverse effects, uh, from these projects. So, this is, again, it's taking all of the projects, um, into account, and so that these potential adverse effects could be mitigated or avoided entirely by, uh, through the planning process and the design process. So, but, just, uh, things that the, the document identified include, during the construction period, uh, traffic diversions; air polu-, uh, emissions; noise and vibration; loss of agricultural land; use of sensitive habitat areas; and disturbing archeological resources as all potential adverse effects during the construction period. During the operational period, when the trains are running, uh, the potential adverse effects include a change to the visual environment. You see the train go by. Uh, increased noise and vibration, and increased auto traffic around the station areas, and then there's also the beneficial effects that are identified in the document, which are essentially the purpose of the project, which are improved safety, mobility, and access; reduced air pollution; and reduced vehicle amount of travel when we leave our car at the station and take the train instead; and it's also consistent with local plans calling for stations here and in Soledad. So, this is the timeline for the environmental document. Uh, the Federal Rail-, uh, Railroad Administration, or FRA, published the notice of intent in the Federal Register back in August of 2012, and we've held scoping meetings around that same time, and multiple stakeholder meetings, including meetings here, um, with your staff; uh, in Soledad at the Monterey County Farm Bureau at Fort Hunter Liggett and other areas, so, um, to take into account issues that we heard back in 2012. Then, um, through the process of drafting a document and coordinating with, uh, FRA, we published this document just in November, and the, uh, pub-, the comment period ex-, is, until January 7th, and then we anticipate publishing the final document in the spring. So, next steps, uh, after we, uh, finalize the program level environmental impact statement, environmental impact report, CalTrans can pursue the negotiations that will then determine, uh, which improvements are needed to implement the service, so that we can start a train, and then, once it, those improvements are identified, then project-level re-, environmental review will proceed as necessary. Um, the public, the document is available for public review online at this web site, which is also in the staff report, or agenda packet. Um, it's, I have a physical copy of the document, but it is rather large, so we decided not to print too many of these, otherwise we'd have to do an EIR on how many trees we killed. Um, Pete also has one of these at the office and, I think Joe does too. So, um, we all have a physical copy that we can share with you, but we only have one each, and then it's also in each of the regional libraries, including the one here in King City. Uh, comments can either be emailed to Pete at prodgers, with a D, at slocog.org, or mailed to Pete, me, or, uh, Federal Railroad Administration, and the addresses are all included in the environmental document, and the comment deadline is January 7th, again. I've said that three times, I think.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: Last slide. So, today's action before you today is to open a public hearing, receive public comment, and close the public hearing, and I would request that, um, city council members and planning commissioners provide comment as well, but, um, we're not necessarily making that part of the public hearing, as, uh, determined by **** law, um, the federal environmental law. So, um, we'll still be taking notes, though, on everything that you say and incorporating that all into our responses, and, um, in order to help me take better notes, I have a tape recorder that I'd like to use. It's a digital recorder if that's okay.  Next Speaker: Sure, of course.  Next Speaker: Okay, and I'm gonna set that up here. It's, it's going to be difficult, I think, to hear everybody unless they come up here to talk.  Next Speaker: I, I will have the people come up here.  Next Speaker: Okay. That would be great. Thank you.  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Yes, please. Thank you, ****.  Next Speaker: So, before we open the public hearing, anything Doreen **** want to ask before the public hearing?  Next Speaker: Um, not at this point.  Next Speaker: Okay, so at this time, I will open up the public hearing, accept, uh, testimony, and then we'll bring it back to, for questions from Planning Commission and City Council.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: So, does anyone from the public have any comments on this item?  Next Speaker: Anyone not named John Baucke.  Next Speaker: We do not discriminate.  Next Speaker: Oh, I'm sorry.  Next Speaker: Based on longevity.  Next Speaker: Sorry.  Next Speaker: Based on longevity? No?  Next Speaker: And, and I guess, uh, since we're recording, if you could, uh, also spell your name –  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: – ****.  Next Speaker: Uh, John Baucke, B-A-U-C-K-E, uh, representing Smith Monterey. Um, I've also had the pleasure of reading this document cover to cover. Uh, and, I just want to put it in context with all the stuff in which has been going on. Uh, the process and thought of a train station in King City, the first written document I've been able to find was dated 2000, which was done by Wil-, uh, Wilbur Smith and Associates, uh, about the Coast Daylight implementation plan, so there's been an effort since at least 2000, and Pete may have, tell a date even earlier than that, uh, bringing this project forward. Uh, the, the City of King has done a number of efforts, uh, one which is, uh, the c-, the Rail Corridor Safety Study, which was how you go through the process to actually close a **** grade crossing and open a new one and all that's involved. Uh, uh, funded by my client, uh, in the City, and then the City did, did the, uh, First Street corridor plan, in which Mott, uh, Hat-, Hatch and Nichols, I think is the –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – did I get the right name? Uh, did another program and, and that was, uh, June of 2012, in which some of that information, I believe Christina had received. The City has gone and taken recommendations out of that document, and gone farther, using rail pros, again, to actually develop a, what we'll call a, a layout plan for the station, **** the plan which you approved in April of this year, so this been this continuing improvements and details of, of, of getting the station in King City. Uh, some of it is not included in this document, and I think some of it, from the conversation, uh, with Christina and, and Pete, is a case of sort of time sequencing. They've put their document to the federal government back in February or January of this year. In April you adopted the, the rail post, rail po-, rail post plan, so there's maybe some loss of information. So, at this point in time, and I think the real thing I would ask is that your staff and TAMC and SLOCOG get together and get all the information that physically exists on this together in their hands so they can refine the written descriptions about the project, and you've gone a lot farther than what CalTrans or UP has as to specifics. Get that into the document so it's as accurate and, uh, I think what we're dealing with is a lack of up to date, uh the document at this point in time. Getting that up to date will give you the best document to tier off as you go forward, and, uh, that's my recommendation, and I, uh, hope TAMC, uh, and, uh, SLOCOG get to, to have. Thank you.  Next Speaker: Okay, would anyone else, like, from the public? And, again, if you would, for the recorder, spell your name.  Next Speaker: Yes, thank you. I'm, uh, Pete Rodgers. I'm SLOCOG staff. Um, I think, uh, it's R-O-D-G-E-R-S, by the way, which is the, uh, name. Um, and I just wanted to introduce myself, not knowing if there's going to be an opportunity when the public hearing is over. If there were questions, just to make sure that I was able to introduce myself and assure you that we're gonna work closely with your staff to integrate these comments, um, and underscore and reiterate what John said about the timing of this document. You know, our doc-, our document was finalized before your plans, and, but it, only in draft form, and we're happy to integrate those changes. Um, and I also wanted to give you just a little bit more context of the bigger project. I mean, we all are looking for this passenger train. I've been working on this passenger train for 22 years. The renaissance in rail California really began in 1990, when we passed Proposition, um, 116, and the vision, as John mentions, that sort of crystallized in 1992, and, um, King City is still the gap in state-supported services, and from San Luis Obispo to San Jose, there is no statesupported services, and Christina and I have been advocating on your behalf and on all, all of Monterey County and northern San Luis Obispo County, we have to be recognized. Uh, we deserve state-supported inner city rail services. You know, and most people don't understand how this is funded and how this works. You know, this is not just Amtrak service. The State of California pays for all of these services, with the exception of the Coast Starlight service, which, you know, we're fortunate to have through, and, and we would like to do what we can to, you know, help you get the Coast Starlight to stop as well, although we had experience with that in Paso Robles. It was very difficult for us to secure that stop, uh, but we were able to do that. Um, so I just wanted to underscore that we need to all work together with our legislators, with the League. There's an opportunity with the Cap and Trade funding, and, um, you know, this being a 22-year-old project, it's, it has peaks and valleys of opportunities, and we're at another peak of opportunity, and so we need to work, uh, closely with our legislators. We talked about, uh, three items we need in order to get this train service operating. The first thing is, it's one train set. We already have an existing train set. We need one more train set, um, which is about $22,000,000.00, and we need, um, we have to implement the capital improvements that we agreed to with Union Pacific, of which we have $25,000,000.00 in the bank to pay for those improvements, although Union Pacific wants a much bigger number of improvements, and the State has already programmed money in their plans to pay for the operating support of the train. So, and, and the cost of that is around $6,000,000.00 a year, so you can see that it's a $50,000,000.00 project. That's why it's taking so long to gather all these pieces together at the same time. So, I think we're on the, the road to getting this thing, um, implemented in the next, you know, 3 to 5 years. Uh, I'd like to believe it was sooner, but, um, with that I'll just close and, again, uh, pledge to work with your staff to integrate these comments.  Next Speaker: Okay. Would anyone else from the public like to comment on this item? Okay. Then, I, real quick, process wise, did I hear you correctly that your request was to close the public hearing before? Okay. I –  Next Speaker: Yes, please.  Next Speaker: – I'm going to, my preference would be to leave the public hearing open. I want to make sure, 'cause I think we're gonna have some valuable comments, that I want to make sure getting into the public document. So.  Next Speaker: Is there a chance I could put this up on the ****?  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Which, whoever is doing the speak, that they can –  Next Speaker: If that means our comments will get into the public record, then I'm –  Next Speaker: Verbatim.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: Um, so I'll, I'll bring it back now to the Planning Commission and City Council for, um, and, and, and actually, maybe process wise, we should, we should do comments, well, maybe to ask questions as well, but, um, I, I don't, ****.  Next Speaker: Whatever.  Next Speaker: Whatever makes you happy.  Next Speaker: You're, you're **** the meeting. Yeah, if there, there is no right or wrong way. No.  Next Speaker: I just, just **** sure we have questions. So, uh, Planning Commission, City Council, would you like to ask some questions? Yes.  Next Speaker: You talked about increasing speed on this track. How fast about, about, or are you just talking about speeding up the slow spots ****.  Next Speaker: I will defer to Pete to answer that question.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Um, Pete Rodgers, I'm SLOCOG staff. Um, most of the speed improvements referenced here are curve realignment projects, which are the high-dollar projects, which we don't see as fundable in the next, in the foreseeable future. Um, what we're really focusing on is the reliability improvements, with the signaling and track, you know, track upgrades and some passing sightings, would be the most likely projects to move forward. Of course, Union Pacific is gonna make the decision on, you know, what's gonna move forward, and they're focused on longer sightings, so that they can get their freight trains out of the way of the faster trains.  Next Speaker: But, but once installed, will the curves, once they're straightened out, will they speed up the train or only those spots?  Next Speaker: Um, the, um, curve realignments, um, were identified in the lower speed areas of, like, 30-mile-per-hour track speed to get it up to a maximum of 79 miles per hour.  Next Speaker: Thank you.  Next Speaker: Other questions?  Next Speaker: I do.  Next Speaker: Okay, and still, for the recorder tell us your name.  Next Speaker: Okay. Um, so, I noticed in our staff report that there are, like, 96 corrections that they want to see the, that ****.  Next Speaker: They're, they're questions or comments, so they're not actually, I wouldn't call them **** or we're asking them to make corrections. Some of these are actually comments, and we're ask-, asking for response. There's also some where there may be duplication, so, for example, on different pages in the EI, EISEIR, there might be, uh, a conversation, say, a discussion as the same, so we're just pointing them out. So, it may be the same type of comment, um, that we're just saying, gee, there's a discussion about, that should be about Fort Hunter Liggett on this page. It should be also on this other page. So, I wouldn't say that it's, you know, um, 96 different corrections, but it's more, uh, comments and some of the, we are asking for corrections, but I wouldn't say that it's many corrections.  Next Speaker: Well, what do you think that's going to cost us to do that? Obviously we have to pay for your time, and, how long does it take to get this to be accurate or, or fair? I mean, I'm, I'm really disappointed that we've done all this work and all this planning to, because having the train stop in King City has been really important to us, and that's how our town got started, was that the train came here, and we have these trains that go by our, our town every day, and –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – we can't get on. And so, we, we've been working for that for years and years, and now we have a report, and the information for our town is, is not accurate. So, how, what's it gonna take for us to, like, you're gonna, you're gonna meet with –\  Next Speaker: I, I think, actually, we had a conversation yesterday. We had, and, and I believe that, um, they thoroughly understand now what the project description is, what our concerns are, and I felt comfortable that they'll make the corrections, so I think they understand now. Uh, they have the information, com-, comprehensive information. I think that they'll make the corrections.  Next Speaker: Okay, well –  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: – I just wanted to express to, uh, I, I don't know if the people from Circle Point are here that wrote this report. I hope that you will express to them how much we would like to have accurate information involved in this, and how important it is to our town, **** to express that.  Next Speaker: Yeah, they, they work for us, so they'll ****.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: And they were on ****.  Next Speaker: Okay. I think that's, um, uh, a lot of things hinge, our downtown addition hinges on that. The, the beautification of **** Street hinging –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – on, on that, and I know we've been working for a very long –  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: I, I think one of the concerns that they did have was they were concerned that possibly our comments meant that they had to go back and do another analysis; that we were asking that they, uh, you know, postpone it, do another analysis, and actually, what we were saying was that if they look at our project description, it actually reduces the environmental impacts; that if you look at what they have, it actually has a number of environmental impacts that wouldn't be there if you take the detailed work that's already been done, and so then actually it would reduce the environmental impacts, and so we weren't saying that it was going to expand it. It actually reduces it, and so I think that the work that we've done here, um, is detailed enough and, and that it actually improves the document.  Next Speaker: I guess, then, I would like to ask the people that are doing the, um, the EIR and who will be making these corrections, that you check back with us before you finalize it, so that we don't end up with a final document that is still, uh, missing our information. Is that fair?  Next Speaker: I, I think that's fair, and I think, uh, my understanding is that they were willing to do that, to work with us on it, that they wanted to, to collaborate with us and they wanted to make sure that the final information was accurate. That was my understanding out of the conversation yesterday.  Next Speaker: With, uh, with Circle Point?  Next Speaker: Yes. That was my understanding, but again, TAMC and, and SLOCOG, basically, they, you know, they, they manage Circle Point, and it was my understanding that they said it's really important that we all work together, and that they wanted to do that.  Next Speaker: Did you want add something?  Next Speaker: Yes, I would, uh, just like to add that, yes, I am the project manager with Circle Point, and Circle Point was on the call yesterday. They understand our direction to integrate these comments. Um, I did, I think you need to understand the length. This has been a 2.-year project that's been underway, and, uh, the in-depth stakeholders meetings that occurred in 2012, the detailed information that you have now was not available. We had the best information at the time, and when our report was prepared, our draft report was prepared, before releasing it to anybody, we were required to submit it to the FRA, the Federal Railway Administration, because of the federal nature of this document, and to get it appropriately noticed, and so, and that was in February 2014. Your report wasn't completed until, I believe May 2014, so we're, we have sufficient budget resources with Circle Point to circle back and ensure that the comments made can be integrated.  Next Speaker: So, indeed, I have a question for you. You said something about one train set would cost $22,000,000.00. What's a train set?  Next Speaker: Well, an individual car is maybe 7, you know, or $5,000,000.00. It's three passenger cars, a cab car, and a locomotive, so the combined –  Next Speaker: It's a train.  Next Speaker: It's a train. It's a train.  Next Speaker: Oh, so, a whole 'nother service that's would –  Next Speaker: No.  Next Speaker: – be going up and down the –  Next Speaker: Well –  Next Speaker: **** the train.  Next Speaker: It's one train.  Next Speaker: Um, yeah, we need two train sets to operate the service we're talking about, 'cause one train will leave from San Francisco. One train will leave from Los Angeles, and they'll cross, so we need two train sets. We have one train set. We need an additional train set.  Next Speaker: So, it's not the Coast Daylight?  Next Speaker: Uh, we, the terminology messes people up, 'cause the existing train is the Coast Starlight.  Next Speaker: Coast Starlight.  Next Speaker: And, um, the Coast Daylight was a service that operated, was operated by Amtrak up until 1970, and then it was discontinued, and operated from Downtown San Francisco to Downtown Los Angeles, and so we're trying to bring back the Coast Daylight.  Next Speaker: Okay, so then we would have two trains then, so two.  Next Speaker: We would have two, yes.  Next Speaker: The Starlight and the Daylight.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: And, both require process and procedure to get them to stop. Once you have a train station.  Next Speaker: And, are you s-, are you serious in saying 3 to 5 years? You think this is doable?  Next Speaker: Yes, it was, the operating funds were in the budget, uh, for this train service to begin in April 2016. Uh, but because we haven't been able to reach agreement with Union Pacific on the capital improvements, we're not able to, uh, move forward with operating a train service.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: Can you, that's what I recall, actually, on the state schedule, it shows it stopping in the City of King in 2020. I actually saw something with a ****, is that correct?  Next Speaker: Yes, it's assumed –  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: – that it will be operating –  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: – in 2020.  Next Speaker: All right.  Next Speaker: And where is that?  Next Speaker: It's actually a state schedule that they have, so the State's put it out.  Next Speaker: It's, um, included in the, um, service development plan –  Next Speaker: Right, in the service –  Next Speaker: – and that was referenced in the report, the –  Next Speaker: Right.  Next Speaker: – the 2013 document.  Next Speaker: In 2013, it shows the, C-, City of King and the stop listed in 20, uh, 20 ****.  Next Speaker: And what report is that?  Next Speaker: It's –  Next Speaker: Okay, it's called the, uh, the Service Development Plan. I'm not sure if we're referring to the same document, but –  Next Speaker: Yeah, I actually, I actually saw, it was a schedule that had been put out. I'm trying to find it. It actually had the City of King.  Next Speaker: That document is available in SLOCOG's web site.  Next Speaker: Okay, uh, other questions from Planning Commission or City Council?  Next Speaker: I have a question.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Um, I know that at one time the, uh, before ****, the did –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – and, I was wondering if it would be wise maybe, uh, to have a more time **** committee, including, uh, including **** at Union Pacific.  Next Speaker: We haven't put together a committee per se on that.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: Um, I, think we need to take some alternative approaches towards Fort Hunter Liggett that staff are flushing out that they need council support for, and trying to get UP in the room on a regular basis is a little bit problematic, but further down the road, yes, I think so.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Any other questions? Okay, I'm gonna go ahead and close the public hearing now. Um, one other comment I wanted to make to staff, so, uh, on the, the letter, the draft letter that's here, it has an incorrect date.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: I've ****.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Uh, it should be 2014.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Okay, uh, now –  Next Speaker: Uh, uh, ****, can I ask a question?  Next Speaker: Yeah, all these ****.  Next Speaker: Oh, no, I said, I was –  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: – listening to comments, ****.  Next Speaker: Yes, we, and, um, do you want to take the recorder and, once the recorder is there, if you could spell your –  Next Speaker: Actually, we should just have him them, just say your name.  Next Speaker: Yeah, let 'em guess how they spell that one.  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Uh, the name is Francis Giueici, G-I-U-E-I-C-I. I am the President of Valley **** Company here in King City, and my question is, uh, we have a building that would be affected by this project, and not that it's not gonna hold up the project, but I'm just wondering, no one's ever been in touch with us to talk to us about any of this. So, my question, basically is, uh, uh, at what point will we be approached by TAMC or someone else to talk about our structure?  Next Speaker: Okay. Who wants to answer that question?  Next Speaker: I'll start with that one. Um, we actually have noticed the Hearns on numerous projects in the First Street corridor. They do own a building, if I recall correctly, and John or Doreen can correct me on the ownership. It's a lease hold of the, of the building. We actually have plotted out, um, the, basically the layout plan, and we can work around that building for the time being, for quite some time.  Next Speaker: This is the –  Next Speaker: Um, but ultimately, we would, I would imagine that a better, higher use would come along for that, but that's sometime in the future.  Next Speaker: Okay, then let me ask, let me ask the follow up **** line, which is –  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: – how can he stay in the loop so he knows how, as, uh –  Next Speaker: If you will give us your direct contact, we will use it as opposed to what we find in the public records.  Next Speaker: Well, you do have our contact.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: I already –  Next Speaker: Uh, but, we have your public record contact.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: And I'm not gonna make you say it out loud, but we would like your email and, you know, stuff that we know that would go directly to you.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: That would be the best way.  Next Speaker: Do we have the ****.  Next Speaker: Yeah, you can just put that on, put it on there, and we will be sure that –  Next Speaker: You have it on, you have it on.  Next Speaker: – one of those. You ha-, turn it over and use it even.  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Um, okay, well you, you've got it already, but I'll do –  Next Speaker: If you can, if, if –  Next Speaker: – it again.  Next Speaker: Yes, please.  Next Speaker: If, if you could just **** Francis, and give it to Michael, and then –  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: – we'll make sure that you, uh, we'll contact you directly.  Next Speaker: So, any, um, –  Next Speaker: Thank you.  Next Speaker: – do you have a question ****? Okay, so, I, so the public hearing is now closed. Um, now, if you have a, a question –  Next Speaker: No, um, Michael, uh, you say you've noticed –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – uh, uh, do you mean you've sent them some letters?  Next Speaker: Yes. That's what's required under the law.  Next Speaker: Okay, well, I know that's what's required, but when we know that there is a building that would be affected, I think just make a phone call. ****. I'd, I'd like to include the people, um, obviously, **** is greatly affected by –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – the ****, uh, the, um, and I don't know that ****, maybe those two –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – and, and **** street, and, and –  Next Speaker: There's actually other property owners involved, including some kind of weird, crazy parcels and lease holds. Um, we do notice them. That threshold of, gee, how much extra effort do we put into. Uh, the law somewhat presumes that people are gonna be acting in their own self-interest –  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: – and so, if they get notice, presumably they would act upon that notice, um –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – and it becomes tough, because when we're noticing downtown addition, there's hundreds of properties being noticed. We don't have the capacity to make a phone call to everyone who's affected, and so, it's difficult. I understand your concern, but we also have limited resources to deal with it.  Next Speaker: And that's one of the reasons why I'm suggesting Thursday, um, council meetings –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm. Fair enough.  Next Speaker: – because I think that we are not doing a good job of letting people know, uh, what's happening, and having that publicity. Like, was there publicity for this? Like, there were letters that went out –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – but was there anything in the newspaper? Was there anything –  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: – ****.  Next Speaker: **** Republican.  Next Speaker: Yeah, it was noticed in –  Next Speaker: Yeah, it was.  Next Speaker: – in the newspaper.  Next Speaker: Yes, it was noticed.  Next Speaker: It has to be published legally, so –  Next Speaker: It was in, in a legal notice.  Next Speaker: – ****.  Next Speaker: But how many people read a legal notice.  Next Speaker: Yeah, I was gonna say. America. It's a tough country.  Next Speaker: That's ****.  Next Speaker: Uh, Councilman Jernigan, I, I also want to mention that, I, I believe, uh, **** Hearns came to a meeting **** and you had asked me to approach Mr. Hearn, and I did that evening. I gave him my card and told him, like, please call me or I would call him and we would have, and I hadn't heard from him, and so, the, the, uh, offer was made to me, and we had not heard from him. I would have set, I was gonna set something up with, uh, the City Manager, but I had not heard back. So, I mean, you could, you know, a-, attempts were made. So, at that meeting, that evening, that evening went **** –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – I, um, at a council meeting.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: He was here on my ****.  Next Speaker: Yeah, I was gonna say.  Next Speaker: Yeah, yeah –  Next Speaker: It was a joint meeting. I remember.  Next Speaker: Okay, **** the meeting also. Yes.  Next Speaker: Okay, so, process wise, what, if any, action does the Planning Commission need to take.  Next Speaker: The purpose for this was to get comments from this Planning Commission to see if you had any comments or questions –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – and I think that this was basically to get your comments or questions –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – and then to go ahead and have the council authorize the Mayor to sign the letter.  Next Speaker: Okay, so there's no formal action that they –  Next Speaker: No.  Next Speaker: – need to take?  Next Speaker: No.  Next Speaker: Okay, so, I'll bring it, I'll bring it to council, and, and I, I believe we need to take formal action of approving the letter?  Next Speaker: Yeah, authorizing you to sign the letter and what staff will do is finalize our comments, and then after finalizing **** for January 7th, authorize the mayor to **** –  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: – the letter that we sent.  Next Speaker: Um, an-, any last questions then or comments? Okay, then I'll entertain a motion to, um, authorize myself sign-, signing the letter.  Next Speaker: I'll make that motion.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Okay. All those in favor?  Next Speaker: Aye.  Next Speaker: Aye.  Next Speaker: Aye.  Next Speaker: Uh, motion carries. And now I will let s-, I will let the, the Planning Commission chairperson adjourn.  Next Speaker: Yes. Thank you.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: You can say the magic **** words.  Next Speaker: Okay, 7:32.  Next Speaker: Got it.  Next Speaker: Okay. Thank you, and I'll just pause for a second for those of you who want to leave, uh, and I will let you leave, and we will currently be ****, 30 seconds.     DRAFT  SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS MINUTES OF JANUARY 7, 2015 _  BOARD MEMBERS PRESENT:   Debie Arnold, Fifth District, County of San Luis Obispo (newly elected President)  Jan Howel Marx, City of San Luis Obispo (newly elected Vice President)  Shely Higinbotham, City of Pismo Beach (Past President) (left @12:02 p.m.)  Lyn Compton, Fourth District, County of San Luis Obispo  Bruce Gibson, Second District, County San Luis Obispo (left @12:02 p.m.) Jim Guthrie, City of Aroyo Grande  Adam Hil, Third District, County of San Luis Obispo (left @12:29 p.m.)  Jamie Irons, City of Moro Bay Frank Mecham, First District, County of San Luis Obispo  Tom O’Maley, City of Atascadero  John Shoals, City of Grover Beach  Fred Strong, City of Paso Robles  Ailen Loe, Caltrans District 5 (Alternate)  BOARD MEMBERS ABSENT: None  SLOCOG STAF PRESENT: Ronald De Carli, Steve Devencenzi, Peter Rodgers, Richard Murphy, Stephanie Hicks, James Worthley, Eliane Wilson, Tim Gilham, Jesica Bery, Geofrey Chiapela, Jefery Brubaker, Malory Jenkins, Sara Sanders, Peter Wiliamson, Barbara Troyan, Aida Nicklin, and Timothy McNulty (Legal Counsel). __  The folowing action minutes are listed as they were acted upon by the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments and as listed on the agenda for the meting held January 7, 2015, in the City of Atascadero, together with staf reports and relatedocuments atached thereto and incorporated therein by reference. To se a videof the meting procedings, go to this link (at SLO-SPAN website) for the Linked Agenda: htp:/w.slo-span.org/cgi-bin/archive.php?owner=SLOCOG-SLORTA&date=2015-01-07 either click the play buton on the video window to view from the begining of the meting or click on a particular agenda item to go directly to that part of the meting).  SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS (SLOCOG) AND SAN LUIS OBISPO REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY (RTA) JOINT METING  1. CAL TORDER AND ROL CAL: President Shely Higinbotham caled the Joint SLOCOG and RTA meting torder at 8:3 a.m. and led the Pledge of Alegiance. President Higinbotham thanked the City of Atascadero for hosting the SLOCOG/RTA Board meting today in their magnificent city hal building.   2. SLOCOG AND SLORTA BOARD ADMINISTRATIVE ITEMS:  a. Welcome New Board Members: President Higinbotham welcomed the new SLOCOG and RTA Board members, namely: San Luis Obispo (SLO) County Supervisor Lyn Compton (District 4), Council Member Jim Guthrie (City of Aroyo Grande), and Mayor John Shoals (City of Grover Beach).  b. ELECTION OF OFICERS: President Higinbotham caled for nominations for President and Vice President.  President:  Action: Board Member Frank Mecham moved to nominate current Vice President Debbie Arnold for President. Board Member Tom O’Malley seconded, and the motion passed unanimously on a voice vote.  Vice President:  Board Member Bruce Gibson moved and Board Member John Shoals seconded, nominating Board Member Jamie Irons for Vice President. The motion failed on a 5/7-split roll call vote.  Action: Board Member Fred Strong moved to nominate Board Member Jan Howell Marx for Vice President. Board Member Tom O’Malley seconded, and the motion carried unanimously on a roll call vote.   C. PRESENTATION: Plaque of Apreciation to Outgoing President Shely Higinbotham: President Debie Arnold read the Plaque of Apreciation, noting thathe SLOCOG/RTA Board apreciates Past President Higinbotham’s contribution and service as SLOCOG/RTA Board President in 2014, and Vice President in 2013. She then presented the Plaque of Apreciation to Past President Shely Higinbotham. Past President Higinbotham thanked the Board for the honor. A grouphoto op for the Board folowed.  d. EXECUTIVE COMITE ASIGNMENT: Mr. Ronald De Carli broughto atention thathe newly elected oficers and the past president wil now serve as the new members of the Executive Comite: President Debie Arnold, Vice President Jan Howel Marx, and Past President Shely Higinbotham.  3. ADJOURN TO SAN LUIS OBISPO REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY (RTA) BOARD METING: Past President Higinbotham adjourned the joint meting to the RTA Board meting at 8:50 a.m.  4. ADJOURN THE RTA BOARD METING & RECONVENE THE SLOCOG BOARD METING: Past President Higinbotham adjourned the RTA meting and reconvened the SLOCOG Board meting at 9:42 a.m.  SLOCOG Board Meting  I. CAL TORDER AND ROL CAL: Past President Shely Higinbotham caled the SLOCOG Board meting torder at 9:42 a.m. Rol Cal was taken.  II. PUBLICOMENTS: Mr. Eric Grening, Atascadero, made the folowing coments:  . The proposal to hold SLOCOG Board metings of-site (as mentioned athe last Executive Comite meting under the Change in Awards Program Strategy item) is a horible ideas it would be confusing for the public/transit users. It is critical to make certain that in any future SLOCOG Board agenda where an action item about holding Board metings of-site is included, the public must be alerted abouthe upcoming meting to adresuch item.  . The San Luis Obispo (SLO) County Planing Comision has continued the agenda item on the proposed Oster/Las Pilitas (Hwy 58) Rock Quary project. It wil be presented atheir next meting on January 8, 2015. (Update: This item was again continued to their next meting on February 5, 2015). The posible impacts of this project, including mitigation and transportation isues, ned to be adresed.  . The Philips 6 Revised Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) and Rail Spur Project is scheduled for public hearing athe SLO County Planing Comision meting on February 5th. The major focus of SLOCOG coments on this project is on capacity. It is a concern that this would be intensified by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)’s mandate requiring oil trains to move slowly. He hopes the SLOCOG leter would not be the last leter expresing concern abouthis project.  III. BOARD ADMINISTRATIVE ITEMS:  A-1 Interagency Asignments: Mr. De Carli briefly reviewed the interagency asignments, noting the purpose of CALCOG, NARC, LOSAN, & CRC, and pointing out SLOCOG’s representatives in 2014.  The Board briefly discused the interagency asignments and reapointed SLOCOG’s interagency representatives and alternates as outlined below:  1. California Asociation of Councils of Governments (CALCOG) Representation: Folowing a motion by Board Member Tom O’Maley and second by Board Member Frank Mecham to nominate President Debie Arnold and Vice President Jan Howel Marx as delegate and alternate respectively, Board Member Fred Strong noted he has nobjection to the motion; however, SLOCOG would lose itseat on the CALCOG Executive Comite as he curently is an oficer of that comite. Board Member Bruce Gibson stresed the ned for continuity, recomending keping the delegate and alternate as they are. Board Member O’Maley concured and withdrew his motion.  Action: Board Member Tom O’Maley moved to reapoint Board Member Strong as delegate to CALCOG for 2015 and President Arnold as the alternate. Board Member Bruce Gibson seconded, and the motion caried unanimously on a rol cal vote.  Delegate: Board Member Fred Strong (reapointed) Alternate: President Debie Arnold (reapointed)  2. National Asociation of Regional Councils (NARC): Vice President Marx inquired if there is a ned to apoint an alternate. Past President Higinbotham noted that if the ned arises or if it is required, then the Board wil come back and apoint an alternate.  Action: Vice President Jan Howel Marx moved to reapoint Board Member Fred Strong as SLOCOG representative to NARC. Board Member John Shoals seconded, and the motion pased unanimously on a voice vote.   Delegate: Board Member Fred Strong (reapointed)  3. Rail Comites: Board Member Gibson moved a motion to reapoint Board Member Fred Strong as the delegate to LOSAN. Board Member Shoals seconded. Board Member Gibson moved to amend the motion (se ful Board action next page) to kep the delegates and alternates for both LOSAN and CRC the same as last years.  Action: Board Member Bruce Gibson moved to kep the same delegates and alternates (as apointed in 2014) for both LOSAN and CRC. Board Member Frank Mecham seconded, and the motion pased unanimously on a voice vote.  a. Los Angeles – San Diego – San Luis Obispo (LOSAN) Rail Coridor Agency Representation:   Delegate: Fred Strong (reapointed)  Alternate: Jan Howel Marx (reapointed)  b. Coast Rail Cordinating Council (CRC) Representation:   Delegate: Jan Howel Marx (reapointed) Alternate: Fred Strong (reappointed)  IV. PUBLIC HEARING:  B-1 Coast Rail Coridor Environmental Impact Statement and Environmental Impact Report (EIS & EIR): Peter Rodgers briefly gave a background of the project, noting SLOCOG does not control al the factors that are on this document, but has control of the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) and the Federal Transportation Improvement Program (FTIP). Mr. Rodgers introduced Mr. John Cok, Project Manager, Circlepoint (the Consultant). He also recognized the presence of Mr. Royce Gotcher, Branch Chief, Caltrans Division of Rail.  Mr. John Cok, Circlepoint (Consultant), discused the Coast Coridor Project EIS/EIR using a PowerPoint presentation, noting the purpose of the project, proposed improvements and sources, geographicontext, timeline and next steps. The final EIS/EIR wil include responses to coments. He highlighted the outreach eforts that were made in the lastwo and half years on this project – 6,0 postcards were sento property owners, legal notices were published inewspapers, and more than 10 oficials received CD copies of the document. He broughto atention that the deadline for coments is today (January 7, 2015).  The Board went into an extensive discusion on this project, inquiring abouthe proposed improvements, and touching on physical improvements instalation, “no build” alternative, sidings, alignments, realignments and their locations. During the discusion, Board Member Mecham asked how the public would know if their coments have ben received and answered. Mr. Cok responded thathe California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) have diferent requirements for that proces, either specificaly inform in writing or verbaly, to provide them a copy or aces to a copy of the document. Both SLOCOG and the Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) have provided a copy of the ful document online at theirespective websites. Mr. Cok pointed outhat physical improvements of segments wil be studied separately. On the ‘No Build’ alternative, any specific improvements that are loked at are not going to be built, but it does not mean that options to do those improvements are not being considered. He said there are a lot of asumptions athis point. Board Member O’Maley said he understands there is a ned for al options to be considered. SLOCOG’s purpose is to se what options are available and to receive publicoments/input. He wanted to confirm thathis Board stil have authority to receive and stil can consider publicoments relative to this document, including an action on the proposed realignments. Mr. Rodgers indicated aditional money may be neded, as changing the draft document may increase costs. The direction from Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) [FRA is the lead agency pursuanto NEPA, and SLOCOG is the lead agency pursuanto CEQA] is to includeverything under the sun.  Past President Higinbotham asked if it is posible to extend the publicoment period to get an answer. Mr. De Carli pointed outhat for the purpose of the general public and the SLOCOG Board, the major isue of publiconcern are the proposed realignments. Al the improvements and properties impacted by those improvements are defined in the document. He noted that as Mr. Cok indicated, EIR is a decision-making reporthat examines al posible improvements. There wil be a separate proces to determine which improvements wil be constructed. SLOCOG has the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), a fiscaly constrained planing document for the San Luis Obispo (SLO) region. Mr. De Carli indicated that SLOCOG has strong policies in loking at projects. The RTP, however, does not include realignment project, as they are not fiscaly posible in this region nor are they cost efective. SLOCOG has not included any realignment project in the RTP. Hence, no realignment project would move forward in this region. Board Member Gibson aded thathe confidence would be the facthathose proposed realignments are not in the RTP. The impacts would be studied buthe particular projects wil be considered by this Board.  Board Member Strong stated he has ben working with the FRA, clarifying that this is an environmental document that loks at improvements, if they are posible or not. He briefly explained thenvironmental proces and reminded everyone thathis document is loking at posibilities, and interagency coperation is neded.  Board Member O’Maley said he understands that realignments are not included in the RTP but he wants to make certain that jurisdictions in this county have the ability to exercise local control.  Mr. Rodgers broughto atention that after confering with Mr. Cok, he believes it would probably be not much of a costo eliminate the realignment project from the document. Mr. Cok aded thathe final EIS/EIR document wil include changes to the draft document. SLOCOG staf and Circlepoint staf wil take a lok at posible implications if somelements are removed from the document (i.e., recirculation of the document or some kind of adendum, or aditional volume, so everyone understands whathose are and can comment on the final document). He noted that coments heard today and in writing up to today are fairly heard and wil be referenced in the final EIS/EIR. Vice President Marx noted that there may be a ned for a suplemental EIS (changed circumstances; e.g., more trains, etc.). A number of mechanical changes wil ned to hapen that are nothat expensive. She said she suports going forward with the present EIS/EIR, as geting this train from SLO al the way to Salinas is a very important goal. She stresed the ned to encourage people to suport increasing pasengerail service, and do what the Coast Rail Coridor Council (CRC) wants to do.  Board Member Shoals wants to make sure that the Board understands this is a program document, no specific projects. When those projects are presented, each wil have their own EIR. He sugested moving on to publicoments.  Public Coments:  Ms. LeAn Broks, Atascadero/Santa Margarita, said that fuly acepting thathe realignment project are not going to hapen makes her very nervous as her property is impacted. She pointed out where her house is located on Salinas Road where the yelow line indicates the realignment. She said she is a senior citizen and not planing to move. She wants the realignment removed from the document, ading that Salinas Road is a dead-end road. She thanked the Board for their consideration of her coments.  Mr. Eric Grening, Atascadero, reminded the Board that SLOCOG as a lead agency is not obligated to certify this EIR. Relative to realignment to save travel time, the cost of acquisition of property can easily be under estimated like High Sped rail. There are other alternatives for geting faster service, and those include restoring sidings that oncexisted (in adition to lengthening those that now exist), tiltrain technology etc. On safety, Mr. Grening stresed loking at places south side of Cuesta Grade where geology is very unstable. Geological factors must be considered.  Mr. Kristopher Lyon, Atascadero, said he, his wife and child live on Salinas Road. They are concerned that if the funds become available, this realignment project could hapen. He noted that if those railroad tracks are realigned, al of their water wels are going away as they would be right on the railroad tracks. Major water wels wil be lost if the project is built and there wil be a financial hit on property values. He urged the Board to eliminate from the document the realignments and the increase to Right-of-Way (ROW).  Mr. John Edgecombe, Atascadero, refering to Table 2.4 in the EIS/EIR, he strongly oposed the realignment project. He noted thathis operational improvement of the railroad is totaly insignificant; it would only cause hardship as property values in that area wil decrease.  Ms. Ane Edgecombe, Atascadero, vehemently oposed the realignment project, pointing outhatheir property is in the red zone. She broughto atention that she and her family did not receive the postcard until November 20th, which is les than 55 days prior to this hearing. Ms. Edgecombe implored to the Board noto put a cloud on those properties that would be afected by the realignment (depreciating property values). She said, “We are puting our lives on hold waiting for when the portion of our properties are taken away for ROW. We wilose 10 ft of of our property in the back, our water wel, and a spot on the front. The realignment project wil reduce the value of homes.”  Ms. Betina Salter, Atascadero & Santa Margarita, stated she lives 50 fet from the railroad. She pointed outhat it is sily to kep something in this documenthat is like a wish list of rail. She noted she to did not receive a postcard. Ms. Salter urged the Board and adresed Board Member O’Maley (Mayor of the City of Atascadero) to remove the realignment project, because keping them in the document means there is always a posibility of it being constructed in the future.  Mr. Gary Kirkland, Atascadero, questioned whowns the railroad tracks, and comented about iminent domain and government interfering in railroad operations. He said, “Stop this tyrany; leave the railroad alone.”  Mr. Edward Vek, Atascadero, stresed the ned to closely examine the purpose of this plan (which is to get grants). Hemphasized the ned to change the ruleso thathe agency does not control everything. As far as safety, improvements are fine, but he urged the Board noto vote on this plan as it is not feasible.  Ms. Myrna Bradley, Atascadero, indicated she found out abouthis isue a few days ago, noting that it afects her family a lot. She said people canot trusthat the government would take them into consideration when big contracts are loked at. Ms. Bradley thanked SLOCOG Board members for their service, urging them to get rid of the realignment project from the document because it afects people. She noted thathe bigesthing for her is the real estate value of their property, ading she has five (5) children (two are going to colege). She is woried that a hit on real estate property values wil create hardship on her family as it wil cost even more money to acquire properties.  Ms. Paulete Claire, Atascadero, thanked everyone who have ben working together to get those afected by this isue to this point. She mentioned the isue of comunication because she to did not receive the postcard; she only learned abouthis realignment isue from neighbors who gotogether and shared the information. She broughto atention thathe los of homes and property values were not included in the PowerPoint presentation under the list of adversefects. Ms. Claire said that luckily, her water suply source is down the river; however, this realignment wil take away her front porch, herental property, the pasture, driveway, gates, a part of the barn and the value of her property. She asked the Board to consider those who live at areas afected by this project.  Past President Higinbotham closed the publicoment portion of this item.  President Arnold stated thathe Board agres there is no funding for this project, stresing that she would like to se the realignment or the thre (3) locations afected by the realignment removed from the document. She said she suports improvements within the existing railroad right of way (ROW), but the realignment or the 3 locations altogether must be removed from this document.  Board Member Gibson clarified to those who spoke today abouthe realignment projecthat the SLOCOG Board has no intention to move forward with such project. The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) does not even mention that a realignment project is a posibility. He said, those who have concerns abouthis isue should have the confidence this project is not going to hapen. Board Member Gibson asked the Board to directhe consultanto respond to coments received andirect staf to remove the realignment project from the document.  Board Member Strong noted that if the action on this item is not completely consistent with state and federal requirements, he would sugest ading a language that says the Board has no intention of including improvements outside of thexisting ROW. He pledged to talk to Union Pacific oficials in Sacramentone wek from today on this isue. Mr. Rodgers indicated that staf has received clear direction to remove this realignment from the EIS/EIR, and therefore wil take this up lader.  Past President Higinbotham noted that the concerns the Board kept hearing is that this project istil in the EIS/EIR; there are unintended consequences because it istil in fine print.  President Arnold stressed the ned for the Board to take actionow on this item so al of the Board’s god intention is clear.  Action: President Debie Arnold moved and Board Member Tom O’Maley seconded to suport to eitheremove the realignments from thre (3) locations (Wilsona, Templeton, & Santa Margarita) or remove al locations. The motion pased unanimously on a voice vote.  Past President Higinbotham recesed the meting at 11:13 a.m. and reconvened at 11:27 a.m.  B-2 Draft 2014 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP): Mr. Steve Devencenzi reviewed the Draft 2014 RTP with a PowerPoint presentation, noting what is new since this draft Plan was presented athe last meting in December. He highlighted the 2014 RTP Apendices and the Chalenges of Improving & Maintaining Our System.  During the discusion that ensued, the folowing coments/questions/responses were given: . Board Member Frank Mecham: I apreciate al the work done on this document; however, the bigest problem on US 101 is the Shel Beach area, which is not adresed here in this draft RTP.  Mr. Devencenzi noted that a six-lane project on that area is not fundable; hence, other techniques/options/improvements are being considered. In today’s agenda, SLOCOG has something to move forward with to begin constructing those improvements. SLOCOG staf wil work with member jurisdictions and Caltrans on this isue.  . Board Member Adam Hil: Are there any improvements planed on Highway 27 (i.e., auxiliary lanes or expansion of thentrance to the schol [in Aroyo Grande] to relieve congestion? As the city’s growth is ocuring on the south side, more people are using that back road and it is geting very dificult for a lot ofolks.  . Board Member Fred Strong: I complimenthis Board and thentire region for we have done very wel with our RTP. Question on ES-6, what does this constitutes, this multimodal 642 miles?  Mr. Devencenzi noted thathe Highway 27 Widening project is included in the RTP; staf wil verify the total miles of city strets. (Note: Number was verified as acurate).  Public Coments:  Mr. Grening thanked the Board for suporting staff in their amazing work on this, saying thathe way coments can be made relative to the RTP is now a nifty tol. He broughto atention he would be leaving for another meting son; he then gave the folowing coments:  . Is there a way the publican know thathe coments are being cumulatively recorded, and when do people gethem back? Mr. Devencenzi indicated staf wil be gathering and compiling al coments received.  . On Agenda Item C-2, Transit Neds Asesment Update – It neds to be stated that the SLOCOG Board and staf wil do everything posible to provide transit service. As long as fixed route services are threatened by the cost of runing Americans with Disability Act (ADA) services, a whole category of potential deficiency is open.  . On Agenda Item C-3, International Perspectives on Paratransit Aproaches – It is very exciting that SLOCOG staf gathered these wider perspectives. The ADA is a very important civil rights legislation.  Mr. Gary Kirkland, Atascadero, remarked that he ses SLOCOG and other government agencies go beyond their purview; government should not decide where people live. The citizens are the ones responsible in making decisions aboutheir lives, nothis Board or the government.  Action: The Board received Item B-2 as presented, including al testimony/coments on this item.  (Past President Higinbotham and Board Member Gibson lefthe meting at 12:02 p.m.)  President Debie Arnold tok over in chairing the meting at 12:02 p.m.  V. TRANSPORTATION ITEMS  C-1 San Luis Obispo (SLO) Regional Rideshare Program Update: Ms. Stephanie Hicks, SLOCOG Public Information Oficer/Regional Rideshare Program Manager, gave a sumary of the Regional Rideshare Month. She then turned the discusion over to Rideshare staf:  Using a PowerPoint presentation, Mr. Peter Wiliamson, Employer Outreach Cordinator, discused the Back ‘N’ Forth Club, a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Program (14% growth in the program; employer tol kit; multiple levels of participation for employers, etc.).  Ms. Malory Jenkins, Comunications Cordinator, presented a PowerPoint on the 51 Traveler Information Program, noting the 51 System and explaining the Rideshare 51 multi-modal triplaner.  Ms. Sara Sanders, Program Cordinator, updated the Board using a PowerPoint presentation on the Rideshare activities relative to Safe Routes to Schol (SRTS) and Mobility Movement. She noted the completion of the SRTS Infrastructure Inventory and the start of the “Know Where To Go” Program to educate transit riders.  Ms. Hicks broughto atention thathis item is for the Board to receive the information presented today.  Action: This item is for information only. The SLOCOG Board received the information as presented.  C-2 Transit Neds Asesment Update: Ms. Eliane Wilson sumarized the Transit Neds Asesment Update using a PowerPoint presentation. She highlighted the performance trends and main deficiencies.  Action: Board Member Fred Strong moved and Board Member Frank Mecham seconded to aprove the Staf recomendation to bring this item to Advisory comites and authorize submision to Caltrans. The motion caried on a voice vote, with Board Member Bruce Gibson and Past President Shely Higinbotham absent.  Board Member O’Maley wondered if one of Atascadero’s Planing Comisioners (who has lots of experience about ADA) has reviewed this document. Ms. Wilson refered the mater to Regional Transit Authority (RTA) Executive Director Geof Straw. Mr. Straw indicated he would bring this as information athe next Regional Transit Advisory Comite (RTAC) meting on January 15th.  C-3 International Perspectives on Paratransit Aproaches: Ms. Wilson discused the item with a PowerPoint presentation, noting that this has ben presented to SLOCOG Executive Comite and at the International Paratransit Conference sponsored by the Transit Research Board. She highlighted the Comparison of Paratransit Performance, Intensities among Metropolitan Areas, and Contrasting Paratransit Setings.  Board Member Mecham complimented Ms. Wilson for an excelent job on this item. Ms. Wilson responded, Mercí (which means thank you).  Action: Upon motion by Board Member Tom O’Maley and second by Vice President Jan Howel Marx, the Board received Item C-3 as presented. The motion pased on a voice vote (Board Member Gibson and Past President Higinbotham absent).  (Board Member Adam Hilefthe meting at 12:29 p.m.)  VI. CONSENT AGENDA: President Arnold broughto atention that Item D-1 wil be puled for a separate Board action and Item D-3 for a short presentation on what the Project Initiation Documents (PIDs) entail. She then caled for a motion to aprove Item D-1, SLOCOG Minutes of December 3, 2014.  Action on Item D-1, SLOCOG Minutes – December 3, 2014: Vice President Jan Howel Marx moved and Board Member Frank Mecham seconded, to aprove the SLOCOG Board meting minutes of December 3, 2014 as presented. The motion pased on a voice vote (Board Members Compton and Guthrie abstained; Board Members Gibson, Hil, and Past President Higinbotham absent).  Discusion on Consent Agenda Item D-3:  D-3 Project Initiation Documents (PIDs) on US 101 in Five Cities Area: Ms. Jesica Bery briefly reviewed the staf report with a PowerPoint presentation.  Board Member Mecham thanked Ms. Bery for her outstanding and concise presentation.  Action on Item D-3: Board Member Lyn Compton moved to aprove the staf recomendation as outlined below. Board Member John Shoals seconded, and the motion caried on a voice vote with Board Members Gibson, Hil and Past President Higinbotham absent.  Staf Recomendation:  1. Concur/Suport Caltrans to initiate PID for Avila Beach Drive interchange and Spyglas climbing lanextension to be completed in the time frame for the 2016 STIP (Northern PID).  2. Concur/Suport Caltrans to initiate PID foramp consolidation and active managed shoulder with technical suport provided by SLOCOG retained consultant – with a goal of completion for 2016 STIP, subjecto revaluation of scope and timeframe (Southern PID).  3. Authorize Executive Director to extend contract with Walace Group (and Kitelson Asociates, Inc.) to do aditional cordination and technical services.  Consent Agenda Items:  D-1 Minutes of Metings: a. SLOCOG Minutes – December 3, 2014 (Aprove); b. Executive Comite Minutes – December 10, 2014 (Information). c. Technical Transportation Advisory Comite (TAC) Minutes, and Citizens Transportation Advisory Comite (CTAC) Minutes – December 17, 2014 (Information). D-2 FY 2014/15 SLOCOG Executive Director Employment Contract Amendment (Aprove Amendmento the Executive Director Employment Contract, providing a 3% Merit Increase efective January 1, 2015).  D-3 Project Initiation Documents (PIDs) on US 101 in Five Cities Area (Aprove the Staf Recomendation as outlined below).  Staf Recomendation:  1. Concur/Suport Caltrans to initiate PID for Avila Beach Drive interchange and Spyglas climbing lanextension to be completed in the time frame for the 2016 STIP (Northern PID). 2. Concur/Suport Caltrans to initiate PID foramp consolidation and active managed shoulder with technical suport provided by SLOCOG retained consultant – with a goal of completion for 2016 STIP, subjecto revaluation of scope and timeframe (Southern PID). 3. Authorize Executive Director to extend contract with Walace Group (and Kitelson Asociates, Inc.) to do aditional cordination and technical services.  D-4 Rideshare 51 Marketing Partnership with KSBY-TV (Aprove Staf’s recomended Marketing Partnership Agrement with KSBY-TV in the amount of $48,0). D-5 Corespondence, Pres Releases and News Articles (Review and File).  Action on Consent Agenda items with thexception of Items D-1 and D-3: Board Member Tom O’Maley moved and Board Member Fred Strong seconded, to aprove the Consent Agenda Items D-2, D-4 to D-5 as presented. The motion caried on a rol call vote, with Board Members Gibson, Hil and Past President Higinbotham absent.  VI. BOARD MEMBER COMENTS: Vice President Marx stresed the importance of adresing the isue brought up by Mr. Grening regarding holding SLOCOG/RTA Board metings ofsite. Mr. De Carli indicated staf would bring this up to the Executive Comite for direction and then the Board for aproval. President Arnold thanked Mayor Tom O’Maley for hosting SLOCOG athis meting.  VII. ADJOURNMENT: President Higinbotham adjourned the meting at 12:58 p.m.    Respectfuly Submited,   Aida Nicklin Executive Secretary     H:\2014-15 OWP\040 Agency Admin 14-15\SLOCOG Board Agendas\8 - February 2015\D-1 Draft SLOCOG Minutes - January 7, 2015.doc E-2: Placeholder for Atascadero Meeting Summary  Coast Corridor EIS/EIR Hearing Meeting Summary – Soledad , CA Dec. 3, 2014  Conducted by Christina Watson, TAMC Principal Transportation Planner  Soledad City Council 12/3/14 – Meeting Minutes a. Councilmember Christopher Bourke: a question to the very impressively thick report you have there, my question is, what is specifically planned for the City of Soledad, I mean there’s a station in the city, we have side tracks next to it, is there any work planned on the tracks in the City of Soledad? i. Ms. Watson: No, the plans have only to do with the station itself in the City of Soledad limits - city limits. ii. Mr. Bourke: So there is no track work? iii. Ms. Watson: That is my understanding, but I will verify that, and the answer will be provided in the final environmental document. iv. Mr. Bourke: Thank you. b. Mayor Fred Ledesma: So we’ll be able to purchase a ticket here instead of going to Salinas? i. Ms. Watson: The train service? So, once the Coast Daylight is in operation, you’ll be able to board here in Soledad and take the train all the way up to San Francisco or all the way down to either Los Angeles or San Diego. ii. Mayor Ledesma: So like with the wine corridor, if people want to, they can come down on the train to visit the wine corridor here or to go to the National Park? iii. Ms. Watson: Yes. iv. City Clerk Adela Gonzalez: Just want to note that the City must fund the station construction. When redevelopment agencies were still around, we had funding designated for station improvements; Mr. Brent Slama has more information on that. Now that the redevelopment agencies are no longer around, we do not have those funds for station improvements. v. Mayor Ledesma: Do we have a cost estimate for that? Can we use the Measure I funding for that? vi. Ms. Gonzalez: I don’t think we have a cost estimate yet and it wasn’t in the approved project list for Measure I. c. Val Gomes1: I have a two-fold question. I appreciate you laying out the environmental impacts. I’m just wondering, I mean I can appreciate it, it may not be as crucial at the moment, but, in case a monetary value has been assessed to the environmental impact at this point, or is there some plan to do such a monetary cost and how that might be mitigated, if there is a cost, if that might be expected to be borne by businesses or taxpayers? A second question that also could be responded to sometime in the future, if not now, would be, in terms of once the project does get to be operational, what’s the cost benefit analysis, in terms of how much would you put in and how much would it benefit the actual taxpayer? If those answers cannot be provided tonight, it can wait. Thank you. i. Ms. Watson: OK d. Councilmember Christopher Bourke: One more question, Ms. Watson, if I may, Councilmember Bourke, at the microphone, here. You said that your organization is going to do the EIR, and then eventually you are going to propose it to the train operator, which is 1 TAMC staff did not get contact info for Mr. Gomes, but Ms. Watson did give him her card and requested he follow up with an email. Union Pacific, which parts of the major plan they are going to implement, so your organization is not making the ultimate, put it that way, Southern Pacific – Union Pacific is going to say what they are going to do, what they’re actually going to do, which might not be the entire plan, correct? i. Ms. Watson: OK, so let me just clarify that. TAMC is not the lead agency on this project, we’re a responsible agency. City of – I’m sorry, Caltrans is the lead agency for the project, but for the environmental document, SLOCOG is the lead agency on the state side of things and the Federal Railroad Administration is the lead agency on the federal side of things – there’s a lot of entities involved in this. In terms of implementing the project, Caltrans Division of Rail and Mass Transportation is the lead agency to implement the project and to conduct the negotiations with Union Pacific to determine which of the projects will be implemented. It’s a long process of negotiating between the entities that will determine exactly which projects will get implemented out of this plan. ii. Mr. Bourke: So it’s up to Union Pacific, basically? iii. Ms. Watson: I would say that it’s up to the negotiations between Caltrans and Union Pacific. iv. Mr. Bourke: Gotcha, OK. When might those be – any idea of timeframe, so that we may know, what might actually be done? v. Ms. Watson: I don’t think we have a timeframe for that. vi. Mr. Bourke: OK, thank you. e. Councilmember Patricia Stephens: This project has been on the burner for 18 years that I know of – how many? i. Royce Gotcher, Caltrans: I think it’s more like 20 years. It’s been a long time. ii. Ms. Stephens: 18-20 years. I think that Mayor Pro Tem has been attending the meetings. I’ve attended, over the years, many, many meetings. iii. Ms. Gonzalez: Former Mayor Gerbrandt, Gary Gerbrandt, was attending these meetings as well. iv. Ms. Stephens: Yes, he’s the one that started Soledad’s involvement, long before our National Park came. I hope to see it in my lifetime. f. Mayor Pro Tem Alejandro Chavez: This project has been going on for years. I just wanted to state that the document we’re talking about here, we’re talking about June of 2015, so I know that’s the one piece that we know about, and then those negotiations will happen. I think the one thing that has changed is that there actually is an interest in rail at the state level for probably the first time. There actually is a group of Senators and there is a committee now that is looking at rail at the state level, when before, had never been any kind of committee that I was aware of, so now there is some kind of interest. Part of it was the bullet train in the Central Valley; I think that is what started the interest. On the positive side of that is the Daylight train. One of the things I didn’t hear in this presentation but I did hear in the morning presentation, because someone asked the question in regards to the amount of passengers in this particular area, I believe it’s number 2 in the nation in regards to rail, or something like that? i. Ms. Watson: I think that’s what Executive Director Hale said this morning. ii. Mr. Bourke: Unlike the bullet train, this would actually really go from LA to San Francisco? iii. Ms. Watson: I think they are both supposed to go LA to San Francisco; this one will go along the Coast. iv. Mr. Bourke: Well, yeah, but the Coast is so much more beautiful. Who would want to go through the San Joaquin Valley? v. Ms. Watson: All the people who live there.  2. King City special joint meeting of City Council/ Planning Commission 12/9/14 Coast Corridor EIS/EIR Hearing Meeting Summary – Salinas, CA Dec. 3, 2014  Conducted by Christina Watson, TAMC Principal Transportation Planner  TAMC Board Meeting 12/3/14 a. Boardmember Louis Calcagno: How many riders are on the Starlight today? Are the primary stops Salinas and San Luis Obispo? And is the Daylight the same thing? I see the train go by every day and no one is on it. If no one rides currently, why would we do another train? b. Boardmember Bruce Delgado: I heard you mention safety as a purpose and as a benefit on several slides, but it’s missing from the environmental benefits slide. You might want to add increased safety to the benefits slide. c. Christine Kemp1: The loss of agricultural land is a great concern. Property owners along the corridor did not receive notice of this project prior to the receipt of the notice of this document, and the project process is unclear. Who is the decision-making body for this project? To whom should we direct questions and concerns? d. Arthur McLoughlin2: I am a resident of North County. I frequently travel on Amtrak, the Coast Starlight, to Los Angeles. The train is usually half to three-quarters full in coach; the trip is during the day so I always ride coach. Many people ride in the club car, which have windows you can’t see into from outside, so it may appear empty but it’s usually full. The club car is a gathering place, people go there to socialize. Amtrak is cheaper and more convenient than flying. It gets you right into downtown LA. Sometimes, the train times don’t work for my trip, and then I’ll take the Amtrak bus to connect to the Surfliner train instead. I am overall in favor of this project. I would ride the Daylight if it were available. e. Ross Jensen3: I am a property owner along the 101, at Spence Road. What are the properties that will be affected by the siding project? Will you be using eminent domain to acquire any properties? In the past, there was also talk about a project to improve the frontage road along the 101 in Chualar. You should make sure there is no conflict between the two projects. f. Boardmember Alejandro Chavez: I think it will be great to have a train station in Soledad, especially for tourists visiting the Pinnacles National Park in Soledad. I have taken the Starlight train six or seven times in the past, and it is 75% or more full on the trip from Salinas to LA. I also rode first class from Salinas to Seattle, and it was fully booked. g. Boardmember Simon Salinas: Consider reaching out to agricultural landowners using a mailing list regarding the Soledad and King City hearings. h. Staff responses: i. Principal Planner Christina Watson: Notices were mailed out to every property owner with property abutting the rail line between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, both when the Notice of Intent was published in 2012 and for this document. TAMC is not the decision-making body for these projects, the document leads are SLOCOG on the state side and the FRA on the federal side. But as a responsible agency, I can respond to questions and help folks get in touch with the right people to get answers to their questions. All comments and questions will also be included in the final document. 1 Ms. Kemp gave staff her contact info and followed up with email correspondence. TAMC has her contact info. 2 Mr. McLoughlin is on the Highway 156 Community Advisory Group. TAMC has his contact info. 3 Mr. Jensen signed in at the meeting. TAMC has a phone number for him. ii. Executive Director Debbie Hale: According to the internet, the Starlight had 454,000 riders in 2012, and was the number 2 long-distance train in the nation. Adding all state-supported services, it was #13 out of 42 nationwide. Staff will evaluate the potential conflict between the proposed siding and the highway frontage road project. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 1 Column No. Page No. Description Comment 1. Throughout Document Incorrect Project Description for City of King Multimodal Transportation Center ("MMTC") Please correct the City of King Project Description. The City's MMTC consists of the following components: 1. A passenger platform, a passenger drop-off and loading zone, a small station building with restrooms and storage rooms, and four passenger shelter canopies. 2. A parking lot for station patrons. 3. A staging area for Fort Hunter Liggett. 4. A bus stop accommodating Amtrak Thruway, Greyhound, and Monterey-Salinas Transit ("MST") bus service, Pinnacles National Park shuttle service, taxi service, and bicycle facilities. 5. Improvements to First Street between Division Street and Broadway Street, including the introduction of street trees, center medians, bike lanes, parallel parking, as well as curb extensions, crosswalks and traffic signals at the intersections with Broadway Street, Bassett Street, and Pearl Street. 6. The De Anza Trail extension south of Division Street to San Lorenzo Creek. If the correct project description were analyzed in the EIS/EIR, the environmental impacts would be reduced. 2. Throughout Document Fiber Optic Cables in Monterey County and City of King While the EIS/EIR mentions fiber optic cables in San Luis Obispo, it does not acknowledge the fiber optic cables in Monterey County. In September 2000, the County of Monterey approved a permit for undergrounding fiber optics communication lines within railroad and public rights-of-way from north Monterey County to south Monterey County. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 2 Column No. Page No. Description Comment There are underground fiber optic communication lines installed within the railroad and public rights-of-way through the City of King. It is our understanding that AT&T, Verizon and Level 3 Communication have these lines. Additionally, there is a proposed hub to be located in the City of King. The EIS/EIR does not mention this information. 3. Throughout Document City of King The City is called "City of King" and not "King City". The correction should be made document wide. 4. Page S-4 Table S-1, 3rd Row The reference to "one new at-grade crossing could be created is inaccurate" To implement the King City Station the existing Pearl Street At-grade crossing must be closed and relocated to Broadway Street. 5. Page 1-11, 2nd Paragraph Long-term parking or storage of train cars. There should be no parking or storage of train cars between San Antonio and San Lorenzo Creek. If this remains in the documents, and adverse impact related to aesthetics should be included in the impact section. 6. Page 2-1 & 2-5, 2-6 Discrepancy in Description On page 2-1, paragraph 2, the "No Build Alternative" assumes there are "no new physical improvements". However, on page 2-6, paragraph 1, it states that the "No Build Alternative" would include known (funded) rail improvements. There appears to be a discrepancy between the two descriptions for the "No Build Alternative" sections. 7. Page 2-5 US Army's Fort Hunter-Liggett There should be mention of US Army's Fort Hunter-Liggett's use of the MMTC. The local military base, US Army’s Fort Hunter-Liggett, has identified the Federal Necessity to be able to move a significant number of Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 3 Column No. Page No. Description Comment troops and their gear equipment from a re-established train station to their facility southwest of the City of King. As part of the US Army’s Energy and Environmental Sustainability efforts, there is a Federal Interest in replacing the numerous shuttle buses between the Fort and the San Jose airport with Amtrak train service between San Jose and the City of King, thus providing a significant passenger draw for a King City station, beyond just the two MST (2) routes that would serve the MMTC. Building on previous studies by Railpros and California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly), the City retained Hatch Mott MacDonald, an engineering consulting firm that has done previous traffic studies for the City, in 2011-2012 to develop a Multimodal Transportation Development Strategy as part of the First Street Corridor Master Plan. The MMTC Development Strategy outlines an approach towards developing and funding a MMTC, along with the re-establishment of the City of King Train Station as an Amtrak station as the new Coast Daylight and Coast Starlight train service is developed. Key to reestablishing the train station near the historic downtown core is relocation of the existing Pearl Street at-grade railroad crossing north to Broadway Street to allow sufficient room for the twelve-hundred (1200’) foot long Amtrak-compliant train platform. 8. Page 2-9 2nd Bullet, 2nd Paragraph Siding extensions /new siding. The EIS/EIR notes that the SDP identifies the sidings to be extended. The King City Siding identified in the SDP on Table 4.2 on Page 4-6 and depicted on Exhibit 4-8 as Improvement M-12 was not analyzed in the EIS/EIR. The layout plan for this siding extension has been subject to additional design and engineering by Railpros this work is contained in the February 24, 2014 Conceptual Design (Exhibit B) Proposed Siding Concept (6 Sheets) 9. Page 2-11, 1st Coast Starlight Please add discussion of Fort Hunter-Liggett and Coast Starlight to Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 4 Column No. Page No. Description Comment Paragraph stop, troop movement. 10. Page 2-11, 2nd Bullet King City Station Please correct the Project Description, as reflected in Column No. 1 above. 11. Page 2-12 Table 2-1 Spreckles Road Crossing in City of King; Lyon Street? Where is the Spreckles Road crossing in the City of King? Lyon Street should be Bitterwater. 12. Page 2-15, Table 2-3 Existing Siding New Station Existing Siding - New Power Switch All the noted siding locations are incorrect. The existing siding current runs from MP 159.19 to 160.64. The extension of the existing siding is to the north from MP 159.19 to MP 156.38. The New Power Switches are shown on the Layout Plan prepared by Railpros (Feb, 2014). The southern switch is located at MP 160.63 (See: Railpros EX-C6); A crossover is proposed starting at approx. MP 159.38 and ends at 159.11(See: Railpros EX-C4, Panels 2 and 3); The northern Power Switch is located at 156.38 (See: Railpros EXC1, Panel 1); The 1,200-foot Train Station Platform is located between MP 160.30 and MP 160.52. (See: Railpros EX-A) 13. Page 3.1-11 King City Station Project description rewrite needed (see Column No. 1) 14. Page 3.1-13 Rail Operation and Roadway Operations Pearl Street /Broadway Street Crossing even without train station. 15. Page 3.3-7 Table 3.3-1 Noise Screening Distances Please confirm this is the correct location. 16. Page 3.3-8 Table 3.3-2 Vibration Screening Distances Please confirm this is the correct location. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 5 Column No. Page No. Description Comment 17. Page 3.3-13, 2nd Paragraph Construction Noise Need to add At-grade crossings to the construct active list. 18. Page 3.3-20, Last Paragraph King City Siding Note that the noise impact would be less if the correct siding location was used, since it would extend the existing siding to the north away from any urban population areas. 19. Page 3.3-22, Table 3.3-5 Vibration Compatibility Impact noted is for extension of the siding South of the Station location, while listed in the table as if it was north of the station. These impacts would be significantly minimized if correct siding extension was used. 20. Page 3.3-24, Last Paragraph Historic Structures What are the specific resources that they are noting? Need to comment on the statement Coast Starlight and Fort Hunter-Liggett will require Starlight to stop for troop deployment. 21. Page 3.4-7, Table 3.4-2 Service Options These figure fail to include Fort Hunter-Liggett ridership demands. 22. Page 3.4-12 Mitigation Measure TRA-6 We need to have the King City Station description clearly note the MMTC design components. 23. Page 3.5-5 City of King General Plan The description fails to note the approved Station Plan design. Broadway Street/Pearl Street At-grade crossing. MMTC concept. 24. Page 3.5-7 Station Footprint and Required Crossing Need to confirm they used the correct footprint for station, Fail to note crossings. 25. Page 3.5-23 Land Use Compatibility and Property - Mitigation Measure Statement as to only schematic plans have been done is not factual. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 6 Column No. Page No. Description Comment 26. Page 3.5-23 Communities and Neighborhoods - Mitigation Measure Note Broadway Street Crossing is need per MIN-LU-4 due to closure of Pearl Street. Need to comment on all the detailed analysis and design criteria of Broadway Street Crossing (Railpros Initial Study) 27. Page 3.5-27, Figure 3.5-1c Generalized Existing Land Uses This figure contain numerous errors. The Downtown Addition Area and First Street area are not accurate. Also the Siding Area fails match either the existing of the correct extension location. See attached mark-up of the details of the King City Siding extension and Station Improvements. The improvements do not extend to the south of MP 160.71 and no changes are contemplated which would impact the San Lorenzo Creek Railroad Bridge at MP 160.72. The commercial areas of the Downtown Addition are not noted on the map. 28. Page 3.5-45, Figure 3.5-2c Environmental Justice Please see previous statements regarding incorrect depiction of King City Siding Extension and Train Station Improvements 29. Page 3.6-2, City of King General Plan The description is inaccurate and is out of date as it fails to depict the Conceptual Train Station and Rail Siding and Improvement Plans prepared by Railpros and adopted by the City Council on April 8, 2014. 30. Page 3.6-9, 3rd Par King City Siding extension. The King City Siding Extension does not "travel through and urban area". The extension of the King City Siding as noted extension from MP 159.19 to the North to MP 156.38 just south of the Spreckels Road At-grade located at MP 156.35. 31. Page 3.6-9 and 10 King City Passenger Station The description is inaccurate and is out of date. It uses the First Street Corridor Plan as a source of information. The City followed the recommendation of this plan, as spend significant time and money to development a detailed Train Station design and track layout plan Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 7 Column No. Page No. Description Comment (Railpros 2014). The platform length is incorrect; it is 1,200-feet and it's width is a minimum of 16 feet. It fails to depict the Conceptual Train Station and Rail Siding and Improvement Plans prepared by Railpros and adopted by the City Council on April 8, 2014. Discussion also fails to noted at-grade crossing relocation or the removal of the Meyer Building required to implement the relocation of the Pearl Street At-grade crossing to Broadway Street. 32. Page 3.13-16 Table 3.3-4 Noise Compatibility Note this table which lists the improvements by area has the siding correctly prior (North of) the station. 33. Page 3.15 - 16 Environmental Justice King City Station? Siding Impacts from wrong location. 34. Page 3.6-15 MIN-VIS-3 Comment on King City's' Policy on trains on sidings. Blocking circulation. 35. Page 3.6-18 King City Photo Photo not representative of location of station. 36. Page 3.7-9, Table 3.7-1 King City Siding Extension, King City Power Switch Impacts associated with incorrect locations. 37. Page 3.7-13, Table 3.7-2 King City Siding Extension, King City Power Switch Impacts associated with incorrect locations. 38. Page 3.7-20, Figure 3.7-1c Important Farmlands Map See previous comment regarding incorrect depiction of King City Siding Extension and Train Station Improvements 39. Page 3.8-6 King City Wastewater Information is out of date. 40. Page 3.8-8 King City Water Information is out of date. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 8 Column No. Page No. Description Comment 41. Page 3.8-11 Table 3.8-1 Potential Utility Impacts King City Siding Extension Impact associated with incorrect location. 42. Page 3.8-13, 1st Paragraph Natural Gas Lines Operational Effects King City Siding Extension The number natural gas line crossings needs to be reexamined since incorrect location was assessed for the King City Siding Extension. 43. Page 3.8-13 Electrical Transmission Lines Construction-Period Effects and Operational Effects King City Siding Extension The amount of intersections and length of transmission line conflicts needs to be reexamined since incorrect location was assessed for the King City Siding Extension. 44. Page 3.9-5 Hazardous Site King City Siding Extension Need to reconfirm the Hazardous Sites identified are relevant to the correct location of the King City Siding Extension. 45. Page 3.9-6 Build Alternative Demolition of Existing Facilities and Structures The demolition of a portion of the Meyer Warehouse for the relocation of the existing Pearl Street At-grade crossing to Broadway Street. Is not assessed. Nor is the demolition of the Freuden Building required for the MMTC (Train Station) assessed. 46. Page 3.9-7 Siding Extensions King City Siding Extension Are the three identified hazardous sites relevant to the correct King City Siding Extension location? 47. Page 3.9-8 Table 3.9-1 Hazardous Sites and Materials King City Siding Extension Need to reconfirm the Hazardous Sites identified are relevant to the correct location of the King City Siding Extension. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 9 Column No. Page No. Description Comment 48. Page 3.10-5 King City Station The source of the acreage data is dated and maybe incorrect. May not include the Broadway Street Crossing. I have STP confirm the area of permanent impact. 49. Page 3.10-15 Table 3.10-2 Impacts on Cultural and Paleontological Resources King City Siding Extension Impacts associated with incorrect location of King City Siding Extension? 50. Page 3.10-19 Historical Resources The analysis is incorrect. The building that is noted as "not" in the impact area of the King City Station is in the middle of the MMTC project site, and will need to be demolished. Also, no discussion is contained regarding the required demolition of a portion of the Meyer Warehouse Building to implement the relocation of the At-grade crossing so that the train station platform can be constructed. The specific of the station features have been identified and the analysis fails to address the project features. 51. Page 3.10-22 Mitigation Measure A-CUL-4 Relocation This measure fails to include a determination of feasibility, or a determination of historical significance. 52. Page 3.11-3 Methods of Evaluations Stations The incorrect document has been used for evaluation of the King City Station. The cite should be Conceptual Design Multi-Modal Transportation Center (Railpros, February 24, 2014) 53. Page 3.11-12 Table 3.11-2 Summary of Potential Geologic and Soil Impacts King City Siding Extension King City Power Switch Impacts noted are associated with incorrect locations. Revision required. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 10 Column No. Page No. Description Comment 54. Page 3.12-10 Table 3.12-10 Potential Proximity Impacts to Surface Waters King City Siding Extension The extensive 133 linear feet of temporary impacts and 100 linear feet of permanent impacts are based on the erroneous location of the King City Siding Extension to the South across San Lorenzo Creek. Please note the Extension of the existing siding is to the north from MP 159.19 to MP 156.38. All the noted impacts listed on this Table would be eliminated if the correct location of the King City Siding Extension was used. 55. Page 3.12-12 Construction-Period Effects King City Siding Extension The noted impacts to San Lorenzo Creek would be eliminated if the correct location of the King City Siding Extension was used. 56. Page 3.12-12 Operational Effects King City Siding Extension The statement that "San Lorenzo Creek is the only body of water that it not currently crossed by the existing alignment", is simply false. The existing alignment crosses San Lorenzo Creek at the existing San Lorenzo Creek Bridge located at MP 160.72. No new crossing is required. The noted operational impacts of .02 miles regarding San Lorenzo Creek would be eliminated if the correct location of the King City Siding Extension was analyzed. 57. Page 3.12-15 Table 3.12-2 Acreage of Proposed Improvements within 100-Year Floodplain King City Siding Extension The figures for the King City Siding Extension should be zero acres, the correct siding extension is to the north from MP 159.19 to MP 156.38 which has no components located within the 100-Year Floodplain. 58. Page 3.12-20 Figure 3.12- 1c Surface Waters in the Project Area King City Siding Extension The noted location of the King City Siding Extension is incorrect. The existing siding current runs from MP 159.19 to 160.64. The extension of the existing siding is to the north from MP 159.19 to MP 156.38. No new improvements are located south of milepost 160.71, which is north of San Lorenzo Creek. Accordingly there would be no Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 11 Column No. Page No. Description Comment impacts to San Lorenzo Creek. 59. Page 3.13-41 Table 3.13-3 Special-Status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in Coast Corridor Study Area King City Siding Extension The impacts on Special-Status Plant Species noted for the King City Siding Extension are based on the erroneous location of the King City Siding extension to the South across San Lorenzo Creek. 60. Page 3.13-49 Table 3.13-4 Build Alternative Potential Operational Biological Resources Impacts King City Siding Extension The Operational Biological Resources Impacts noted for the King City Siding Extension are based on the erroneous location of the King City Siding extension to the South across San Lorenzo Creek. 61. Page 3.13-64 Figure 3.13- 1d Sensitive Vegetation Communities King City Siding Extension The location of the King City Siding Extension is mapped incorrectly. The existing siding current runs from MP 159.19 to 160.64. The extension of the existing siding is to the north from MP 159.19 to MP 156.38. No new improvements are located south of milepost 160.71. The Cropland and Annual Grassland impacted areas are not depicted correctly. 62. Page 3.13-73 Figure 3.13- 2d Critical Habitat King City Siding Extension The location of the King City Siding Extension is mapped at the wrong location and the Critical Habitat impacts based on this erroneous location. 63. Page 3.13-82 Figure 3.13- 3d Wetlands and Jurisdictional Waters King City Siding Extension The location of the King City Siding Extension is mapped at the wrong location and the wetland impacts based on this erroneous location. 64. Page 3.14-2 City of King General Plan The description fails to note the additional detailed engineering and design work contained in the I Conceptual Train Station and Rail Siding and Improvement Plans prepared by Railpros and adopted by the City Council on April 8, 2014. In addition, the significant benefits and interrelationship of the Fort Hunter-Liggett components of the Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 12 Column No. Page No. Description Comment MMTC are not depicted. 65. Page 3.14-5 City of King It seem that author fails to understand the King City Train Station is a component of the MMTC. 66. Page 3.14-9 Indirect Impacts The description fails to note that the First Street Corridor Master Plan recommendation of for detailed engineering and design studies to further implement the MMTC have been prepared. The MMTC - Conceptual Train Station and Rail Siding and Improvement Plans prepared by Railpros, adopted by the City of King City Council on April 8, 2014 contain the detailed engineering and design work which the Build Alternative should have incorporated into the its Project Description. 67. Page 3.15-3 Foreseeable actions As noted the cumulative analysis is "drawn from two main categories - land development and transportation", and the "analysis is draws on the environmental review of ... where more fine-grained analysis is appropriate, environmental reviews of locally adopted plans." A review of Section 6.0 References clearly shows that the analysis conducted failed to incorporate the extensive environmental analysis contained in the Downtown Addition Specific Plan Final EIR (SCH Number 2006041150). The Downtown Addition Specific Plan Project is an approved development which one of its key characteristics is it is a "Transit-oriented development with a adjacent transit center (i.e. MMTC) intended to be a train station in the long term and a bus depot in the near term at Broadway Street" (See: DASP FEIR Page 3.05). The King City Station (i.e. MMTC) and the approved Downtown Addition Project have been planned as integrated projects. However, the Draft PEIR/S fails to express is that the King City Station requires the relocation of the existing Pearl Street Atgrade crossing to Broadway Street so to be able construct the platform for the King City Station, in any case. Since, the existing Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 13 Column No. Page No. Description Comment Pearl Street At-grade crossing is located in the middle of the proposed platform (See: Exhibit A -Railpros, Feb 24, 2014). 68. Page 3.15-5 Table 3.15-1 Planned and Programmed Transportation Improvements US 101 - First Street Interchange A note should be made that this improvement is part of the Railroad Corridor Safety Improvement Program adopted by the City of King to implement the relocation of the Pearl Street At-grade crossing to Broadway Street. (See: Railpros, May 6, 2011) 69. Page 3.15-10 Traffic and Travel Cumulative Effects King City Station The document fails to include any discussion of the King City Station. Please note an extensive traffic analysis was conducted regarding the required relocation of the existing Pearl Street At-grade crossing to Broadway Street (See: DASP FEIR 4.13-26). 70. Page 3.15- 26, Last Paragraph Hydrology and Water Resources Cumulative Effects King City Siding Extension The effects on surface waters can be avoided by correcting the location of the King City Siding Extension to that contained in Exhibit C the detailed engineering plans prepared by Railpros (Feb, 2014) and adopted by the City Council of the City of King on April 8, 2014. 71. Page 3.15-27 Biological Resources and Wetlands Cumulative Effects King City Siding Extension The effects on Biological Resources and Wetlands can be avoided by correcting the location of the King City Siding Extension to that contained in Exhibit C the detailed engineering plans prepared by Railpros (Feb, 2014) and adopted by the City Council of the City of King on April 8, 2014. 72. Page 3.15-29 Summary of Build Alternative Impact This section fails to include any discussion of the extensive beneficial growth-related effects that the King City Station (MMTC) will have due to the integration with Fort Hunter-Liggett. The document also makes an inaccurate statement in its assumption that commuting schedules have a direct correlation to potential for transit-oriented development. Transit-oriented developments are compact, mixed-use, “walkable” pedestrian-friendly neighborhood Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 14 Column No. Page No. Description Comment located near transit (with in 1/2 mile) Source: United States Government Accountability Office - Multiple Factors Influence Extent of Transit-Oriented Development, November 2014. Please note the approved Downtown Addition Project which is adjacent and integrated into the King City Train Station (MMTC) is a substantial transit-oriented development. 73. Page 3.17-1 Unavoidable Adverse Environmental Impacts King City Siding Extension As noted "many potentially adverse/significant impacts described in this document can be avoided or minimize by selecting an alignment option that avoids or minimizes impacts on environmental resources... "As note in these comments the potentially adverse/significant impacts from the King City Siding Extension can be eliminated by simply using the correct siding extension location which is north from MP 159.19 to MP 156.38. 74. Page 3.17-1 Unavoidable Adverse Environmental Impacts King City Station Since the document failed to use the correct project description for the King City Station, any unavoidable adverse environmental impacts which could result from the detailed plans for the King City Multi-modal Transportation Center (MMTC) by Railpros, 2014 (i.e. correct project description) need to clearly set forth in the Final EIS/EIR. 75. Page 3.17-3 Unavoidable Potentially Significant Impacts Traffic and Travel King City Station As noted in other comments, the relocation of the existing Pearl Street At-grade crossing to Broadway Street is required to construct the station platform, since the existing Pearl St. grade crossing is located in the middle of the platform. The demolition of a portion of the existing warehouse located within the street ROW of the relocated at-grade crossing will be required to establish the King City Station. In addition, the demolition of another warehouse building will be required since in is located with the King City Station ("MMTC") parking area. The City of King has analyzed all the locational alternatives for the platform and no alternatives exist which meet the Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 15 Column No. Page No. Description Comment project objective to re-establish the King City Station within the area of the original station or within the downtown area. Accordingly, there will be impacts from the re-establishment of the King City Station which will be unavoidable potentially significant impacts. The Final EIS/EIR needs to clearly state these unavoidable potentially significant impacts after conducting an analysis of the corrected project description (See: Railpros 2014). 76. Page 3.17-4 Unavoidable Potentially Significant Impacts Biological and Wetland Resources Hydrology and Water Quality King City Siding Extension As noted before the impacts to Biological and Wetland Resources, Hydrology and Water Quality from the King City Siding Extension can be avoided or significantly eliminated by the use of the correct project description. This information is clearly set forth in the Railpros, Feb 2014 report, specifically in the track layout plans contained in Exhibit C of the Railpros report. 77. Page 3.12-12 Description of siding over San Lorenzo Creek. Please note that these impacts would not be applicable if the Railpros layout, based o the Union Pacific and Caltrans proposal, had been analyzed in the Coast Daylight EIS/EIR. (Reference Exhibit C.) See attached Railpros Track Layout for King City Train Station and King City Siding Extension. This information was distributed by the City of King in early 2014 to regional transportation agencies. The City of King spent a significant amount of time and money laying the side extension out in consultation with Union Pacific. The Coast Daylight EIS/EIR does assessment includes an unfeasible siding extension to the south that has never been contemplated and would be very expensive and cause significant issues for the City. The EIS/EIR needs to assess the impacts on the King City Siding Extension as drawing in detail by Railpros (contained in the attachment), programed by Caltrans in the Coast Corridor Service Development Plan (Appendix C) and identified and modeled by 78. Page 3.12- 23, Figure 3.12-1 c Show siding extension over San Lorenzo Creek. 79. Appendix B & C Union Pacific Improvements (King City Siding Extension) Page 8 (Cover excluded) Page is titled "Coast Sub" Please note on the bottom of the page the "Proposed 10,000" which is located to the North of the existing King City current 6,300 double track SW. Attachment 1 CITY OF KING COMMENTS COAST CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR (SCH#2012081045) JANUARY 6, 2015 16 Column No. Page No. Description Comment Union Pacific (Appendix B). 80. Page 4-12 Build Alternative Grade Crossing and Mobility Improvements King City Station The relocation of the existing Pearl Street At-grade crossing to Broadway Street required to construct the station platform is missing. Please note the existing Pearl Street grade crossing must be relocated since it is located in the middle of the proposed station platform. This At-grade crossing relocation is an integral part of the MMTC design plans. 81. Page 4-33 Figure 4-2c Build Alternative Summary of Potential Impacts to Section 4(f) Resources King City Siding Extension As noted in other comments the King City Siding Extension is not located at location M-12 as noted in the Caltrans Service Development Plan, nor located as depicted in 1'-100' scale in the Railpros track layout plans contain in Exhibit C of the 2014 Railpros report. sLO COUNTY I apcd Alr Pollution Control District San l-uis Oblspo CountY January 7,2015 Pete Rodgers Ad m i n istrative Di rector San Luis Obispo Council of Governments 11 14 Ma rsh Street San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 SUBJECT: ApCD Comments Regarding the Coast Corridor lmprovements Draft Program - Environmental lmpact Statement/Report Dear Mr. Rodgers, Thank you for including the San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District (APCD) in the environmental review process. We have completed our review of the Coast Corridor lmprovements Draft Program - Environmental lmpact Statement/Report (ElS/ElR). The program addresses the need for conventional rail improvements on California's existing Coast Corridor iail alignment, with a focus on the portion between Salinas and San Luis Obispo intended to enable expanded passenger rail service on the entire Coast Corridor (from San Francisco to Los Angeles). The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (slococ), and the Transportation Agency for Monterey county (TAMC) have prepared this Program Environmental lmpact Statement/Environmental lmpact Report, which examines the potential environmental impacts of alternatives being considered for the proposed project located in Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties, California. The document describes why the project is being proposed, the existing environment that could be affected by the project, potential impacts, and the avoidance, minimization, and/or m itigation strategies. No Build Alternotive The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical improvement expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of positive train control (PTC) along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. This will provide the baseline for analysis of potential improvements. For the purposes of this program EIS/EIR, whose purpose and need is limited to potential physical rail system 100% Post Consumer RecYcled PoPer r 805.781.5912 ' 805.781.1002 rlr slocl€dnair.org 3433 Roberto Court, San Luis Obispo, CA 93401Coast Corridor t mprovements EIS/EI R Jonuary 7, 2014 Poge 2 of 6 improvements and expansion of passenger rail service, the No Build Alternative includes other planned and programmed rail improvement projects for the Coast Corridor in the vicinity of the Salinas to San Luis ObisPo region. Build Alternative The Build Alternative assumes the restoration of "Coast Daylighf' passenger service, which would initially consist of 2 trains per day traveling between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, increasing to 4 trains per day by the year 2040. The Build Alternative includes an exhaustive list of potential - physical improvements between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, some number of which may be found necessary to accommodate increased Coast Daylight service. The extent of needed physical improvements has not been identified at this time but is expected to be determined outside the context of CEeA/NEpA environmental review. The Build Alternative looks broadly at each physical improvement contemplated for the area to provide decision-makers additional information in identifying which if any conceptual physical improvements should be carried forward. The Build Alternative has the potential to adversely affect localized traffic near stations, land use and community impacts and air quality pollutant emissions during construction. The EIS/EIR includes mitigation strategies to be applied as one or more components of the Build Alternative move forward for design and potential implementation. To the extent these strategies can be translated into project-level mitigation, adverse effects can be reduced or avoided entirely. In addition, the Build Alternative will have beneficial environmental effects, such as economic growth, air quality improvements during operation, and energy consumption improvements during operation. The fotlowing are APCD comments that ore pertinent to this proiect. GENERAL COMMENTS As a commenting agency in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review process for a project, the APCD assesses air pollution impacts from both the construction and operational phases of a project, with separate significant thresholds for each. The APCD assessed this project by assuming all emissions are from the operational phase. Please address the action items GENERAL COMMENTS: 1. Support for alternative transportation upgrades The APCD commends the project proponents for the promotion of rail transportation which will increase the potential for mass transit use, which is consistent with several of the APCD's land use goals and policies in the Clean Air Plan. In addition, railtransportation upgrades help meet the greenhouse gas emission targets set by California legislation. 2. San Luis Obispo Car Free Program Vehicle emissions are the largest source of emissions in SLO County. This project has the potential to reduce the number of vehicle trips in SLO County. The APCD recommends underlined text.Coost Corridor Rait t mprovements-Draft EIS/EI R Jonuory 7, 201 5 Poge 3 of 6 4. including the san Luis obispo (slo) car Free program in the proSram promotion, to "n.ourug" car-free transportation to and around San Luis Obispo County' SLO Car Free providestools to travelers on the pleasures and availability of traveling to our area without their cars, or by parking their cars once they arrive. By pledging to travel to, or around SLO County without a car, visitors receive special incentives from participating hotels, restaurants, transportation services and attractions. In addition, businesses who join slo Car Free as a participating business receive free advertisement on their website, highlighting the businesses efforts to encourage "green," tourism to San Luis obispo county. Businesses are also promoted through several social media networks and at the numerous events that SLO Car Free participates in each year. The Build Alternative would strengthen the SLO Car Free program. CONSTRUCTION: described in the ElR. Based on the impacted acreage information provided in the EIS/EIR, it appears possible the construction phase would exceed the APCD's construction emission threshold(s) identified in Table 2-1 of the CEQA Air Quality Handbook (available at the APCD web site: Diesel Particulate Matter Diesel particulate matter (DPM) is a toxic air contaminant and carcinogen, and exposure to DPM may lead to increased cancer risk and respiratory problems. lf construction related measures to reduce the proiect impacts below the threshold. lf sensitive receptors are within 1.000 feet of the project site. a Health Risk Assessment (HM) may be required. Sections 3.6.1 and 3.7.4 of the APCDs 2012 CEQA Handbook provide more background on HRAs in conjunction with CEQA review. Guidance on the preparation of a HRA may be found in the CAPCOA report IIEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT FOR PROPOSED IAND USE PROJECTS. which can be downloaded from the CAPCOA website at www.capcoa.org. Insufficient Diesel Equipment Information / Diesel Emissions Near Sensitive RecePtors Construction activity for this project will likely involve the use of numerous pieces of heavyduty diesel equipment. Diesel particulate matter is listed as a toxic air contaminant by the 5. Emissions Summary \N\N\ru. S I OCI ea n a i r. o rg). ApCD's CEqA Handbook. The APCD recommends on-site mitigation from constructionCoast Corridor Rait t mprovements-Draft EIS/EI R Jonuary 7, 201 5 Poge 4 of 6 6. California Air Resources Board with no identified threshold level below which there are no significant health effects. Therefore, the APCD is very concerned with projects that will produce large amounts of diesel exhaust near sensitive receptors. used: . Area of disturbance and proximity of that area to sensitive receptors; . Number and type of construction equipment operating throughout the construction phase ofthe Project; . ldentify sensitive receptors within 1000 feet of construction boundary . lf the project includes hauling, identify fleet mix, hauling route (must minimize sensitive receptor impact) and number of trips per day; . Time frame for the operation of construction equipment during the project, which includes: . The total length of the project duration; . An estimation of the number of daily operating hours for the equipment; and . An estimation of equipment that would operate simultaneously on a given day. Natu ra lly Occurring Asbestos Naturally occurring asbestos (NOA) has been identified by the state Air Resources Board as a toxic air contaminant. Serpentine and ultramafic rocks are very common throughout California and may contain naturally occurring asbestos. The SLO County APCD has identified areas throughout the County where NOA may be present (see the APCD's 2012 CEeA Handbook, Technical Appendix 4.4). lf the project construction activity is located in a candidate area for Naturally Occurring Asbestos (NOA), the following requirements apply. Under the ARB Air Toxics Control Measure (ATCM) for Construction, Grading, Quarrying, and filed with the APCD. lf the site is not exempt from the requirements of the regulation, the applicant must comply with all requirements outlined in the Asbestos ATCM. This may include development of an Asbestos Dust Mitigation Plan and an Asbestos Health and Safety Program for approval by the APCD. More information on NOA can be found at Demolition Activities-Demolition of Asbestos Containing Materials Demolition activities can have potential negative air quality impacts, including issues surrounding proper handling, demolition, and disposal of asbestos containing material (ACM). Asbestos containing materials could be encountered during the demolition or remodeling of existing buildings or the disturbance, demolition, or relocation of above or below ground utility pipes/pipelines (e.g., transite pipes or insulation on pipes). lf this 7.Coost Corridor Rait tmprovements-Droft EIS/EIR January 7, 201 5 Page 5 of 6 a. b. NESHAP). These requirements include, but are not limited to: 1) written notification, within at least 10 business days of activities commencing, to the APCD, 2) asbestos Survey conducted by a Certified Asbestos Consultant, and, 3) applicable removal and disposal requirements of identified ACM. Please contact the APCD Enforcement Division at (805) 781-5912 for further information. 8. Dust Control Measures Construction activities can generate fugitive dust, which could be a nuisance to local residents and businesses in close proximity to the proposed construction site. Constructionperiod mitigation strategies listed on page3.2-21of the EIS/EIR addresses construction dust control. ApCD CEQA Handbook requires that projects with grading areas that are greater than 4-acres or are within 1,000 feet of any sensitive receptor shall implement the following mitigation measures to manage fugitive dust emissions such that they do not exceed the ApCb,s 20% opacity lirnit (APCD Rule 401) or prompt nuisance violations (APCD Rule 402). A c. d. Reduce the amount of the disturbed area where possible; Use of water trucks or sprinkler systems in sufficient quantities to prevent airborne dust from leaving the site and from exceeding the APCD's limit of 20% opacity for greater than 3 minutes in any 60 minute period. Increased watering frequency would be required whenever wind speeds exceed 15 mph. Reclaimed (non-potable) water should be used whenever possible; All dirt stock pile areas should be sprayed dai! and covered with tarps or other dust barriers as needed; permanent dust control measures identified in the approved project revegetation and landscape plans should be implemented as soon as possible, following completion of any soil disturbing activities; Exposed ground areas that are planned to be reworked at dates greater than one month after initial grading should be sown with a fast germinatinS, non-invasive, grass seed and watered untilvegetation is established; All disturbed soil areas not subject to revegetation should be stabilized using approved chemical soil binders, jute netting, or other methods approved in advance e. f. by the APCD; E. All roadways, driveways, sidewalks, etc. to be paved should be completed as soon as possible. In addition, building pads should be laid as soon as possible after grading unless seeding or soil binders are used; h. Vehicle speed for all construction vehicles shall not exceed 15 mph on any unpaved surface at the construction site; i. All trucks hauling dirt, sand, soil, or other loose materials are to be covered or should maintain at least two feet of freeboard (minimum vertical distance between top of load and top of trailer) in accordance with CVC Section 23'114; APCD recommends including measures not listed on Page 3.2-21:Coast Corridor Rqil I mprovements-Draft EIS/EI R January 7, 201 5 Page 6 of 6 Install wheel washers where vehicles enter and exit unpaved roads onto streets, or wash offtrucks and equipment leaving the site; Sweep streets at the end of each day if visible soil material is carried onto adjacent paved roads. Water sweepers shall be used with reclaimed water should be used where feasible. Roads shall be pre-wetted prior to sweeping when feasible; All PMro mitigation measures required should be shown on grading and building plans; and, The contractor or builder shall designate a person or persons to monitor the fugitive dust emissions and enhance the implementation of the measures as necessary to minimize dust complaints, reduce visible emissions below the APCD's limit of 20% opacity for greater than 3 minutes in any 60 minute period. Their duties shall include holidays and weekend periods when work may not be in progress. The name and telephone number of such persons shall be provided to the APCD Compliance Division prior to the start of any grading, earthwork or demolition. OPERATIONAL: 9. Operational Phase Locomotive ldling Limitations Public health risk benefits can be realized by idle limitations for diesel engines. To help reduce the emissions impact of diesel locomotives. the program shall implement idling control techniques. especially when locomotives are within 1000 feet of sensitive receptors. Signs that specifiT'no idling areas' must be posted and enforced. COMMENTS LISTED BY TABLE OR PAGE NUMBER: 10. Table 3.2.2. Attainment Status The table lists slo county ozone attainment status incorrectly. Please use status listed on the APCD website: httf'://slocleanair.org/images/cms ,Fle:d/fileslAttainmentStatus20August20l3%288%29.pclf Again, thank you for the opportunity to comment on this proposal. lf you have any questions or comments, feel free to contact me at 78"1-5912. Sincerely, Gary Arcemont Air Quality Specialist GJNarr cc: Tim Fuhs, Enforcement Divisiofl, APCD Gary Willey, Enforcement Division, APCD Amy Clymo, Planning Divisiorl, Monterey Bay Unified APCD k. l. m. H :\PLAN\CEQA\Project-Review\3000\3800\3852-1 \3852-1 .docxSANTA MARIA VALLEY RAILROAD COMPANY P.O. Box 5665 Santa Maria, California 93456 Telephone (805) 922-7941 FAX (805) 922-9554   January 7, 2015  Mr. Pete Rodgers Administrative Director San Luis Obispo Council of Governments 1114 Marsh Street San Luis Obispo, CA 93401  Coast Corridor Improvements Draft EIS/EIR  Dear Mr. Rodgers:  The Santa Maria Valley Railroad is a 14 mile short line railroad serving on line customers in the Santa Maria Valley and customers throughout the Central Coast via transload operations. The Board of the Santa Maria Valley Railroad (SMVRR) has asked that I respond with comments to the Coast Corridor Improvements Draft EIS/EIR. Additional passenger trains including the proposed Amtrak Coast Daylight train has a direct impact on freight service with SMVRR’s freight customers.  The SMVRR’s sole connection to the national railroad network is with the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR), interchanging at Guadalupe, California. As a handling carrier of Union Pacific Railroad, the SMVRR is a captive customer to the UPRR. Freight service dependability is dependent on the UPRR Coast Line (Coast Corridor) as well as the rest of UPRR’s system and other railroads in the national railroad network. Any service impact on the UPRR Coast Corridor has a direct impact on the freight service levels with the SMVRR.  Currently all of the SMVRR’s inbound and outbound freight travels south to and from the former GM plant rail yard in Van Nuys, California and then to West Colton, California where the freight cars are sorted and placed on the appropriate trains to destination. The SMVRR receives and picks up cars at the UPRR interchange yard in Guadalupe, California. A twice a week inbound train arrives from Van Nuys on Monday nights and Thursday nights. The inbound train also brings up cars for freight customers from Lompoc to San Luis Obispo, including the Phillips 66 plant on the Nipomo Mesa and the Imerys/World Minerals mine just outside of Lompoc. Tuesday mornings and Friday mornings the local UPRR crew sorts and builds the inbound train for SMVRR and assembles the outbound cars destined for Van Nuys. The train travels back to Van Nuys with the outbound cars on Tuesday and Friday nights. A daily train between Van Nuys and West Colton brings inbound cars to Van Nuys and takes the outbounds from Van Nuys to West Colton.  In the past, the SMVRR received cars daily from either north or south of Guadalupe. The Holly Sugar Plant in Betteravia closed in 1993 and the railroad lost most of its business. By 2007 UPRR cut service to Guadalupe to twice a week. The last four years the SMVRR has seen resurgence in freight traffic, quadrupling freight traffic. Service failures are becoming more frequent as trains are becoming longer out of Van Nuys and traffic congestion with passenger trains is eroding freight service levels and on time performance.  SMVRR has requested additional trains with UPRR and UPRR has denied. Although the SMVRR has experienced a significant increase of rail traffic, car count does not yet justify additional trains at the present. SMVRR also requested the possibility of freight service originating from the north, UPRR has denied this request because of inadequate track capacity and presently inadequate traffic volume. Currently rail cars originating from the Bay Area to travel to Roseville where it is sorted at the rail yard in Roseville and placed on a quality manifest train to the West Colton rail yard to be sorted and placed on the train to Van Nuys and on to Guadalupe. Transit times from the Bay Area can be as long as 7 days for customers less than 300 track miles away from the SMVRR. We expect volumes to increase the next several years to justify a manifest train originating from the north end of the Coast Corridor. This extra traffic will impact the portion of the line of the proposed Amtrak Coast Daylight train.  Generally speaking, the SMVRR’s board has concerns with additional passenger trains as current congestion along the Coast Corridor has resulted in service failures the last several years.  Specific comments to Coast Corridor Improvements DEIR as follows:  Page 1-6 Aging Rail Infrastructure  Investment in corridor rail service has not kept pace with population and travel growth. To imply that the Coast Corridor is an “aging infrastructure” and no investment has been made to the Coast Corridor is inaccurate. UPRR, as with all private railroads in the U.S., has to justify the levels of capital improvements to meet the current and future rates of returns. UPRR has invested a significant amount of capital in the Coast Corridor to improve reliability and safety.  The UPRR Coast Line was built and originally owned by Southern Pacific Railroad. UPRR took over Southern Pacific Railroad in 1996. The prior 30 years Southern Pacific Railroad was in financial straits and deferred maintenance occurred throughout its system. As a result the Coast Corridor was in dire need of maintenance when the UPRR took over in 1996. UPRR has been investing heavily along their entire system for years, capital investments have been around $3.5 billion per year the last several years. UPRR has put a considerable amount of work on the Coast Corridor the last 15 years, replacing ties, installing CWR (continuously welded rail) replacing jointed rail, and replacing and modernizing signal systems. The UPRR Coast Corridor in terms of reliability and safety is in much better shape than say 15 years ago.  Page 3.1-4 3.1.3 Existing Freight Rail Freight rail volume within the project area is relatively low as the Coast Corridor is considered a “secondary” or “relief” line to the busier Central Valley line to the east. The Coast Line is the primary and only line that the Santa Maria Valley Railroad interchanges with. Traffic is expected to continue to grow within the next 5 years on the SMVRR, reaching or exceeding traffic levels when the former Holly Sugar plant at Betteravia was in operation. The SMVRR is also looking at nearby communities of San Luis Obispo and Lompoc to build additional transload facilities to accommodate the growing transload business. Transload facilities consist of a “public” track where customers without a direct rail access can load or unload rail cars and truck it to and from the final miles. Customers not located directly on a rail line can have the cost and efficiency advantages of rail and still have the convenience of trucking. The SMVRR is expected to outgrow its current Transload facilities within the next several years. Also additional local traffic such as the Phillips 66 rail spur project will significantly increase rail traffic on the Coast Corridor.  Page 3.15-9 Cumulative Impact Analysis, Traffic and Travel The SMVRR has increased rail traffic significantly and is looking to expand or build new facilities along its 14 miles of right of way. The SMVRR is looking to adjacent communities to expand operations including San Luis Obispo and Lompoc. A feasibility study is under way to rebuild part the San Luis Obispo rail yard on UPRR property to a transload facility, private passenger car storage and maintenance facility, and storage facility for the San Luis Obispo Railroad Museum. A private passenger car storage and maintenance facility will have a direct positive impact on current Amtrak trains and the proposed Amtrak Coast Daylight Train as private passenger cars, passenger cars owned and operated by private individuals, represent an additional revenue source for Amtrak.  In conclusion, the Board of the Santa Maria Valley Railroad would like to see that adequate capacity is built into the line so it can accommodate rising freight traffic. Currently there are traffic congestion issues on both the north and south ends of the Coast Corridor that needs to be addressed. If the Coast Corridor can accommodate both growing freight traffic and safely and efficiently accommodate additional Amtrak trains such as the Coast Daylight while UPRR can make its rate of return to justify continuing improvements and investments into the line in addition to what is planned, the Board of the Santa Maria Valley Railroad would be in support of the Coast Corridor Improvements.  Sincerely,    Rob Himoto President  Cc: Gregory Wallen, Manager of Road Operations, Union Pacific Railroad  Lori Trout, Manager Short Line Development, Union Pacific Railroad  Melissa Grosz, Asset Manager Industrial Products, Union Pacific Railroad  Paul Marcinko, Regional Manager Industrial Development, Union Pacific Railroad  United States Department of the Interior pat_signatureOFFICE OF THE SECRETARY Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance Pacific Southwest Region 333 Bush Street, Suite 515 San Francisco, CA 94104   IN REPLY REFER TO: (ER 14/0724)  Filed Electronically  7 January 2015  Stephanie Perez Federal Railroad Administration 1200 New Jersey Ave, SE Washington, DC 20590 Related review: ER 12/0589  Subject: Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Salinas to San Luis Obispo Portion of the Coast Corridor Improvements, Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties, CA  Dear Ms. Perez:  The Department of the Interior has received and reviewed the subject document and has no comments to offer.  Thank you for the opportunity to review this project.   Sincerely,  Patricia Sanderson Port Regional Environmental Officer   cc: OEPC-Staff Contact: Carol Braegelmann (202) 208-6661; Carol Braegelmann@ios.doi.gov  NPS-Environmental Protection Specialist: Roxanne Runkel (303) 969-2377; roxanne_runkel@nps.gov  Next Speaker: Thank you, Maurice. Uh, just really quickly, uh, **** council members. I like the, the City Manager's, uh, **** on the City. I have sat in the past and currently I'm the Executive Legal Advocacy Committee. Uh, I will be their, uh, **** available, so, if you can go, uh, go and participate, it's a good learning process, and **** that process. Thank you.  Next Speaker: Thank you. Okay. And now we're going to go to the, uh, the public hearing, Item B, which is joint with the Planning Commission. Um, Michael ****.  Next Speaker: So, this evening we have, uh, under Item 2B, we have a joint meeting of the Planning Commission. I will note in our minutes that the planning, that the meeting will be convened, um, presently; that the members of the Planning Commission are present. It would be appropriate, though, for the Chair of the Planning Commission to formally convene the meeting before we go on.  Next Speaker: Thank you, uh, ****. Uh, I'd like to call the meeting of the Planning Commission to come to order.  Next Speaker: And so this evening's, uh, the purpose of this evening's public hearing is to conduct a public hearing regarding the environmental impact statement, environmental impact report for the Coast Corridor Improvements Draft, uh, program, and out of that, we expect that the council this evening will receive public testimony, receive testimony from City staff, as well as TAMC, uh, staff and consultants, and authorize the Mayor to sign the letter attached to the staff report, um, as well as provide additional comments and information to TAMC and the consultants on the project, and with that, I will turn it over to Doreen, and she will give you an overview of the project, and then we have TAMC staff, Ann, available as well.  Next Speaker: Um, Mayor and members of the City Council, uh, reporting this evening is the Coast Corridor draft program for environmental impact statement and environmental impact report. The, um, reason for this is you have an environmental impact statement, which **** in ways that the national Environmental Protection Act. It's a national program, **** program, and then, of course, the environmental impact statement, which complies with the California Environmental Quality Act. This is actually a Power Point presentation. **** and **** is going to present. What I'm going to do is just ****. Christina will talk a little more in detail about the EISEIR. Uh, what staff had an opportunity to do was review the EISEIR for compliance. We are not **** to, the City is not ****. Um, that is the lead agency. That means that they are the agencies responsible for actually coordination the processing of this document. The re-, public review period for the **** ends January 7, 2015. During this period of time, this is, uh, the public's opportunity to review the document and provide comments. As you look at your, uh, staff report, you'll notice that there is a chart that's included in the document that has a number of comments. Um, we've looked up the EISEIR, and provided comments. One are the purposes for this document, and future use of the document is to tier off the environmental document so that when the City comes forward with a ****, uh, project in more detail, we hope to use that environment **** so that we don't have to spend a lot of money on generating environmental information ****. So, it's extremely important that the information is accurate and that there is, uh, information that is current and not stale. We did have an opportunity to speak with, uh, TAMC staff last night, **** staff last night, and Circle Point staff, uh, last night. Circle Point is Next Speaker: And, and I guess, uh, since we're recording, if you could, uh, also spell your name –  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: – ****.  Next Speaker: Uh, John Baucke, B-A-U-C-K-E, uh, representing Smith Monterey. Um, I've also had the pleasure of reading this document cover to cover. Uh, and, I just want to put it in context with all the stuff in which has been going on. Uh, the process and thought of a train station in King City, the first written document I've been able to find was dated 2000, which was done by Wil-, uh, Wilbur Smith and Associates, uh, about the Coast Daylight implementation plan, so there's been an effort since at least 2000, and Pete may have, tell a date even earlier than that, uh, bringing this project forward. Uh, the, the City of King has done a number of efforts, uh, one which is, uh, the c-, the Rail Corridor Safety Study, which was how you go through the process to actually close a **** grade crossing and open a new one and all that's involved. Uh, uh, funded by my client, uh, in the City, and then the City did, did the, uh, First Street corridor plan, in which Mott, uh, Hat-, Hatch and Nichols, I think is the –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – did I get the right name? Uh, did another program and, and that was, uh, June of 2012, in which some of that information, I believe Christina had received. The City has gone and taken recommendations out of that document, and gone farther, using rail pros, again, to actually develop a, what we'll call a, a layout plan for the station, **** the plan which you approved in April of this year, so this been this continuing improvements and details of, of, of getting the station in King City. Uh, some of it is not included in this document, and I think some of it, from the conversation, uh, with Christina and, and Pete, is a case of sort of time sequencing. They've put their document to the federal government back in February or January of this year. In April you adopted the, the rail post, rail po-, rail post plan, so there's maybe some loss of information. So, at this point in time, and I think the real thing I would ask is that your staff and TAMC and SLOCOG get together and get all the information that physically exists on this together in their hands so they can refine the written descriptions about the project, and you've gone a lot farther than what CalTrans or UP has as to specifics. Get that into the document so it's as accurate and, uh, I think what we're dealing with is a lack of up to date, uh the document at this point in time. Getting that up to date will give you the best document to tier off as you go forward, and, uh, that's my recommendation, and I, uh, hope TAMC, uh, and, uh, SLOCOG get to, to have. Thank you.  Next Speaker: Okay, would anyone else, like, from the public? And, again, if you would, for the recorder, spell your name.  Next Speaker: Yes, thank you. I'm, uh, Pete Rodgers. I'm SLOCOG staff. Um, I think, uh, it's R-O-D-G-E-R-S, by the way, which is the, uh, name. Um, and I just wanted to introduce myself, not knowing if there's going to be an opportunity when the public hearing is over. If there were questions, just to make sure that I was able to introduce myself and assure you that we're gonna work closely with your staff to integrate these comments, um, and underscore and reiterate what John said about the timing of this document. You know, our doc-, our document was finalized before your plans, and, but it, only in draft form, and we're happy to integrate those changes. Um, and I also wanted to give you just a little bit more context of the bigger project. I mean, we all are looking for this passenger train. I've been working on this passenger train for 22 years. The renaissance in rail California really began in 1990, when we passed Proposition, um, 116, and the vision, as John mentions, that sort of crystallized in 1992, and, um, King City is still the gap in state-supported services, and from San Luis Obispo to San Jose, there is no statesupported services, and Christina and I have been advocating on your behalf and on all, all of Monterey County and northern San Luis Obispo County, we have to be recognized. Uh, we deserve state-supported inner city rail services. You know, and most people don't understand how this is funded and how this works. You know, this is not just Amtrak service. The State of California pays for all of these services, with the exception of the Coast Starlight service, which, you know, we're fortunate to have through, and, and we would like to do what we can to, you know, help you get the Coast Starlight to stop as well, although we had experience with that in Paso Robles. It was very difficult for us to secure that stop, uh, but we were able to do that. Um, so I just wanted to underscore that we need to all work together with our legislators, with the League. There's an opportunity with the Cap and Trade funding, and, um, you know, this being a 22-year-old project, it's, it has peaks and valleys of opportunities, and we're at another peak of opportunity, and so we need to work, uh, closely with our legislators. We talked about, uh, three items we need in order to get this train service operating. The first thing is, it's one train set. We already have an existing train set. We need one more train set, um, which is about $22,000,000.00, and we need, um, we have to implement the capital improvements that we agreed to with Union Pacific, of which we have $25,000,000.00 in the bank to pay for those improvements, although Union Pacific wants a much bigger number of improvements, and the State has already programmed money in their plans to pay for the operating support of the train. So, and, and the cost of that is around $6,000,000.00 a year, so you can see that it's a $50,000,000.00 project. That's why it's taking so long to gather all these pieces together at the same time. So, I think we're on the, the road to getting this thing, um, implemented in the next, you know, 3 to 5 years. Uh, I'd like to believe it was sooner, but, um, with that I'll just close and, again, uh, pledge to work with your staff to integrate these comments.  Next Speaker: Okay. Would anyone else from the public like to comment on this item? Okay. Then, I, real quick, process wise, did I hear you correctly that your request was to close the public hearing before? Okay. I –  Next Speaker: Yes, please.  Next Speaker: – I'm going to, my preference would be to leave the public hearing open. I want to make sure, 'cause I think we're gonna have some valuable comments, that I want to make sure getting into the public document. So.  Next Speaker: Is there a chance I could put this up on the ****?  Next Speaker: ****.  January 7, 2015 Myrna Bradley (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Hi, I am Myrna Bradley. I live off of Los Palos Road and I found out about this a few days ago. I get…it is hard to talk sometimes when…this really affects our family a lot. The gentleman over there told a lot of the technical things that are that I wanted to say, but I wanted to mention, you know, they say its science fiction. Well, you know computers were science fiction at one time and you know, who would have thought we would have computers in our hands. Just you know 20 years ago. You know I am 50 years old and I never would have thought of a computer in my hand you know so our…our lives now, everything’s high-speed you know, and so if we don’t…we can’t really trust that these big government people are gonna say, “oh yeah, this little we’ll let everybody know, we’ll listen to what they have to say, you know they don’t really have that in mind when they consider their big contracts and businesses and stuff and I appreciate this this time to be able to say something because that is part of what we are all about as Americans and I wanted to say thank you to you all for serving our country, for serving our city and our state. And I know some people get real emotional, including me, about issues like this, but I know all of you are thinking very clearly and trying to see what is best for us as people. So, to narrow it down, the biggest thing for me right now is the real estate value. So now you put a shadow on our real estate. I have five children. I have two going into college next year, one going into college the next year after that. My husband has a main job and he takes side-work just so we can provide for our children and you know this real estate value hit, this shadow on us, is a really important thing for us you know, its…I know it might affect billions of dollars later on for changing this contract or whatever, but like the other gentlemen said too you know it will cost even more money trying to acquire our properties, which we have, you know, which is ours. Anyways, sorry I am not making too much sense we are very concerned about our property values and I don’t think, I don’t think it is necessary for this to be in this thing. I think we just need to say, get rid of it, take it out because it affects people and that is what our country is all about. It is about people, each of us individually. Thank you.  January 7, 2015 Leanne Brooks (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Moving a little slowly recovering from a broken ankle. (coughs) Excuse me. I am LeAnne Brooks, I live on Salinas Road, which is in the Henry/Santa Margarita curve part and excuse me if I am um not um fully accepting of what is said of, “oh, this will never happen”. I agree with Mr. O’Malley, if it’s on paper, it can happen at some point and so just having this on paper makes me very nervous because this is my house (holds up map and points to where her house is located), right here in this section, this is where I raised my children, this is where I grow my organic vegetables, this is where I intend to pass on my land to my grandsons. I am a senior citizen; I am not going to move at this point in my life so I want this red and yellow stuff here to vanish into history. I intended to talk about why, you know, certain points here are talking about water…water problems in the area. I have been hauling water since August so any disturbance to...further disturbance to our water table is just not acceptable in any way. Salinas is a dead end road. If they do anything to the crossing, which they did a few months back, we’re stuck. We have no other way out. So, I will cut it short with that, and thank you for your consideration.  January 7, 2015 Paulette Claire (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) First of all, I want to thank all of you that have been working so hard to get us to this point and I know you have put in a lot of hours and a lot of time and you have put your heads together. Mayor O’Malley has spoke…has spoke for many of you quite candidly and I appreciate that. A couple points that I want to make is apparently the communication issue that many of us have experienced. You’ve heard it from some of the people who have spoken, the post cards…I’ve lived at my home for 20 years; my mailbox is a locked box. The first time I heard about this project was in November with a very plain envelope and luckily it was not an advertisement and I opened it and was surprised to see the dates, the times, and the information. Luckily our neighbors had gotten together and were speaking together. We have people who have time to delve into the situation and share the information with us so unless..unless if there had not been the letter in November, which like the post card could not have been mailed or could have gotten lost. If we didn’t have people who had the time to speak up and delve into the situation, I would not be here today so a big thanks to everybody. The other question that I have and it might be a rhetorical question for the gentlemen who spoke earlier was in your presentation that you had up on the screen, you had a list of adverse effects to our community. You forgot to list the people of the community and the loss of home and residential land. As I look at the picture, the railroad right-ofway goes right through the middle of my house so I guess I would be sharing my home with The Union Pacific or Amtrak Railroad. Luckily, my water supply is down by the river so I am not going to lose my river…my water supply, but I will lose my front porch, my screen door, a rental that I have on my property that offers me retirement income, the pasture out front where my animals live, the driveway, the gate, part of the barn, not the whole barn, but part of the barn and value to my property that has already been brought down. I am in the 11 to 12 second corridor that has already been mentioned. 11 seconds of the train going by. Actually, love the train; I don’t know if I love the train quite so much as I did yesterday or the day before or last year. I would like you to consider those of us who live on Salinas Road, Los Palos Road…our lives, our investments, and our personal future, not just the future of our city, and our county. Thank you.  Response to the Costal Corridor EIR  First let me say this EIS/EIR is SLOCOG’s Affordable Care Act! Meaning the only way we really will know what is planned is when you approve it next month! Those who wrote it intended to hide facts from the Homeowners in our area, by making statements that are factually untrue, also by sending it to us during the holiday season, when we are the people who have potentially the most to lose. The notice arrived at our home on the 20th of November not on November 14th which was the beginning of our 55 Day Comment Period. The date is accurate as it arrived on 20th November when I had back to back obligations and did not get home until after 5 pm. and was leaving early the 21st to visit an elderly relative. I gave it to my husband before I left on the 21st and that night he called me at almost midnight very upset with what he saw! For the next 45 plus days he has been going over these documents and those included by reference. Yes, we know that if something is referenced it becomes a part of the document! He has provided SLOCOG a large document of his concerns. His are much more technical than mine. Now getting back to the scheduling of the comment period to be from 14th of November until January 7th why would anyone schedule the 55 Day Commentary Period during the holidays other than to guarantee low attendance because you knew people tend to put things aside that seemed innocuous during the period from Thanksgiving to New Years, as this is an extremely hectic time for families! I propose the reasoning was because you knew in this area it would be the most contentious portion of the project and actually threatens people with the loss of their homes and you wanted to mute the response! The Cloud put on our properties by your EIS/EIR puts us all in limbo, personally we have numerous projects to improve our yard and home, which we had put off until we could acquire and pay for the materials with cash, now we have the materials to finally make the improvements, we are faced with the possible loss of portions if not all of our property. These items cannot be returned, they are project specific now we are in a great quandary do we finish the project or what? Your incomplete design puts into question many things; if you go with the green we will lose a minimum of 100 feet which takes out our chicken yard, chicken coop, storage/studio shed, trees, new fencing, etc. If go with the 500 feet we lose our home, our garage, our well, and while we could rebuild the house on the front of our lot, we can never drill another well due to the moratorium by Atascadero Mutual Water Company. And if you accept the 1000 foot we could lose everything! We probably would not even get enough our home to rebuild it! Or even purchase elsewhere. Especially since after this EIR/EIS is approved by you it will force downward the values of our home and it becomes a permanent cloud on our title, as we see no sunset clause in it. If you decided not to go forward with the project or indefinitely delay it the cloud is still there... We cannot sell our property without disclosing the cloud on our title, or we could be sued by a future purchaser. Even refinancing will be more difficult as one of our neighbors found out recently when the VA inspector devalued his home by about $25,000 due its proximity to the railroad, why now when it has always been next to the railroad and previously had not been a problem. How long will we have to wait for answers or do you actually know what you have planned but knew the outcry would be so great you have to do the same as the Affordable Care Act where the only way we can know what is in it was to pass it. Once again I will reiterate that this EIS/EIR is SLOCOG’s version of the Affordable Care Act, because they just know the Homeowners in this area are stupid just like Jonathan Gruber, who just knew the American Voters are stupid. What you are doing to this neighborhood is unethical because you are making homeowners in this area put their lives on hold for your convenience, unable to make plans for the future!  Anne Edgecombe January 7, 2015 Anne Edgecombe (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Okay, I’m gonna say personally, this EIR/EIS is your Affordable Care Act. It means that the only way that we will really know what is going on is when it is passed. That doesn’t mean much to you people, you are not affected. We’re in the red zone. We were told that you guys gave us cards. We never received a card. We were told, by the gentlemen, that this came to us 55 days before and that we would have 55 days and that you gave us a magnificent 55 days rather than 45. Ours came to us on November 20th. I know that because I was leaving town the next day. I gave it to my husband to review because it upset me. For the last 45 days you have made our lives hell because my husband spent all his time on the computer finding out all the documents that were tied to it which become a part of it. You pass these things, like these people say you are putting a cloud on our titles forever because 10 years from now, 20 years…listen, it won’t happen for 20 years, gee, then you depress our values more and more and more every month and every year. Every time it gets closer, every time someone rattles their sabers. Is this what we want? Basically, what you are doing is making our neighborhood, putting our lives on hold, waiting for you to come down and tell us what to do. We have things we want to do on our property. We can’t do them because we don’t know when you are going to take it away from us. Ours is in a position they say is slope instability, if that was cut away by Union, probably southern optical cable. It was their property but they cut the toe of the slope off so the hill has slid. So we are definitely affected. The worst case…the best case scenario we lose, if we drop the green, we lose 100 feet off the back of our property. We lose a chicken area; we lose a studio, which is a shed with a window, uh…nothing much. We go to the next one we lose our house, we lose are well which is even more important because we will never be allowed to re-drill it because of the moratorium on drilling. So if… we have to be left with a spot at the front, which is in the red so no matter what you do you have just reduced the value of our home at this point down immensely. I know you don’t care because otherwise you wouldn’t even be thinking about it…thank you.  Observations about the Coast Corridor Rail Realignment and Operation The EIS/EIR refers to previous documents, and a few quotes are as follows: STUDIES LEADING TO THE PROGRAM EIS/EIR Several planning and feasibility studies have identified and proposed improvements for the Coast Corridor. Amtrak completed the California Passenger Rail System: 20- Year Improvement Plan Technical Report (Amtrak 20-Year Plan) in March 2001. Caltrans Division of Rail (DOR) coordinated with Amtrak, the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), and other transportation agencies to complete the Coast Corridor Service Development Plan in May 2013. The UPRR has recommended a series of improvements it asserts are necessary to allow for increased passenger use of the Coast Corridor. The Build Alternative, further described below, was intentionally drawn broadly to encompass all the physical improvements contemplated by the plans and studies above.Above is a screen print of the subject area north of Santa Clara Road, in Atascadero. The red area is a 1000 foot wide buffer zone for undefined purposes. The red line is the existing tracks, the yellow lines are the existing right of way, and the green line is an approximation of the realignment. Note that these green lines are straight except at the north end and trains cannot operate on tracks with angle points, so they bear only a crude relationship to any future alignment. However, the 1000 foot buffer zone together with the ambiguity of the proposed realignment creates a cloud over local properties that reduces the marketability of these residences and thus the property value is impaired. Given the long approval process for the realignment, by the time any property acquisitions are made, a history of depressed prices will work against the present owners. The FEMA flood map shows a portion of the same area and the floodway crossing the tracks. South of Santa Clara Road, there is a long tangent and no need for a realignment in that immediate area until after crossing the bridge south of Eaglet. Santa Clara Road corresponds to UPRR milepost 228.3. The northerly terminus is near milepost 227.1 and occurs in a curve. This terminus is in a very curious location until it is realized that it corresponds with the Special Flood Hazard Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood. ... The Base Flood Elevation is the water-surface elevation of the 1% annual chance flood. ZONE AE Base Flood Elevations determined. FLOODWAY AREAS IN ZONE AE 'The floodway is the channel of a stream plus any adjacent floodplain areas that must be kept free of encroachment so that the 1% annual chance flood can be carried without substantial increases in flood heights. These statements were taken from the Flood Insurance Rate Map 06079C0853G dated September 16, 2012. It is plain to see that the proposed northly terminus of this section coincides with the floodway engulfing the railroad tracks. Realignments immediately north of this point will involve a more complicated permitting process and are not proposed in the EIS/EIR. Since the railroad tracks are on a raised embankment in this area, the 1% annual chance flood will likely erode the embankment for a considerable distance south of this northerly terminus. Treating the embankment as a flood control levee raises a lot of questions. Since it has been in place for over a century, it is grandfathered under FEMA until the changes contemplated by this EIS/EIR enter the permit stage, and then it must be compliant. This location is also near where the railroad embankment eroded to just short of the tracks during the 1969 flood. The SPRR (before the merger) repaired the embankment and erected steel pilings in the river bed with heavy cables attached between these pilings and large tires were strung along the cables. These energy dissipation devices were removed under Court Order. Thus, there is a judicial history for this location, and it is hard to imagine that work in this area would be unchallenged today. Therefore, it is expedient to stop at this location. However, from a track layout perspective this location is extremely unwise, and straightening the curve as shown by encroaching into the floodway is very unlikely to be permitted. Further complicating things are the Atascadero Mutual Water Company's wells located on both sides of the tracks near milepost 227.5. These wells serve more than five hundred residences. Of the six curves (CO-29) mentioned in the in the Amtrak 20 year plan referenced above, two are north of the area mapped with the furthest north being just north of Halcon Road. The third is in the floodway area north of 227.5. and the sixth is a 2.5 degree of curvature curve north of Santa Clara Road that meets the 3 degree of curvature criteria. This leaves a 6 and a 4 degree of curvature curves with lengths of 450.05 and 857.94 with a 509.3 foot tangent between them to be concerned with. The UPRR Roseville Timetable #5 shows a speed limit of 40mph for passenger trains in this area extending from milepost 223.8, a point just north of the curve nearest to the Pine Mountain Cemetery, to milepost 228, at a point three tenths of a mile north of Santa Clara Road, and then 55mph until the town of Santa Margarita except for entering the siding. For the sake of argument, assume that the change over point is moved from milepost 228 to 227.5 near the wells, a distance of 0.5 miles. The increase in speed would take a theoretical 12 seconds off the time while requiring the condemnation of multiple residences. The taking of residences is contemplated only in the two realignments within the Henry/Santa Margarita section. No other section in this 133 mile project contemplates taking residences. Table 2-4, on page 2-16 of the EIS/EIR lists: Potential Maximum Speed Increases for Build Alternative Components. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignments Current Maximum Speed Range (mph) – 35 and 40-55 Future Maximum Speed Range (mph) – No Change This is a change from the chain of previous referenced documents which all showed speed increases and brings into question the reasoning for the realignment in this section. It is apparent that the speed is controlled by track to the north of this section as indicated by the No Change in Table 2-4. The other section of the Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignments is the 3 degree of curvature curve at Asuncion Road which also meets the criteria. It is inconceivable that a project without apparent merit requiring the taking of residences would be included here. Is there some future consideration at work here? It would seem that tilting trains and their benefits and defects are also a consideration. From Appendix C - Coast Corridor Service Development Plan: Section 4.1.2 - Corridor Rail Service Improvements. Track Upgrades. The key to operating at maximum authorized speeds in mixed use (passenger and freight) operations is the condition of the infrastructure (rail, ties, and sidings), track geometry, signal system and level of maintenance. Improvements such as additional and extended sidings, double-tracking, and curve realignments are necessary in order to maintain the Corridor as a FRA Class IV railroad. (vii) In addition to system infrastructure improvements, there are ongoing rail and tie replacement needs. While the UPRR has made and continues to make infrastructure upgrades, the Corridor, while maintained to FRA standards, is characterized by single-track operations, short sidings or lack of sidings, manually-thrown switches, and an outdated signaling system. Much of the track is older, which requires a much greater level of maintenance to operate at maximum allowable speeds (MAS). The track geometry requires trains to operate at slower than maximum FRA allowable speed (79 mph), and siding lengths and conditions make train meets both difficult and time consuming. [( vii ) Class 4 track is maintained to safely operate freight trains up to 60 mph and passenger trains up to 80 mph. This is the typical class for mainline track that hosts freight and passenger service. Factors influencing the classification of track include the condition of rail and rail joints, proper distance between rails (gauge), rail alignment, and the condition of cross ties.] Curve Realignments. Curve realignments allow for reduced trip times by increasing train speeds on curved tracks and prolonging track life, reducing the frequency of repair or maintenance needs. Rolling Stock Upgrades. Rolling stock upgrades include purchasing new railcars and locomotives to operate the proposed passenger services. In addition to improving the passenger experience (e.g., amenities, ride comfort), new rolling stock can offer tangible travel time benefits—trains with tilting capabilities, for example, can reduce or eliminate the need for trains to reduce speed on low-radius curves, allowing trains to maintain higher average speeds.The bold type assertions in the paragraphs above are particularly disturbing. If this was the testimony of an expert witness in court, that witness could be charged with perjury, but this is only a legal document and not a court of law. Are these sentences the proper subject for a grand jury investigation or simply demonstrating incompetence? What about the multitude of people who signed off on this document? There is an old joke about a camel being a horse put together by a committee. Is this simply bureaucratic arrogance? Perhaps, so many people signed off that they all assumed that there was no need to actually read the document or compare it to federal regulations. I once heard an Englishman describe American Professionals like this, “Everyone insists on their prerogatives, but also disclaims responsibility.” How can a document so riddled with false statements be seriously considered for adoption? It should be noted that the UPRR is a Class 1 Railroad, but the track of the Coast Subdivision is FRA Class IV track with a weight limit of 158 tons per railcar and a maximum speed varying from 20 to 70mph between Gilroy and San Luis Obispo as shown on the UPRR Roseville Timetable #5. Between Salinas Station at milepost 114.8 and San Luis Obispo at milepost 248.5 (133.7 miles), there are 32 speed limits. Counting only the highest speed limit in those areas with complexities gives this condensed table: Pass. Speed Number of sections Total miles 20 1 0.2 25 2 8.4 30 3 5.1 35 1 1.7 40 5 12.1 45 4 5.4 50 4 12.3 55 4 28.5 60 3 3.7 65 1 2.3 70 4 54.0 75 0 79 0 Discounting acceleration and deceleration, and assuming the speeds listed above, a time of 157 minutes is the theoretical minimum. The FRA class 4 legal maximum of 79 mph applies only to a 20.8 mile run from South San Jose to North San Martin and is beyond our consideration here. From the Southern Pacific Coast Line Condensed Schedules – 1927 #72 7:45 SF Daylight Limited nonstop express 7:45 LA #70 9:00 SF 10:22 San Jose 11:14 Gilroy 11:55 Watsonville Jct. 12:12 Del Monte Jct.12:29 Salinas 2:53 Paso Robles 4:35 San Luis Obispo 8:30 Santa Barbara 11:55 LA In 1927, The Southern Pacific Passenger Train #70 Traveled 133.9 miles from Salinas to San Luis Obispo in 246 minutes with a stop in Paso Robles. The Schedule in Appendix B of the EIS/EIR travels the same distance with an additional stop in King City in 178 minutes. The UPRR analysis includes no realignments, but many siding, switch and signal improvements to allow train passing and tighter scheduling. While Federal Regulations limit maximum speeds based on track class and curves. The railroads are free to set lower company speeds on the track they own, and they do so based on legal advise, crossing conditions, maintenance frequency, and other considerations. From the Amtrak 20-Year Rail Improvement Plan Technical Report 2001 Rolling Stock – Modern Intercity Tilt Equipment (CO-06): Two sets of modern intercity equipment with tilt (active or passive) capabilities would be purchased by this project to operate roundtrip Amtrak Daylight service along the Coast Corridor between San Francisco and Los Angeles. Train sets with tilt equipment would allow the Daylight service to operate at train speeds up to 79 mph on the Coast Corridor, reducing the need for some infrastructure improvements related to decreasing track curvature and increasing track superelevation. In lieu of several infrastructure improvements, the use of tilt train technology along the Coast Corridor was considered while developing the proposed improvement projects. Using tilt equipment along the this corridor would reduce the number of infrastructure improvement projects required, thereby reducing the associated capital costs. Henry to Santa Margarita Curve Realignments (CO-29): This infrastructure project is located 19 miles north of San Luis Obispo and would relocate 2.10 miles of main line track between Henry and Santa Margarita. The project would construct 2.10 miles of new main track and embankment on new right-of-way. The six existing curves would be reduced to four curves with a three-degree maximum curvature. This track curvature infrastructure improvement would increase train speeds from 65 to 110 mph, resulting in reduced trip times and increased capacity It should be noted here that 110 mph requires FRA Class 6 track. It should also be noted that a three degree maximum degree of curvature curve with a legal maximum super-elevation of six inches and a legal maximum 3 inches of cant deficiency (unbalanced super-elevation) without a FRA waiver will allow a top speed 65.4 mph per Federal Regulations. The FRA can issue a waiver, and Amtrak's Acela Express is allowed 7 inches of cant deficiency in the North East Corridor on Amtrak owned class 8 track. Amtrak's 1997 Waiver application was denied by the FRA, so The Acela Express has the highest waiver in the USA. The FRA rarely grants significant waivers on trackage rights lines. Freight railroads are not interested in high super-elevation, and finding more than 3 inches is rare. Heavy freights pulling uphill around a curve rub the inside rail with the wheel flanges, so superelevation is minimized on freight tracks, especially since the EPA eliminated the use of curve grease. FRA regulations require the inspector to shut down the line if the super-elevation is negative or more than 7 inches. Thus, there is always some super-elevation to keep from going negative and the FRA tables stop at 6 inches and include 3 inches of cant deficiency by default, and 4 inches by waiver. In France 11.8 inches of cant deficiency is the law for tilting passenger trains and some tracks have so much super-elevation that the minimum speed requirements and steep grades on some passenger tracks preclude the operation of most freight trains even though there is a statutory limit of 750 meters on train length. Europe has difficult terrain with lots of hard rock mountains and as of 2009, 79% of train miles in the EU27 are passenger trains. The use of steep grades and tight curves has saved triple digit millions of dollars with fewer long tunnels and bridges and more direct routes. This requires almost three times the horsepower per ton of train compared with an Amtrak train and lightweight aluminum construction which our outdated 1950's regulations won't allow on mixed use tracks. Europe has had two major revisions to their regulations as technology has improved while we have done nothing except legislate heavier reinforcement. To put this in another perspective, 11.8 inches of cant deficiency corresponds to 30 centimeters or 0.20g which is equivalent to one fifth the weight on the truck (wheel set) as a side load trying to derail the wheel flanges. It is cant deficiency that controls the additional speed that may be used on curves. A tilting train provides comfort for the passengers for those trains that are operating under a waiver. It is usually difficult to explain engineering principles to law makers and journalists. As a result, we are saddled with the perception that stronger and heavier is better. Even a Soccer Mom senses this when she straps her toddler into a child seat in her Ford Explorer with the little “Baby on board” sign in the back window interfering with her vision in the rear view mirror. This is intuitive and misconceived. American Passenger Trains are basically battering rams on wheels by law. Tilting trains are an American invention, but other countries have developed national transportation systems around them while we continue to legally mandate 1950's technology. The automobile and bus industry does not want people riding the train. A successful passenger train takes a piece out of their bottom line, so their lobbyists work to deny relief to the railroads. Legislative problems are not fixed unless there is a rude awakening; usually a spectacular accident with major loss of life and a very public outcry. The status quo is simply legislated failure. Even when Congress responds to these events, the results have hidden consequences. For example: The the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008 mandates positive train control (PTC) by the end of 2015. This is a technology that is still in development and a clear winner has yet to emerge. In consumer electronics, think VHS vs. Betamax. VHS was eventually replaced by DVDs, but even though Betamax had technical advantages, VHS was cheaper and prevailed in the marketplace. In 2008, people worried about personal computer viruses and identity theft. Recently, we have seen Sony Pictures brought to its knees by hackers, and in Iran, their government nuclear enrichment program has been hit hard by malware that caused extensive physical damage as effective as sabotage. Today, our physical infrastructure from water supplies and power plants, to train signaling is a potential target for cyber warfare. Without delaying legislation, non complying railroads may be reduced to Class 3 speeds of 40 mph for freight and no passenger trains. Class 3 commonly includes regional railroads and Class 1 secondary main lines. An example is BNSF between Spokane and Kettle Falls, Wash. In the eyes of theUPRR this may be preferable to spending millions on unproven technology that may become obsolete prematurely. Delaying the signal upgrade on the lightly used Coast Subdivision could be a smart move. It will happen eventually, but the UPRR doesn't want to do it twice or end up with a Rube Goldberg patched together upgrade. Not completing the signal upgrade by the end of 2015 will prevent Amtrak operations on the line. In 1922 the Interstate Commerce Commission mandated in cab signaling as a safety measure for all railroads with passenger trains on their lines. Prior to this, Passenger trains routinely operated at 100 mph on some tracks. By not upgrading to cab signaling and accepting the reduced speed of 79 mph, the railroads started the long process of shedding their passenger operations. The European tilt train experience is a maximum weight of 19 tons per truck (wheel set). An Amtrak superliner coach weighs 74 tons or 37 tons per wheel truck and a freight car can weigh 158 tons or 79 tons per truck. To load passengers efficiently at stations, you need wide doors, which then mandates more steel reinforcement. The problem is that the centrifugal force in a curve is proportional to the mass on the wheel at any given speed through that curve. Tracks are held in place by the friction of the ballast against the ties. Steel wheels on steel rails are not perfect and the resulting vibrations from operations are enough to move the track. On straight track, the result may be uneven settling or a tipping of the track. On curved track, high speed will move the track outward and low speed heavy pulling will move the track inward. These effects are not compensating, so the track distortions can get complicated. European track owners have used concrete roadbeds to keep the rails in place on highly cant deficient curves. European government agencies own the track and regulate safety. It is up to the train operating companies to see to passenger comfort. In the US, we regulate passenger comfort based on some tests done on the New Haven Railroad in 1950. The California High Speed Rail Project and Amtrak in the Northeast Corridor Acela line have recently been granted a waiver for aluminum cars for 160 mph operations on passenger train on class 8 track owned and maintained by the train operator. No aluminum passenger train cars are allowed on mixed usage trackage in the USA. The Japanese tilt train experience is that sensor driven actuators didn't work very well and their second generation tilt trains employ computer stored track information databases and route position equipment tells the computer where it is along the route. First generation tilt trains used sensors and servos to act like a governor and they reacted to something that was already happening so they were always playing catch up. These systems are unstable and will hunt (oscillate) if the deadband is too small. If it is too large, the ride becomes uncomfortable. These systems were usually turned off at less than 43.5 mph or when a train approached a station or changed tracks. The second generation uses a computer hosted look ahead table to apply corrections based on expectations. Its like the difference between walking up to a set of stairs in the dark and turning on the lights. If you see the stairs, you step up. If you don't see them, you stumble. The first generation sensor corrected tilt trains had troubles in reverse curves that were fixed in the second generation. They still use sensors to supplement the tables and fine tune the response to changing conditions, which also updates the tables. Tilt trains have their place, but there needs to be realistic expectations, and not all tilt trains are created equal. Caveat emptor. Most railroad maintenance expenses can be expensed in the current tax year. Capital improvements have to be depreciated and property taxes are paid on this slowly declining value, or sometimes on replacement value. Railroad equipment and property is typically longer lived than ordinary business equipment. The bridge over Santa Margarita Creek at Eaglet is probably 128 years old and made of riveted iron. After more than a century, it is still on the tax rolls and has proposition 13 protection. The UPRR is in no hurry to acquire replacement real estate that will be taxed at current market value unless it adds significant profit potential to their freight operations. For the UPRR, faster speeds take more horsepower to overcome grades and the horsepower requirement to overcome wind resistance which varies with the cube of the speed and this means more locomotives and more fuel and more wear on the tracks for more frequent maintenance. Slower speeds means more labor costs. Like a supply and demand curve in an economics textbook, the sweet spot is where the curves cross. Costs go up on either side of the sweet spot. The UPRR will resist any change which tends to pull their operations away from that sweet spot. In 1962, the SPRR bypassed a 900 foot long tunnel on Cuesta Grade. To get it off the tax rolls, they boarded up the portals and dynamited the roof to cave it in. The picture below is a screen shot from the Federal Railroad Administration web site. Note the craters along the tunnel's path. The railroads pay property taxes for the track, which depend on the value of the property. This is an additional incentive for US railroads, to rely on "do more with less". The railroad system has far less capacity than in the past, but transports more freight. One result is, that many lines do not allow trains of different speed any longer. Either the fast ones or the slow ones are delayed regularly. It needs to be stressed that these railroads still exist. They are the survivors. Instead of getting public money for performing infrastructure upgrades, as in Europe, the railroads pay to the public after doing so, in the form of property taxes. Historically, these policies have worked as an additional incentive for projects like de-electrification, ripping out the second track of double track railroad, giving up less important lines. It is unrealistic to expect investment within a setup that rewards disinvestment. European express rail freight systems use mostly capacity that has been added for passenger traffic. Doing it vice versa in the USA has no economic basis. When competing on private infrastructure against trucking on public infrastructure, it is logical to attract the business that is most compatible to rail freight and push the excess towards the roads, where capacity and maintenance is a problem of the public. Express freight is best transported by truck, within the logic of existing traffic policies. It is unrealistic to expect any US railroad to set up an express freight system. This also means: No change regarding infrastructure that could make it easier to run passenger trains. The 158 ton limitation on the Coast Route prevents the use of some heavier six axle locomotives. Improved signaling and more sidings along the Coast Route will help the UPRR increase capacity. Realigning the tracks does almost nothing for their freight business and has a very large tax disincentive that goes on for many years. Any UPRR officer that promotes the SLOCOG plan at a stockholders meeting is likely to be out of a job immediately. Realignment of track was excluded from the UPRR response to the EIS/EIR in appendix B. Even holding the Phillips 66 upgrades hostage is not going to be convincing. The Bakken formation will fill a lot of tank cars. If the keystone pipeline goes ahead, the tank car traffic will fall off. If the price of crude stays low, development will stagnate. The UPRR would like to move those tank cars, but not with long term strings attached. For people, nothing is certain but death and taxes. For UPRR, nothing is certain but taxes. The oil business has been notoriously volatile, taxes are much more predictable. Railroads are the most capital intensive business in the USA, with a low return on investment. Railroads are risk averse and tax avoiding. While we have thriving commuter lines in Southern California and the Bay area. Unless some very deep pocketed public entity wants to buy out the Coast Route, there is little to do. Any good engineer would say to forget the UPRR tracks that were engineered and built before 1894 with hand labor, and start over with a completely new right of way. It is not economical to smooth out that right of way if high speed rail is indeed what is needed. A Daylight train is projected to hold fewer passengers than a single Boeing 747. Unfortunately, there is not enough local population density to support a line that does not offer convenient LA to SF schedules. The SPRR offered nonstop 12 hour Daylight Limited service in 1927. The counties along the route want the local station stops. It should be further noted that the Coast Route was rejected by the California High Speed Rail Authority in favor of the Valley Route and ground breaking is scheduled for the first section from Bakersfield to Fresno. When the LA to SF connection is completed up the valley, it will siphon off the bulk of the passengers leaving us with a MilkRun version of the Daylight with inadequate passenger volumes. Amtrak is subsidized by the tax payers, but there is a limit where good management says enough! We simply do not have the population density along the route to support the Daylight in San Luis Obispo and Monterey Counties without those through ticket passengers that will be diverting to the much faster valley route. Most local service has limited competition, and competition discourages price gouging. As a further note: Tesla Motors is selling non polluting electric cars and Google has started manufacturing production of a self driving car. In a few short years, the assumptions about reducing pollution and increased safety of rail versus the highway may be reversed. In New York, the Metro train had lower fuel efficiency per passenger mile than autos on the express way because of non rush hour operation with reduced occupancy. There is no way the Daylight can compete on speed! So, why is this a major emphasis? Tourists coming to the Central Coast will enjoy the scenery, and those in a rush will not consider the Daylight when you can drive drive from LA to SF in under 8 hours and you don't have to rent a car when you get there! Or, you can fly which takes 1.5 hours plus the TSA hassle. On a personal note: My parents purchased lot 57 before the 1969 flood, and there was no slope stability problem either before or after the flood. We did stand on the bluff after the flood and look out at the trash caught in the barbed wire fences on the properties below us between the SPRR and the Salinas River. Years later, the railroad brought in earth moving equipment to carve away the toe of the slope to facilitate plowing in plastic conduit for fiber optic cables. Since then, we have had occasional small winter slides which have exposed the roots of oak trees and caused other distress. This is a maintenance problem of the railroad's own making, and a minimum amount of slope trimming could correct it, but that would require permits to remove dozens of oak trees. Simply cleaning up the toe as needed is a better solution. The slope withstood the test of almost a century before the fiber optic cable's inappropriate installation.  This is a boondoggle. Maybe, enough money will be available to take some land, but in the end, it will give our county a seedy reputation. Do overs, or second chances will be very hard to obtain. Unfortunately, there may be some personal suffering before reason and economics prevail. John EdgecombeJanuary 7, 2015 John Edgecombe (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Thank you. I have in my hand an 11 page document which I forwarded to Pete. What we’ve got here, I’ve pulled from my page 3, “the taking of residences is contemplated only to realignments within the Henry/Santa Margarita section. No other section of this 133 mile project is contemplating taking residences”. I have done the math on the improvement that would happen in the realigning the residences north of Santa Clara Road and that is a magnificent 55 sec…, excuse me, a magnificent 12 seconds. The a…in Table 2-4 of the EIR they list the potential maximum speed increase for built alternative components for Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments…future maximum speed range, no change. So we are having here a cloud on our title for a totally insignificant operational improvement to the railroad. And what we are seeing …well, I talked to one of the gentlemen who recently, in the last week, I believe, refinanced his house, his home, through the VA. When the inspector came out they took 25,000 dollars off the deal because of the railroad. If this document does not have a sunset clause, we will have to live with depressed property values forever. Thank you.   From: Ellen Evans [XXXXXXXXXXXXXX] Sent: Wednesday, January 07, 2015 4:28 PM To: Pete Rodgers Subject: Coast Corridor Improvements Program  Dear Mr. Rodgers,  I was unable to attend this morning's meeting in Atascadero regarding the above referenced matter. However, the gist of the meeting has been relayed to me and, despite it sounding like the portion of the program that involves straightening the rail line in the Henry/Santa Margarita area will not be included in the final draft, I nevertheless wish to convey my thoughts regarding this proposal.  I strenuously object to it for three reasons. First, the proposed straightening is so minimal that it could not possibly be worthwhile, so I have to wonder what the point of this really is. Second, as a taxpayer, I do not feel that the cost of undertaking such an idiotic action is a wise use of public funds and we already have quite enough waste in government. Third, my family has lived here for forty-five years. This is our home and it is the most wonderful place in which to live that I can imagine and I have no interest in losing it because of a ridiculous scheme that will have no real benefit to anyone.  Thank you for considering my input and I hope that this will truly be the end of this proposal.  Ellen Evans 9538 Los Palos Road Atascadero, CA 93422  Next Speaker: Thank you, Maurice. Uh, just really quickly, uh, **** council members. I like the, the City Manager's, uh, **** on the City. I have sat in the past and currently I'm the Executive Legal Advocacy Committee. Uh, I will be their, uh, **** available, so, if you can go, uh, go and participate, it's a good learning process, and **** that process. Thank you.  Next Speaker: Thank you. Okay. And now we're going to go to the, uh, the public hearing, Item B, which is joint with the Planning Commission. Um, Michael ****.  Next Speaker: So, this evening we have, uh, under Item 2B, we have a joint meeting of the Planning Commission. I will note in our minutes that the planning, that the meeting will be convened, um, presently; that the members of the Planning Commission are present. It would be appropriate, though, for the Chair of the Planning Commission to formally convene the meeting before we go on.  Next Speaker: Thank you, uh, ****. Uh, I'd like to call the meeting of the Planning Commission to come to order.  Next Speaker: And so this evening's, uh, the purpose of this evening's public hearing is to conduct a public hearing regarding the environmental impact statement, environmental impact report for the Coast Corridor Improvements Draft, uh, program, and out of that, we expect that the council this evening will receive public testimony, receive testimony from City staff, as well as TAMC, uh, staff and consultants, and authorize the Mayor to sign the letter attached to the staff report, um, as well as provide additional comments and information to TAMC and the consultants on the project, and with that, I will turn it over to Doreen, and she will give you an overview of the project, and then we have TAMC staff, Ann, available as well.  Next Speaker: Um, Mayor and members of the City Council, uh, reporting this evening is the Coast Corridor draft program for environmental impact statement and environmental impact report. The, um, reason for this is you have an environmental impact statement, which **** in ways that the national Environmental Protection Act. It's a national program, **** program, and then, of course, the environmental impact statement, which complies with the California Environmental Quality Act. This is actually a Power Point presentation. **** and **** is going to present. What I'm going to do is just ****. Christina will talk a little more in detail about the EISEIR. Uh, what staff had an opportunity to do was review the EISEIR for compliance. We are not **** to, the City is not ****. Um, that is the lead agency. That means that they are the agencies responsible for actually coordination the processing of this document. The re-, public review period for the **** ends January 7, 2015. During this period of time, this is, uh, the public's opportunity to review the document and provide comments. As you look at your, uh, staff report, you'll notice that there is a chart that's included in the document that has a number of comments. Um, we've looked up the EISEIR, and provided comments. One are the purposes for this document, and future use of the document is to tier off the environmental document so that when the City comes forward with a ****, uh, project in more detail, we hope to use that environment **** so that we don't have to spend a lot of money on generating environmental information ****. So, it's extremely important that the information is accurate and that there is, uh, information that is current and not stale. We did have an opportunity to speak with, uh, TAMC staff last night, **** staff last night, and Circle Point staff, uh, last night. Circle Point is Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: I've ****.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: Uh, it should be 2014.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: Okay, uh, now –  Next Speaker: Uh, uh, ****, can I ask a question?  Next Speaker: Yeah, all these ****.  Next Speaker: Oh, no, I said, I was –  Next Speaker: Yes.  Next Speaker: – listening to comments, ****.  Next Speaker: Yes, we, and, um, do you want to take the recorder and, once the recorder is there, if you could spell your –  Next Speaker: Actually, we should just have him them, just say your name.  Next Speaker: Yeah, let 'em guess how they spell that one.  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Uh, the name is Francis Giueici, G-I-U-E-I-C-I. I am the President of Valley **** Company here in King City, and my question is, uh, we have a building that would be affected by this project, and not that it's not gonna hold up the project, but I'm just wondering, no one's ever been in touch with us to talk to us about any of this. So, my question, basically is, uh, uh, at what point will we be approached by TAMC or someone else to talk about our structure?  Next Speaker: Okay. Who wants to answer that question?  Next Speaker: I'll start with that one. Um, we actually have noticed the Hearns on numerous projects in the First Street corridor. They do own a building, if I recall correctly, and John or Doreen can correct me on the ownership. It's a lease hold of the, of the building. We actually have plotted out, um, the, basically the layout plan, and we can work around that building for the time being, for quite some time.  Next Speaker: This is the –  Next Speaker: Um, but ultimately, we would, I would imagine that a better, higher use would come along for that, but that's sometime in the future.  Next Speaker: Okay, then let me ask, let me ask the follow up **** line, which is –  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: – how can he stay in the loop so he knows how, as, uh –  Next Speaker: If you will give us your direct contact, we will use it as opposed to what we find in the public records.  Next Speaker: Well, you do have our contact.  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: I already –  Next Speaker: Uh, but, we have your public record contact.  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: And I'm not gonna make you say it out loud, but we would like your email and, you know, stuff that we know that would go directly to you.  Next Speaker: Okay.  Next Speaker: That would be the best way.  Next Speaker: Do we have the ****.  Next Speaker: Yeah, you can just put that on, put it on there, and we will be sure that –  Next Speaker: You have it on, you have it on.  Next Speaker: – one of those. You ha-, turn it over and use it even.  Next Speaker: ****.  Next Speaker: Um, okay, well you, you've got it already, but I'll do –  Next Speaker: If you can, if, if –  Next Speaker: – it again.  Next Speaker: Yes, please.  Next Speaker: If, if you could just **** Francis, and give it to Michael, and then –  Next Speaker: Yeah.  Next Speaker: – we'll make sure that you, uh, we'll contact you directly.  Next Speaker: So, any, um, –  Next Speaker: Thank you.  Next Speaker: – do you have a question ****? Okay, so, I, so the public hearing is now closed. Um, now, if you have a, a question –  Next Speaker: No, um, Michael, uh, you say you've noticed –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – uh, uh, do you mean you've sent them some letters?  Next Speaker: Yes. That's what's required under the law.  Next Speaker: Okay, well, I know that's what's required, but when we know that there is a building that would be affected, I think just make a phone call. ****. I'd, I'd like to include the people, um, obviously, **** is greatly affected by –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – the ****, uh, the, um, and I don't know that ****, maybe those two –  Next Speaker: Mm hmm.  Next Speaker: – and, and **** street, and, and –  Next Speaker: There's actually other property owners involved, including some kind of weird, crazy parcels and lease holds. Um, we do notice them. That threshold of, gee, how much extra effort do we put into. Uh, the law somewhat presumes that people are gonna be acting in their own self-interest –  Next Speaker: Yes.  Coast Corridor EIS/EIR Hearing Meeting Summary – Soledad , CA Dec. 3, 2014  Conducted by Christina Watson, TAMC Principal Transportation Planner  Soledad City Council 12/3/14 a. Councilmember Christopher Bourke: a question to the very impressively thick report you have there, my question is, what is specifically planned for the City of Soledad, I mean there’s a station in the city, we have side tracks next to it, is there any work planned on the tracks in the City of Soledad? i. Ms. Watson: No, the plans have only to do with the station itself in the City of Soledad limits - city limits. ii. Mr. Bourke: So there is no track work? iii. Ms. Watson: That is my understanding, but I will verify that, and the answer will be provided in the final environmental document. iv. Mr. Bourke: Thank you. b. Mayor Fred Ledesma: So we’ll be able to purchase a ticket here instead of going to Salinas? i. Ms. Watson: The train service? So, once the Coast Daylight is in operation, you’ll be able to board here in Soledad and take the train all the way up to San Francisco or all the way down to either Los Angeles or San Diego. ii. Mayor Ledesma: So like with the wine corridor, if people want to, they can come down on the train to visit the wine corridor here or to go to the National Park? iii. Ms. Watson: Yes. iv. City Clerk Adela Gonzalez: Just want to note that the City must fund the station construction. When redevelopment agencies were still around, we had funding designated for station improvements; Mr. Brent Slama has more information on that. Now that the redevelopment agencies are no longer around, we do not have those funds for station improvements. v. Mayor Ledesma: Do we have a cost estimate for that? Can we use the Measure I funding for that? vi. Ms. Gonzalez: I don’t think we have a cost estimate yet and it wasn’t in the approved project list for Measure I. c. Val Gomes1: I have a two-fold question. I appreciate you laying out the environmental impacts. I’m just wondering, I mean I can appreciate it, it may not be as crucial at the moment, but, in case a monetary value has been assessed to the environmental impact at this point, or is there some plan to do such a monetary cost and how that might be mitigated, if there is a cost, if that might be expected to be borne by businesses or taxpayers? A second question that also could be responded to sometime in the future, if not now, would be, in terms of once the project does get to be operational, what’s the cost benefit analysis, in terms of how much would you put in and how much would it benefit the actual taxpayer? If those answers cannot be provided tonight, it can wait. Thank you. i. Ms. Watson: OK d. Councilmember Christopher Bourke: One more question, Ms. Watson, if I may, Councilmember Bourke, at the microphone, here. You said that your organization is going to do the EIR, and then eventually you are going to propose it to the train operator, which is 1 TAMC staff did not get contact info for Mr. Gomes, but Ms. Watson did give him her card and requested he follow up with an email. Union Pacific, which parts of the major plan they are going to implement, so your organization is not making the ultimate, put it that way, Southern Pacific – Union Pacific is going to say what they are going to do, what they’re actually going to do, which might not be the entire plan, correct? i. Ms. Watson: OK, so let me just clarify that. TAMC is not the lead agency on this project, we’re a responsible agency. City of – I’m sorry, Caltrans is the lead agency for the project, but for the environmental document, SLOCOG is the lead agency on the state side of things and the Federal Railroad Administration is the lead agency on the federal side of things – there’s a lot of entities involved in this. In terms of implementing the project, Caltrans Division of Rail and Mass Transportation is the lead agency to implement the project and to conduct the negotiations with Union Pacific to determine which of the projects will be implemented. It’s a long process of negotiating between the entities that will determine exactly which projects will get implemented out of this plan. ii. Mr. Bourke: So it’s up to Union Pacific, basically? iii. Ms. Watson: I would say that it’s up to the negotiations between Caltrans and Union Pacific. iv. Mr. Bourke: Gotcha, OK. When might those be – any idea of timeframe, so that we may know, what might actually be done? v. Ms. Watson: I don’t think we have a timeframe for that. vi. Mr. Bourke: OK, thank you. e. Councilmember Patricia Stephens: This project has been on the burner for 18 years that I know of – how many? i. Royce Gotcher, Caltrans: I think it’s more like 20 years. It’s been a long time. ii. Ms. Stephens: 18-20 years. I think that Mayor Pro Tem has been attending the meetings. I’ve attended, over the years, many, many meetings. iii. Ms. Gonzalez: Former Mayor Gerbrandt, Gary Gerbrandt, was attending these meetings as well. iv. Ms. Stephens: Yes, he’s the one that started Soledad’s involvement, long before our National Park came. I hope to see it in my lifetime. f. Mayor Pro Tem Alejandro Chavez: This project has been going on for years. I just wanted to state that the document we’re talking about here, we’re talking about June of 2015, so I know that’s the one piece that we know about, and then those negotiations will happen. I think the one thing that has changed is that there actually is an interest in rail at the state level for probably the first time. There actually is a group of Senators and there is a committee now that is looking at rail at the state level, when before, had never been any kind of committee that I was aware of, so now there is some kind of interest. Part of it was the bullet train in the Central Valley; I think that is what started the interest. On the positive side of that is the Daylight train. One of the things I didn’t hear in this presentation but I did hear in the morning presentation, because someone asked the question in regards to the amount of passengers in this particular area, I believe it’s number 2 in the nation in regards to rail, or something like that? i. Ms. Watson: I think that’s what Executive Director Hale said this morning. ii. Mr. Bourke: Unlike the bullet train, this would actually really go from LA to San Francisco? iii. Ms. Watson: I think they are both supposed to go LA to San Francisco; this one will go along the Coast. iv. Mr. Bourke: Well, yeah, but the Coast is so much more beautiful. Who would want to go through the San Joaquin Valley? v. Ms. Watson: All the people who live there.  2. King City special joint meeting of City Council/ Planning Commission 12/9/14 January 7, 2015 Eric Greening (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Thank you. I am Eric Greening and following up on Mr. O’Malley’s questions. I will remind you that as a lead agency, even as a co-lead agency, you were an essential and critical path. You are not obligated to certify this EIR and can withhold certification until the realignments are eliminated. Relative to the realignment saving travel time, there is a huge investment of someone’s time in their construction and in the acquisition of the property and the cost of acquisition of property can easily be underestimated as the high-speed rail people initially did until they got a lesson in it that severance is part of the cost, not just the land you’re taking. If you sever one part from another, that is also taking property values away from people. If we are interested in a faster service or at least a less delayed service, there are other alternatives to curve realignments. There is restore… in addition to lengthening additional sidings; there is restoring sidings that existed in the past. I remember when they came and tore out the Henry siding just before SP turned it over to UP. That was…that used to be actually the siding as which the Coast Starlights most often met. The road bed is still there right near Curbaril in Atascadero. There wouldn’t need to be any moving of any tracks. The other would be Tilt Train Technology and I wish I knew it were being built in this country. Right now the main one is built in Spain, the TALGO, but some of you may remember a ride we had on that over a decade ago when they were showing off the train and when the good people of Paso Robles got the train to stop there. Served almonds and local wine, and actually got it on Amtrak’s radar to start including that stop at Paso Robles. That was before the Depot had been done. Anyway, so there are alternatives that are much less disruptive to people’s lives; restoring past sidings, Tilt Train Technology. If we are concerned about safety, I would like to look at some of the stretches…if Harold Miosi were still alive, he would be here warning about places on the south side of the grade going down and around those curves where the geology is so unstable that in his lifetime he watched up to 24 feet of ballast stuffed up under the tracks because the mountain was trying to peel away from them. So, if we’re concerned about speed, I named the alternatives. If we are concerned about safety, and especially if we are going to have more oil trains, which I hope we don’t, if we are concerned about safety, look at the geological underpinnings on the grade, particularly the south side. There’s some serious issues there. Thank you.  From: Celine Hayden [mailto:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx] Sent: Monday, January 05, 2015 3:48 PM To: Pete Rodgers Subject: Written comment for Coast Corridor Improvement EIS/EIR  Dear Federal Railroad Administration Representatives,  I live, with my family, on Leff Street in San Luis Obispo, next to the train tracks and a stone’s throw from the train station. We love the idea of expanded service to the Bay Area as we are big proponents of public transit. We would like to make one request, though. The one train that presently goes to the Bay Area, the Coast Starlight, when going North the train’s engines stop right next to our property, or one property over on either side. And boy, is it loud. If you are outside, it is hard to hear over the train’s engines and often I have to stand next to someone and yell at them at the top of my voice to be heard. The trains going north idyll for about 15 minutes at the station so this has a serious noise impact on the neighborhood and our neighbors.  I have never complained about the noise, but if the FRA is considering expanding service I would like to request that sound mitigation measures be implemented. I don’t know if a kind of muffler can be put on the train’s engines, or whether the FRA can erect a sound barrier (a wall similar to those used next to highways, for example), or perhaps if the trains could turn off their engines while they sit at the station, that would be sufficient. Some trains idyll for quite a long time at the station, such as the 12:50pm train coming in from Los Angeles. This train idylls for 45 minutes before heading South at 1:35pm. Although this train’s engine is further away from our house than the northbound trains, it still impacts the noise level significantly in the neighborhood.  Thank you for taking the time to read my comments. I look forward to the day we have expanded service to the Bay area!  Sincerely,  Celine Hayden  Coast Corridor EIS/EIR Hearing Meeting Summary – Salinas, CA Dec. 3, 2014  Conducted by Christina Watson, TAMC Principal Transportation Planner  TAMC Board Meeting 12/3/14 a. Boardmember Louis Calcagno: How many riders are on the Starlight today? Are the primary stops Salinas and San Luis Obispo? And is the Daylight the same thing? I see the train go by every day and no one is on it. If no one rides currently, why would we do another train? b. Boardmember Bruce Delgado: I heard you mention safety as a purpose and as a benefit on several slides, but it’s missing from the environmental benefits slide. You might want to add increased safety to the benefits slide. c. Christine Kemp1: The loss of agricultural land is a great concern. Property owners along the corridor did not receive notice of this project prior to the receipt of the notice of this document, and the project process is unclear. Who is the decision-making body for this project? To whom should we direct questions and concerns? d. Arthur McLoughlin2: I am a resident of North County. I frequently travel on Amtrak, the Coast Starlight, to Los Angeles. The train is usually half to three-quarters full in coach; the trip is during the day so I always ride coach. Many people ride in the club car, which have windows you can’t see into from outside, so it may appear empty but it’s usually full. The club car is a gathering place, people go there to socialize. Amtrak is cheaper and more convenient than flying. It gets you right into downtown LA. Sometimes, the train times don’t work for my trip, and then I’ll take the Amtrak bus to connect to the Surfliner train instead. I am overall in favor of this project. I would ride the Daylight if it were available. e. Ross Jensen3: I am a property owner along the 101, at Spence Road. What are the properties that will be affected by the siding project? Will you be using eminent domain to acquire any properties? In the past, there was also talk about a project to improve the frontage road along the 101 in Chualar. You should make sure there is no conflict between the two projects. f. Boardmember Alejandro Chavez: I think it will be great to have a train station in Soledad, especially for tourists visiting the Pinnacles National Park in Soledad. I have taken the Starlight train six or seven times in the past, and it is 75% or more full on the trip from Salinas to LA. I also rode first class from Salinas to Seattle, and it was fully booked. g. Boardmember Simon Salinas: Consider reaching out to agricultural landowners using a mailing list regarding the Soledad and King City hearings. h. Staff responses: i. Principal Planner Christina Watson: Notices were mailed out to every property owner with property abutting the rail line between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, both when the Notice of Intent was published in 2012 and for this document. TAMC is not the decision-making body for these projects, the document leads are SLOCOG on the state side and the FRA on the federal side. But as a responsible agency, I can respond to questions and help folks get in touch with the right people to get answers to their questions. All comments and questions will also be included in the final document. 1 Ms. Kemp gave staff her contact info and followed up with email correspondence. TAMC has her contact info. 2 Mr. McLoughlin is on the Highway 156 Community Advisory Group. TAMC has his contact info. 3 Mr. Jensen signed in at the meeting. TAMC has a phone number for him. ii. Executive Director Debbie Hale: According to the internet, the Starlight had 454,000 riders in 2012, and was the number 2 long-distance train in the nation. Adding all state-supported services, it was #13 out of 42 nationwide. Staff will evaluate the potential conflict between the proposed siding and the highway frontage road project. -----Original Message----- From: Kemp, Christine [XXXXXXXXXXXX] Sent: Wednesday, December 03, 2014 1:56 PM To: Christina Watson Subject: Coast Corridor Rail Project - Salinas to Soledad - Google Earth Image  <<GoogleEarth_Image.jpg>> Christina -  I am following up on the TAMC meeting this am regarding the Coast Corridor Railway project.  I viewed the on-line Google Earth showing the improvement areas. Attached is the map for the railway section between Salinas and Soledad. There is an orange line running along the rail track from south of Spence Road to Esperanza Road. What does that orange line meant? Other than this orange line, this appears to be the only work being done in this section of the railway line. Is that correct?  Also, is there a Key that I can locate that states what the "orange", "green", blue" and "red" lines denote, as well as the numbers on the map, i.e. 1.40.2, 144.9, etc.  I would also appreciate you e-mailing me a copy of the PowerPoint presentation you give this morning.  Thank you for your assistance.  Christine Christine G. Kemp Noland, Hamerly, Etienne & Hoss A Professional Corporation 333 Salinas Street P.O. Box 2510 Salinas, CA 93901 (831) 424-1414 ext. 271 (831) 424-1975 (fax) XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX  -----Original Message----- From: Christina Watson Sent: Wednesday, December 03, 2014 4:02 PM To: Kemp, Christine Subject: RE: Coast Corridor Rail Project - Salinas to Soledad - Google Earth Image  Christine,  Thanks for your questions and for attending the hearing this morning. Attached is my PowerPoint and a key to the GIS map. I'll also be posting both up on our website in the next day or so.  The orange line is a siding improvement project. The numbers are mile markers along the railroad alignment. I will also forward this email to our consultants to verify that the siding is the only improvement proposed between Spence and Esperanza.  Thank you,  Christina _________________________________________ Christina Watson Principal Transportation Planner Transportation Agency for Monterey County 55-B Plaza Circle Salinas, CA 93901 Tel. (831) 775-4406 Fax (831) 775-0897 christina@tamcmonterey.org http://www.tamcmonterey.org  -----Original Message----- From: Kemp, Christine [XXXXXXXXXX] Sent: Wednesday, December 03, 2014 4:10 PM To: Christina Watson Subject: RE: Coast Corridor Rail Project - Salinas to Soledad - Google Earth Image  Thank you Christina -  Can you also please ask the consultant to confirm that, except for the siding improvement project and whatever else is associated with that improvement between Spence Road and Esperanza, there are no other proposed improvement project in or along the railroad right of way between Soledad and Salinas.  Thank you,  Christine Christine G. Kemp Noland, Hamerly, Etienne & Hoss A Professional Corporation 333 Salinas Street P.O. Box 2510 Salinas, CA 93901 (831) 424-1414 ext. 271 (831) 424-1975 (fax) XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX _____________________________________________ From: Christina Watson Sent: Thursday, December 04, 2014 2:34 PM To: 'Kemp, Christine' Subject: RE: Coast Corridor Rail Project - Salinas to Soledad - Google Earth Image   Dear Christine,  Yes, except for the proposed Spence siding improvement project (MP 121 - 123.4), there are no other separate physical improvements specifically proposed in the area between Spence Road and Esperanza Road. However, proposed system-wide track and signal improvements could still be located within the existing railroad right-ofway (ROW) through this area. These include tie replacement, new rail (continuous welded rail), ballasting improvements, etc.  Regarding your question about proposed improvements between Salinas and Soledad, the only improvements that might potentially be outside the existing railroad ROW are the proposed new Spence siding and the proposed new Soledad Station. Here are all the potential improvements proposed between Salinas and Soledad:  Mile Post (MP) Location Improvement Type 114.9 Existing Salinas siding New powered switch 121 - 123.4 Spence New siding 130 Existing Gonzales siding New powered switch 140 Existing Soledad siding New powered switch 140 Soledad New station   Also, just so you know, the railroad, Union Pacific, is constantly maintaining their system, separately from anything that is being considered in this Draft Program EIS/EIR, so you may see work being done on their railroad that is not related to our project.  Thank you,  Christina  Coast Corridor EIS/EIR Hearing Meeting Summary – Salinas, CA Dec. 3, 2014  Conducted by Christina Watson, TAMC Principal Transportation Planner  TAMC Board Meeting 12/3/14 a. Boardmember Louis Calcagno: How many riders are on the Starlight today? Are the primary stops Salinas and San Luis Obispo? And is the Daylight the same thing? I see the train go by every day and no one is on it. If no one rides currently, why would we do another train? b. Boardmember Bruce Delgado: I heard you mention safety as a purpose and as a benefit on several slides, but it’s missing from the environmental benefits slide. You might want to add increased safety to the benefits slide. c. Christine Kemp1: The loss of agricultural land is a great concern. Property owners along the corridor did not receive notice of this project prior to the receipt of the notice of this document, and the project process is unclear. Who is the decision-making body for this project? To whom should we direct questions and concerns? d. Arthur McLoughlin2: I am a resident of North County. I frequently travel on Amtrak, the Coast Starlight, to Los Angeles. The train is usually half to three-quarters full in coach; the trip is during the day so I always ride coach. Many people ride in the club car, which have windows you can’t see into from outside, so it may appear empty but it’s usually full. The club car is a gathering place, people go there to socialize. Amtrak is cheaper and more convenient than flying. It gets you right into downtown LA. Sometimes, the train times don’t work for my trip, and then I’ll take the Amtrak bus to connect to the Surfliner train instead. I am overall in favor of this project. I would ride the Daylight if it were available. e. Ross Jensen3: I am a property owner along the 101, at Spence Road. What are the properties that will be affected by the siding project? Will you be using eminent domain to acquire any properties? In the past, there was also talk about a project to improve the frontage road along the 101 in Chualar. You should make sure there is no conflict between the two projects. f. Boardmember Alejandro Chavez: I think it will be great to have a train station in Soledad, especially for tourists visiting the Pinnacles National Park in Soledad. I have taken the Starlight train six or seven times in the past, and it is 75% or more full on the trip from Salinas to LA. I also rode first class from Salinas to Seattle, and it was fully booked. g. Boardmember Simon Salinas: Consider reaching out to agricultural landowners using a mailing list regarding the Soledad and King City hearings. h. Staff responses: i. Principal Planner Christina Watson: Notices were mailed out to every property owner with property abutting the rail line between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, both when the Notice of Intent was published in 2012 and for this document. TAMC is not the decision-making body for these projects, the document leads are SLOCOG on the state side and the FRA on the federal side. But as a responsible agency, I can respond to questions and help folks get in touch with the right people to get answers to their questions. All comments and questions will also be included in the final document. 1 Ms. Kemp gave staff her contact info and followed up with email correspondence. TAMC has her contact info. 2 Mr. McLoughlin is on the Highway 156 Community Advisory Group. TAMC has his contact info. 3 Mr. Jensen signed in at the meeting. TAMC has a phone number for him. ii. Executive Director Debbie Hale: According to the internet, the Starlight had 454,000 riders in 2012, and was the number 2 long-distance train in the nation. Adding all state-supported services, it was #13 out of 42 nationwide. Staff will evaluate the potential conflict between the proposed siding and the highway frontage road project. January 7, 2015 Gary Kirkland (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Thank you very much. You might be getting tired of me, but that’s okay. What I am calling about...talking about today, on this issue, is who owns the railroad? Who owns those tracks? That doesn’t seem to come up. If you are going to make this document, whatever it is, and it is gonna be government that gonna decide what is gonna to happen to the railroads, we have an amendment in the constitution that says about illegal taking…eminent domain is the idea. Why doesn’t the government then buy those railroad tracks and they can do with them as they please. But no, a cheaper and easier way to do it, although I think illegal, at least unconstitutional, is just make regulations that require the railroad company, or whoever owns it, to do whatever we want, although we won’t take it from you. One of the comments up here was that you have a conflict between the railroad companies that want freight and passengers. Well, the freight companies exist to make money for their owners and meet the needs of their customers and if you are gonna go in there and make them do rail transportation that interferes with their ability to make money of course you are gonna have conflict and you are gonna use the tyrannical power of government to force them to do things that make them even lose money so that you can meet the needs of people who don’t want to pay for it. They want to have rail transportation without paying the full cost of it and we’ve gotta stop this tyranny. Leave the railroads alone. Let them provide what people want and you guys get out of this business. I said that before…thank you. January 7, 2015 Christopher Lyon (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Hi, my name is Christopher Lyon. My wife and child and I live on Salinas Road. This has been referred to as a science fiction story. It seems more like a horror story to a lot of us that live in the affected areas. You know, I hear that it’s not gonna happen because of fiscal issues, however, as Mr. O’Malley said, if the finances are realigned, this could happen and in the documents they are showing not a 500 foot increase in the railroad right away but 1,000 foot increase in the railroad right away on either side of the tracks. So postcards were sent to everyone within five hundred feet, what about the people out to one thousand feet. If these tracks are realigned, specifically on Salinas road, we lose our access with our road, if it…all of our wells are right along the railroad tracks, we potentially lose our water source, as well as Atascadero Mutual Water, they have a major well at the North end of Salinas Road, which they would potentially lose as well. So, I have also heard that there are also financial effects to us already from this in that some people have taken a hit on property values because this is public knowledge now. So I urge to try to eliminate the realignment as well as the increase in right-of-ways before this is accepted or goes forward. Thank you.  From: Rachel May [mailto:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx] Sent: Tuesday, January 06, 2015 4:35 PM To: Pete Rodgers Subject: Comments on the Cost Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR  Dear Mr. Rodgers,  I am writing to formally submit my comments on the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR, as I will be unable to attend the public hearing tomorrow, January 7th, at Atascadero City Hall. I am outraged to find that my home and a majority of my 15 acre property in southern Atascadero sits within the “red zone” of condemned houses on your proposed map included in the EIS/EIR. This is where I live and am raising my family. Straightening this segment of track (Henry/Santa Margarita section) is going to allow a quicker train? Really?? And this “quicker” train is going to travel up and down Cuesta Grade at this new “quicker” rate of speed. Ha! The passenger trains that currently run up and down the California Coast are primarily used by travelers and tourists, not commuters. Why would commuters want to take a lower speed train that stops at many local stops? They don’t. That is why a high speed rail is being built in the Central Valley connecting LA and SF. The Amtrak train that currently runs twice daily along this section of track (one north-bound train and one south-bound train per day is not being utilized to capacity at this time. Why do you think adding another train is going to increase this number of people? According to your proposed map, my home and the home of all of my neighbors in a 1 mile section along Salinas Road are going to be condemned … so a few more tourists can enjoy a slightly faster trip from San Francisco to LA. Mr. Rodgers, how would you feel if the location where your home is built, where you have a garden and fruit trees, where your child plays, where you raise your chickens, was bulldozed over for a new train carrying new tourists? Let me tell you, it feels horrifying and heartbreaking. These are people’s lives you are destroying. This area also encompasses a significant amount of wildlife from the nearby Salinas River basin. It also includes the wells of the Atascadero Municipal Water district. THINK ABOUT THIS!! Please.  Sincerely, Rachel May 11005 Salinas Road Atascadero, CA 93422 xxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxx 805-540-8166  Coast Corridor EIS/EIR Hearing Meeting Summary – Salinas, CA Dec. 3, 2014  Conducted by Christina Watson, TAMC Principal Transportation Planner  TAMC Board Meeting 12/3/14 a. Boardmember Louis Calcagno: How many riders are on the Starlight today? Are the primary stops Salinas and San Luis Obispo? And is the Daylight the same thing? I see the train go by every day and no one is on it. If no one rides currently, why would we do another train? b. Boardmember Bruce Delgado: I heard you mention safety as a purpose and as a benefit on several slides, but it’s missing from the environmental benefits slide. You might want to add increased safety to the benefits slide. c. Christine Kemp1: The loss of agricultural land is a great concern. Property owners along the corridor did not receive notice of this project prior to the receipt of the notice of this document, and the project process is unclear. Who is the decision-making body for this project? To whom should we direct questions and concerns? d. Arthur McLoughlin2: I am a resident of North County. I frequently travel on Amtrak, the Coast Starlight, to Los Angeles. The train is usually half to three-quarters full in coach; the trip is during the day so I always ride coach. Many people ride in the club car, which have windows you can’t see into from outside, so it may appear empty but it’s usually full. The club car is a gathering place, people go there to socialize. Amtrak is cheaper and more convenient than flying. It gets you right into downtown LA. Sometimes, the train times don’t work for my trip, and then I’ll take the Amtrak bus to connect to the Surfliner train instead. I am overall in favor of this project. I would ride the Daylight if it were available. e. Ross Jensen3: I am a property owner along the 101, at Spence Road. What are the properties that will be affected by the siding project? Will you be using eminent domain to acquire any properties? In the past, there was also talk about a project to improve the frontage road along the 101 in Chualar. You should make sure there is no conflict between the two projects. f. Boardmember Alejandro Chavez: I think it will be great to have a train station in Soledad, especially for tourists visiting the Pinnacles National Park in Soledad. I have taken the Starlight train six or seven times in the past, and it is 75% or more full on the trip from Salinas to LA. I also rode first class from Salinas to Seattle, and it was fully booked. g. Boardmember Simon Salinas: Consider reaching out to agricultural landowners using a mailing list regarding the Soledad and King City hearings. h. Staff responses: i. Principal Planner Christina Watson: Notices were mailed out to every property owner with property abutting the rail line between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, both when the Notice of Intent was published in 2012 and for this document. TAMC is not the decision-making body for these projects, the document leads are SLOCOG on the state side and the FRA on the federal side. But as a responsible agency, I can respond to questions and help folks get in touch with the right people to get answers to their questions. All comments and questions will also be included in the final document. 1 Ms. Kemp gave staff her contact info and followed up with email correspondence. TAMC has her contact info. 2 Mr. McLoughlin is on the Highway 156 Community Advisory Group. TAMC has his contact info. 3 Mr. Jensen signed in at the meeting. TAMC has a phone number for him. ii. Executive Director Debbie Hale: According to the internet, the Starlight had 454,000 riders in 2012, and was the number 2 long-distance train in the nation. Adding all state-supported services, it was #13 out of 42 nationwide. Staff will evaluate the potential conflict between the proposed siding and the highway frontage road project. From: Chantal Georis Melendrez Sent: Friday, November 21, 2014 9:07 AM To: Pete Rodgers Subject: coast corridor draft program mailing  To Whom It May Concern,  In response to the mailing sent by your organization, we are in FULL cooperation and support with anything necessary to make this long overdue project come to pass. Our rail service is severely lacking in this area. We live in Monterey, and formerly from Europe...need I say more?  Sincerely  Chantal Georis Melendrez 298 Larkin Street Monterey 93940 Sent from my iPad  January 7, 2015 Bettina Salter (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Well, it is very hard to disagree with or follow the previous speaker who I agree with. I do not live in that particular area, but I do know people who do live in that area and it just seems really silly to keep something in this document that sounds like it was on a wish list provided by Union Pacific. And it needs to get out of this. My…the reason I came to this was this hearing was because I own property in Santa Margarita that is , I haven’t measure, but I think it is within 500 feet of the railroad and I’m assuming that I was supposed to get a post card, but we never got any post card. I never…the first I ever heard of this was a letter that I got and I think it is because I am signed up on some other things that have to do with…not because of being a property owner so I think that probably needs to be checked on, the notification. At any rate, I agree with Mayor O’Malley that this whole part of this rail realignment that is along that section that that is being considered just needs to be taken out because whoever it was who said, “if it’s in there, it’s a possibility”, is absolutely correct…so, thank you.  From: Barbara Schneiderhan [mailto:xxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx] Sent: Wednesday, January 07, 2015 2:03 PM To: Pete Rodgers Subject: Public comments  Pete Rodgers,  After attending the meeting today I have a couple of comments to add to the ones sent previously. The general feeling in the room was pretty unanimous that the realignment plan is not a good or feasible idea. If you look at it rationally, in order to straighten the curve at Henry/Margarita you would nave to move literally mountains of earth or change the grade which would defeat the idea of picking up speed. The Google earth view does not show the changes in elevation along that section of track. Having traveled several times between San Diego and Eugene Oregon. I can tell you that the speed the train moves has little or nothing to do with the length of travel time. The amount of time spent on sidings waiting for freight to pass is a huge factor. As you travel, the train can make up time within the speed limits to reach the next stop early only to have to wait until the scheduled departure time. Remember trains can arrive late but they can never leave early. Over the last two years the tracks below my house has been upgraded twice. The first upgrade was to install longer rails , the second was to replace all worn ties and repack the rail bed. Both of these repairs improved safety and comfort in travel. I do believe that the best way to move forward with this project is to remove the realignment plans completely. As long as they are buried in the proposal they will have to be disclosed in real estate transactions. I can re-assure buyers that this grand scheme to straighten the tracks will not happen but a home purchase is a very emotional transaction and any doubt can cause a sale to fall through. It was my impression that the Council agreed with this unanimously. I hope that you and they can work out a way to do just that. I also hope that the homeowners involved in the realignment areas will be notified when that happens. It would make it much more conducive to continuing to maintain and improve our properties.  Thank You Barbara Schneiderhan 9550 Los Palos Road Atascadero Ca. 93422  805 460-6685   From: Nancy Thompson <xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx> To: "prodgers@slocog.org" <prodgers@slocog.org> Cc: "district5@co.slo.ca.us" <district5@co.slo.ca.us> Date: 01/06/2015 11:19 AM Subject: Coast Corridor Improvement Draft Program EIS/EIR  --- Just yesterday, Jan 5, 2015, we were informed by a neighbor of this potential plan that would affect our area. First of all, why weren't property owners informed of the plan? Secondly, if approved, this plan would be a disaster to the existing homeowners in the path of the plan. All of our water supply/wells would be compromised, not to mention significant loss of property. We have lived on this property for 31 years, and both my husband and I are lifelong county residents. Our quality of life, not to mention the monetary investment, would be ruined. I hope that our local representatives will serve us well by not approving this program. Nancy Thompson, 11705 Salinas Road, Atascadero, CA 93422 ************************************************************************* ********* Nancy Thompson SLO County Teacher Induction Program Mentor "You teach a little by what you say. You teach the most by what you are!" ---- Dr. Henrietta Mears  [Scanned @co.slo.ca.us]  On Wednesday, January 7, 2015 11:18 AM, "jcaffee@co.slo.ca.us" <jcaffee@co.slo.ca.us> wrote:  Dear Ms. Thompson, After researching this project, it is my understanding that the project EIS is being presented to the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments today. It is not the intent of the SLOCOG Board to support or encourage any improvements outside of the existing railroad right of way. To view the Board's discussion, please visit http://www.slo-span.org/ Your questions and/or comments may be submitted to Pete Rodgers at SLOCOG 805-781-5724 or prodgers@slocog.org. I would be glad to forward your comments to Mr. Rodgers on your behalf. Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance. Sincerely, Jennifer Caffee Legislative Assistant 5th District Supervisor Debbie Arnold San Luis Obispo County (805) 781-4339/FAX (805) 781-1350 On Wednesday, January 7, 2015 11:52 AM, Nancy Thompson <xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx> wrote:  Thank you for your quick response. I have just returned from the SLOCOG meeting. Please extend my appreciation to Mrs. Arnold for her support on this issue. While we appreciate the attempts at improving railroad safety and service, we were quite upset about the possibility of losing our home of over 30 years. Again, thank you serving the citizens of District 5.  ************************************************************************* ********* Nancy Thompson SLO County Teacher Induction Program Mentor "You teach a little by what you say. You teach the most by what you are!" ---- Dr. Henrietta Mears  From: Nancy Thompson [mailto:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxxxxxxx] Sent: Wednesday, January 07, 2015 12:33 PM To: Pete Rodgers Subject: Re: Coast Corridor Improvement Draft Program EIS/EIR  Thank you and the entire SLOCOG committee for your support at today's meeting regarding the Coast Corridor Improvement Plan. Of course, we support ongoing safety measures, but our land and livelihoods were in jeopardy. Although we did not receive any advance notice of this meeting, I hope that we will be kept apprised of any further developments, particularly in light of the motion that was passed. It will bring peace of mind knowing that our local area has been removed from the project. Again, thank you for today's outcome.  ************************************************************ ********************** Nancy Thompson SLO County Teacher Induction Program Mentor "You teach a little by what you say. You teach the most by what you are!" ---- Dr. Henrietta Mears  January 7, 2015 Edward Veek (verbal comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Thank you Mayor Tom O’Malley for getting us started. I would…I’d say first of all we need to examine what the heck the purpose of this whole plan was. It was to get grants. I am getting tired of people going around getting grants and paying the grant makers to do it. I think we need to examine that process. Why was it required? You said it was some other agency required it. Well, change the rules so that the agency doesn’t have control over everything. Next, we have to talk about is the right hand listening to the left hand? You’re not even talking how can you listen? Next, as far as safety is concerned, if you want to replace a tire that is wore out, you don’t replace the car and change the route it is gonna drive on. This sounds like something Atlas Shrugged would have brought up. I think we are talking about some new plans supported by the Ickley Foundation, which is supported by a couple of people on this council. I am not gonna mention your names over there. Anyway, what I say is vote no on this plan. This plan does not have any feasibility. The only its..its pointed out is there is some safety improvements in it. That’s fine, let’s address the safety improvements and vote no on this plan.      Appendix 2.1 Attachments to City of King Comment Letter   railpros_logo.png  Conceptual Design Multi-Modal Transportation Center          Report level: Concept Design  Prepared By: RailPros, Inc.  Revised February 24, 2014        1 Ada Parkway |Suite 200|Irvine|California|92618 www.railpros.com Office 714.734.8765   Background The City of King, California has identified a need to optimize transit connections for the transit dependent population by consolidating the existing transit and multi-modal passenger transportation activities, and to facilitate the re-establishment of the King City train station ("Station") at First Street in the Historic Downtown.  On its behalf, a Multi-modal Transportation Center Development Strategy (the Strategy) has been prepared, which sets forth the actions the City should take to facilitate the funding and development of the Multi-modal Transportation Center (MMTC).  The MMTC concept includes re.establishing the historic 1886 passenger rail station “King’s Station” as part of the new Amtrak Coast Daylight train service and potential establishment of Coast Starlight service. A key recommendation contained in the Strategy specifically recommends that a detailed conceptual design of the Multi-Modal Transportation Center and its rail station component be prepared.  The following discussion summarizes the proposed MMTC Conceptual Design and the railroad track and Amtrak station facility improvements anticipated for enhanced operations of commuter and freight train operations. King City Multi-Modal Transportation Center The proposed King City Multi-Modal Transportation Center is located west of the existing tracks between the proposed Broadway crossing and San Lorenzo Creek. The proposed MMTC consists of the following components: 1. A passenger platform, a passenger drop-off and loading zone, a small station building with restrooms and storage rooms, and four passenger shelter canopies. 2. A parking lot for station patrons. 3. A staging area for Fort Hunter Liggett. 4. A bus stop accommodating Amtrak Thruway, Greyhound, and Monterey-Salinas Transit (MST) bus service, Pinnacles National Park shuttle service, taxi service, and bicycle facilities. 5. Improvements to First Street between Division Street and Broadway Street, including the introduction of street trees, center medians, bike lanes, parallel parking, as well as curb extensions, crosswalks and traffic signals at the intersections with Broadway Street, Bassett Street, and Pearl Street. 6. The De Anza Trail extension south of Division Street to San Lorenzo Creek. Train Station and Platform The proposed Station is serviced by a 1,200 feet long and 16 feet wide side platform, pursuant to Amtrak standards. The platform ends approximately 100 feet from the proposed Broadway crossing, on the north end, to allow for proper activation of the crossing warning equipment. On the south end, the platform ends clear of the proposed railroad signal and turnout. See Exhibit A for platform and track concept plan. The platform is proposed to be within UPRR right of way. The train platform is separated from the parking lots by a low fence with periodic breaks to allow access between the platform and the adjacent “kiss ‘n ride” drop-off zone and parking lot, which are described C:\Users\Juan\Documents\JGN\Images\Precedents\Building_Types\Train_Platfroms\King-City_Train_Depot.jpgC:\Users\Juan\Documents\JGN\Images\Precedents\Building_Types\Train_Platfroms\UK_Horsted_Keynes_Platform_01.jpgC:\Users\Juan\Documents\JGN\Images\Precedents\Building_Types\Train_Platfroms\Fishers_Indiana_Train_Platform_02.jpgbelow (see Exhibit B, Figure 1 and Figure 2). Four passenger shelter canopies are provided along the platform, two to the north of the station building and two to the south. The train station building, located near the midpoint of the platform, includes an enclosed bike room on the north end of the building, and at the south end a uni-sex restroom and two storage rooms, one for the Amtrak Station and the other for Fort Hunter Liggett. Between these enclosed rooms is a covered, somewhat wind sheltered but unenclosed waiting area with benches and Quik-Trak ticketing machines. As the station design is developed further, glass walls to further shelter passengers from wind without compromising visibility and security might be explored. The station building design is essentially a hybrid of Amtrak’s Category 3 Caretaker Station (which includes a fully enclosed interior passenger waiting area) and a Category 4 Shelter Station (which provides no enclosed rooms). A small plaza on the First Street side of the station building provides a welcoming place for passengers and visitors passing through the station. The train station building and train canopy designs are influenced by the design of the historic King City Train Depot and other train stations and platforms of approximately the same period (see below illustrative images). Further design guidance may be provided by the Architectural Guidelines of the City of King Historic Corridor Revitalization Plan.   Station Patron Parking Lot Off-street parking for Amtrak, Greyhound, and MST passengers is provided between Bassett Street and Pearl Street (see Exhibit B, Figure 1). The parking lot provides 59 parking spaces and is screened from First Street by street trees, a three-foot high wall, and landscaping. Access to the parking lot is provided from both Bassett Street and Pearl Street. A 12-foot wide “kiss ‘n ride” drop-off lane is provided along the entire length of the east side of the parking lot, adjacent to the platform. The “kiss ‘n ride” lane may also accommodate Amtrak Thruway buses which would enter from Pearl Street, pick-up and drop-off passengers, and then exit via Bassett Street where they may proceed to the north or to the south along First Street. The paving of the parking lot slopes upward from First Street toward the railroad at a grade of less than 4%, so that the platforms can be accessed without steps or ramps (see Exhibit B, Figure 5). Fort Hunter Liggett Staging Area A staging area for troop mobilizations to and from Fort Hunter Liggett is located to the south of the station building and south of Pearl Street. The staging area design – to be finalized by Fort Hunter Liggett – accommodates parking and queuing for multiple buses and/or vehicles to pick-up and deliver troops to and from Fort Hunter Liggett. The staging area is accessed from the south via a one-way 14- foot wide queue lane that begins at Division Street and runs parallel to First Street along its east side and partially within the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way; it may be necessary to acquire right-of-way from UPRR for this purpose. Buses and/or other vehicles would pick-up or drop-off troops along the platform or within the staging area and then exit via Pearl Street where they may proceed to the north or to the south along First Street. The queue lane is separated from First Street by street trees, landscaping, and a low split rail fence. Gates can be provided at the southern end of the queue lane and at the northern side of the staging area. Like the Station Patron Parking Lot, the Fort Hunter Liggett lot is screened from First Street by street trees, a three-foot high wall (or a higher, transparent fence if required by Fort Hunter Liggett), and landscaping. In addition, an existing Union Pacific structure located near the southeast corner of First Street and Pearl Street is retained. The paving of the staging area slopes upward from First Street toward the railroad at a grade of less than 4%, so that the platforms can be accessed without steps or ramps (see Exhibit B, Figure 6). Multi-modal Service Bus service for Amtrak Thruway Bus, Greyhound Bus, two MST fixed routes, and shuttle service to Pinnacles National Park, are accommodated in a bus turnout lane along the east side of First Street between Pearl Street and Bassett Street and, if needed, along the east side of First Street in front of the Fort Hinter Liggett staging area. Along the bus turnout lane are a wide sidewalk, shade trees, and two bus shelters. Amtrak Thruway buses may also pull into the station patron parking lot from Pearl Street, pick-up and drop-off passengers along the “kiss n’ ride” drop-off lane, and exist via Bassett Street to First Street. Taxis may queue along the east side of First Street in front of the Fort Hunter Liggett stating area. As mentioned above, an enclosed and secure bike room is included in the Train Station Building. First Street Improvements Street trees, curb extensions, crosswalks, center medians, and on-street parking are introduced along First Street to signal to motorists, pedestrians, and cyclists that they are entering Downtown and the station area. The existing curbs are retained – except for where curb extensions are introduced at Broadway Street, Bassett Street, and Pearl Street – along the entire west side of First Street between Division Street and Broadway and along the east side of First Street between Division Street and the south side of the Fort Hunter Liggett staging area. First Street between Broadway Street and Bassett Street (see Exhibit B, Figure 3). This section includes parallel parking on both sides of the street, one bike lane and one traffic lane in each direction, and a left turn lane/planted median. Sidewalks are urban in character with street trees planted in tree wells. In order to accommodate the parallel parking and a sidewalk of sufficient width along the east side of First Street, that curb will need to be reconstructed approximately 8 feet to the east of the existing curb and the right-of way width will need to be increased by a similar amount. First Street between Bassett Street and Pearl Street (see Exhibit B, Figure 4). This section consists of parallel parking on the west side of the street, a bus turnout lane on the east side of the street, one bike lane and one traffic lane in each direction, and a left turn lane/planted median. Sidewalks are urban in character with street trees planted in tree wells. Two bus shelters are provided next to the bus turnout lane. First Street south of Pearl Street to the curve (see Exhibit B, Figure 3). This section is the same as between Broadway Street and Bassett Street, with the parallel parking on the east side of the street accommodating taxi queuing. First Street between curve and Division Street (See Exhibit B, Figure 6). This section includes one bike lane and one traffic lane in each direction, a left turn lane/planted median, and a sidewalk with continuous street tree planter strips along the west side of the street. There is no on-street parking on this stretch of First Street. As indicated above, a dedicated queue lane for Fort Hunter Liggett vehicles – separated from First Street by landscaping, street trees, and a low split-rail fence – is provided along the east side of First Street. This queue lane can also serve as a segment of the De Anza Trail, connecting hikers directly to the new train station. First Street south of Division Street: (see Exhibit B, Figure 7) This segment would remain substantially as it is – with one travel lane in each direction – with the recommended addition of landscape and street trees to improve the image of this important gateway to Downtown King City. De Anza Trail The Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail – a 1,210-mile National Park Service trail that extends from Nogales on the U.S.-Mexico border in Arizona, through the California desert, and along the California coast to San Francisco – is accommodated along the west side of the railroad tracks and platform to the station. South of Division Street it consists of a 12-foot wide paved trail that is separated from First Street by landscaping, street trees, and a low split-rail fence; north of Division Street – and with the approval of Fort Hunter Liggett – it can share the Forth Hunt Liggett queue lane. During times when Fort Hunter Liggett is using the queue lane – or if the queue lane must be dedicated entirely to Fort Hunter Liggett – pedestrians and cyclists would cross First Street at Division Street and proceed along the sidewalk along the west side of First Street. A five-foot high chain link fence separates the De Anza Trail and the railroad right-of-way. UPRR does not allow trails on their right of way for safety reasons; acquisition of this portion of the right-of-way may be necessary. Track Realignment and Siding Extension In order to maintain concurrent operations of freight (UPRR) and passenger (Amtrak) trains, the proposed corridor improvements noted in Exhibit C are recommended. The proposed track corridor improvements include: • Installation of No 24 Power-Operated Turnout (North of Lorenzo Creek) • Track re-alignment of UPRR mainline and siding tracks near the proposed station • Siding extension (North of King City downtown area), with the new track on 20’ centers to the existing track. • Track re-alignment of main track and existing siding to establish 20’ track centers • New Universal Crossover (Power-Operated No. 24) • Installation of Power-Operated No 24 Turnout ( South of Spreckles Road) The proposed track improvements above allow for stopping Amtrak trains on the siding without impacting UPRR’s capacity. The design is intended to allow Amtrak and UPRR trains to meet and pass each other near the station or along the siding to the north without limiting or disrupting the service operations of either UPRR or Amtrak. The proposed turnouts and crossovers improve operations for both Amtrak and UPRR by provide access back and forth across proposed siding and mainline tracks at multiple locations. The proposed siding outside of the downtown area recreates the siding capacity UPRR might otherwise lose if the existing siding were transformed into a siding serving Amtrak trains. Phasing The Multi-Modal Transportation Center cannot proceed without the removal of the southern portion of the Meyer’s building that currently is built on the future Broadway right-of-way, the subsequent construction of the Broadway Street at-grade crossing, and the closure of the Pearl Street at-grade crossing. Phase 1 would include construction of the train platform, station building, and canopies, as well as the entryway and curb extensions at Pearl Street. The existing L.A. Hearne warehouse building on the northeast corner of First Street and Pearl Street – occupying most of the area intended for the station patron parking lot – could remain, with interim passenger parking accommodated in the area intended for future Fort Hunter Liggett staging operations or preferably in a temporary gravel parking lot between the new Broadway at-grade crossing and the existing L.A. Hearne building. If the First Street improvements could also be constructed in the phase, additional parking would be available along the east side of First Street. During Phase 2, the existing building L.A. Hearne building is removed and the station patron parking lot is built. At that time – if not before – the bus turnout lane and the Bassett Street entry and curb extensions would be constructed, along with the First Street improvements between Pearl Street and Broadway Street. Once the station patron parking lots between Pearl Street and Bassett Street is constructed, a commercial or mixed-use building can be built on the southeast corner of Broadway Street and First Street. During Phase 3, First Street south of Pearl Street is improved, the Fort Hunter Liggett queue lane is constructed, and the De Anza trail south of Division Street is built. In addition a crosswalk is introduced across First Street at Division Street so that De Anza Trail users can travel along the west side of First Street in the event that the Fort Hunter Liggett queue lane is in use or if Fort Hunter Liggett determines that the queues lane should be dedicated solely to Fort Hunter Liggett. Conclusion The Multi-Modal Transportation Center improvements described above and detailed in the Conceptual Drawings, attached as Exhibits, serve to consolidate the City’s transportation and transit activities at a central location in the downtown area. The concept was developed to serve various forms of transit and transportation, centered at the proposed Amtrak station, based on the Multimodal Transportation Center Development Strategy and information provided by the City. Coordination with UPRR and Amtrak will be necessary as plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center develop further. DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PROPOSED PLATFORM SCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' CROSSING No TBD BROADWAY ST (PROPOSED NEW AT-GRADE CROSSING) PROPOSED RAILROAD STATION 1200' PLATFORM PROPOSED PEARL ST CLOSURESARGENT TOWN PLANNING LO S A N G E L E S | B E R K E L E Y | A L B U Q U E RQUE Multi-Modal Transportation Center Parking Lot 0’ 5’ 10’ 15’ 20’ 40’ 50’ Scale: 1” = 10’ north 30 May 2014 New Urban Realty Advisors, Inc. King City, CA SARGENT TOWN PLANNING LO S A N G E L E S | B E R K E L E Y | A L B U Q U E RQUE Multi-Modal Transportation Center Parking Lot 0’ 5’ 10’ 15’ 20’ 40’ 50’ Scale: 1” = 10’ north 30 May 2014 New Urban Realty Advisors, Inc. King City, CA DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE LEFT SPRECKELS ROAD SCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' MATCH LINE - SEE TOP RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE BOTOM LEFT MATCH LINE - SEE TOP RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B2DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE LEFT SCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' MATCH LINE - SEE TOP RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE BOTOM LEFT MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B3 MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B1DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE LEFT SCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' MATCH LINE - SEE TOP RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE BOTOM LEFT MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B4 MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B2DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE LEFT SCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' MATCH LINE - SEE TOP RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE BOTOM LEFT MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B5 MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B3MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE LEFT SCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' MATCH LINE - SEE TOP RIGHT MATCH LINE - SEE BOTOM LEFT MATCH LINE - SEE MIDDLE RIGHTMATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B6 MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B4 DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND PROPOSED STATION PLATFORM SEE SHEET EX-ASCALE: IN FEET 0' 25' 50' 100' 150' MATCH LINE - SEE SHEET B5 DEC. 2013 1 Ada Parkway | Suite 200 | Irvine | California | 92618 www.railpros.com EXISTING TRACK PROPOSED TRACK REMOVE TRACK LEGEND1.0 PURPOSE AND NEED 1.1 INTRODUCTION This chapter describes the purpose of and need for conventional rail improvements on California’s existing Coast Corridor rail alignment, with a focus on the portion between Salinas and San Luis Obispo intended to enable expanded passenger rail service on the entire Coast Corridor (from San Francisco to Los Angeles). Figure 1-1 shows the entire length of the 470-mile-long Coast Corridor rail line. The Coast Corridor rail line consists of three segments: . Northern Segment - 77 miles from San Francisco to Gilroy, also known as the Caltrain Corridor . Middle Segment - 171 miles from Gilroy to San Luis Obispo - inclusive of the entirety of the project area considered in this document (Salinas - San Luis Obispo) . Southern Segment - 222 miles from San Luis Obispo to Los Angeles. Corresponds to the northern half of the Pacific Surfliner Corridor, also known as the LOSSAN Corridor1 1 The LOSSAN Corridor is a 351 mile long intercity and commuter rail corridor, stretching from San Diego in the south, up to San Luis Obispo County. Currently a programmatic EIS/EIR is underway for LOSSAN North (the segment of the LOSSAN Corridor between Los Angeles and San Luis Obispo.  The entire Coast Corridor spans eight counties: Los Angeles, Ventura, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, San Benito, Monterey, Santa Clara, San Mateo, and San Francisco. The Coast Corridor serves as a transportation link between Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area. This corridor is also served by air and highway systems. In terms of seat capacity, the most heavily traveled air route in the US connects Los Angeles International Airport and San Francisco International Airport. Additional heavily traveled air routes spanning the corridor serve the Oakland, San José, Burbank and Long Beach airports.2 2 Additional smaller airports exist along the Corridor; those listed are the 4 next largest regional airports. 3 The Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) certified an EIR for the Salinas Rail Extension project in 2006 and subsequently adopted a CEQA Addendum for the proposed extension of commuter rail service from San Jose to Salinas. These environmental documents identify proposed physical components improvements associated with the planned rail extension. Such components improvements would occur between San Jose and Salinas. At present, no NEPA documentation has been completed for this project, but would be required if federal funding were proposed to implement any of the proposed improvements. Interstate 5 (I-5) in the Central Valley – east of the corridor – serves as the main highway transportation system connecting the two dominant metropolitan regions at either end of the corridor. US Highway 101 (US 101) is the secondary north-south connector route between the Bay Area and Los Angeles regions. US Highway 1 (US 1) serves local access and recreational travel through Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties (particularly between Carmel on the north and Morro Bay to the south). In addition to these north-south routes, several state routes provide east-west access from the US 101 corridor to the Pacific Coast and or Central Valley (State Routes 68, 46, 41 and 198). While travel between the ends of the Coast Corridor today is facilitated predominantly by air and automobile, rail plays an increasingly important role in corridor mobility. Current passenger rail services in the corridor include: . Pacific Surfliner intercity service between San Luis Obispo and San Diego, operated by Amtrak and funded by Caltrans . Coast Starlight long distance service between Seattle and Los Angeles, operated and funded by Amtrak . Capitol Corridor intercity service between Placer and Santa Clara Counties, for which a planned service extension to Salinas (by 2019) has completed environmental review and is currently in design/engineering work3 . Metrolink Ventura County Line commuter rail service, sharing the same route as Pacific Surfliner trains between Los Angeles Union Station and Oxnard, with additional service to East Ventura Station in Ventura . Caltrain commuter rail service between San Francisco and Gilroy California High-Speed Rail (CA HSR) represents an emerging passenger rail service. By 2029, the system will run from San Francisco to the Los Angeles basin in under three hours at speeds capable of over 200 miles per hour. The system will eventually extend to Sacramento and San Diego, totaling 800 miles with up to 24 stations. While the bulk of the CA HSR alignment will traverse the San Joaquin Valley, the Coast Corridor as a whole will provide several connection points to the proposed high speed rail system. None of these potential Coast Corridor/CA HSR connection points are in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor that is the subject of this Program EIS/EIR. To the north, the closest major connection points would be Diridon Station in San José and the Gilroy Caltrain Station. To the south, the closest connection points would be Los Angeles Union Station and Burbank Airport. Corridor freight rail services are operated by Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR), providing service that roughly parallels the Interstate 5/US 101 corridors between the Bay Area and Los Angeles. Currently, the Coast Corridor carries low levels of freight traffic and is primarily considered a “secondary” or “relief” line to the much busier Central Valley line to the east. The Coast Corridor does not see any containerized traffic, but does carry bulk commodities such as fertilizer, lumber, aggregate, fuel, and coal. In addition, there is some activity related to repositioning empty rail cars from the Port of Oakland to Southern California to balance the inbound/outbound disparity of goods traffic. Coast Corridor freight rail service provides access to Port Hueneme in Ventura County, the only deep-water port between the adjacent Ports of Long Beach/Los Angeles and Oakland. Port-related cargo includes a mix of agricultural products and bulk commodities. As of 2014 2015, San Luis Obispo County is preparing the Final EIR for the considering a proposal to extend a rail spur to the Phillips 66 Nipomo Mesa oil refinery in unincorporated San Luis Obispo County so that crude oil could be delivered to the refinery via rail. The refinery is approximately 20 miles south of the City of San Luis Obispo and, thus, outside the corridor considered here. Up to 5 trains of 80 cars per week are anticipated. Trains are proposed to arrive at the refinery from points north (including Utah, North Dakota, and Canada) via the Coast Corridor. 1.2 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR IMPROVED INTERCITY RAIL TRANSPORTATION BETWEEN SALINAS AND SAN LUIS OBISPO 1.2.1 PURPOSE The purpose of the proposed rail improvements to the Coast Corridor is to enhance safety and develop a faster and more reliable passenger and freight rail system that provides added capacity in response to increased travel demand between Los Angeles and San Francisco and the intermediate cities along the US 101 corridor. The existing capacity of the Corridor’s transportation system is insufficient to meet existing and future demand, and the current and projected future system congestion will continue to result in reduced reliability, slower travel speeds, increased travel times, and deteriorated air quality. In addition to providing new direct passenger rail service, another purpose of the proposed rail improvements is to foster improved rail connectivity to the proposed CA HSR system. The greater Coast Corridor region from San Francisco to Los Angeles faces significant mobility challenges today, further detailed below. These challenges apply to the portion of the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo and are likely to continue in the future as continued growth in population, employment, and tourism activity is expected to generate increased travel demand. By 2040, statewide population is expected to grow substantially, further straining the existing transportation network. An effective rail system is necessary to meet the future mobility needs of residents, businesses, and visitors. In light of the transportation challenges listed above, Caltrans Division of Rail (DOR) and the Coast Rail Coordinating Council, a partnership of local transportation planning agencies, have identified a number of potential rail improvements to the Coast Corridor that are individually and collectively intended to improve mobility and reliability in this congested part of the state’s rail system. This slate of potential improvements includes individual projects that would contribute, individually and/or collectively, to creating a more reliable, safe, competitive, and attractive intercity travel option. The proposed increase in intercity passenger rail service would also allow flexibility for passengers who may prefer other means of transportation over automobiles. Such an increase in service would provide additional transportation system capacity that could relieve some of the projected near- and long-term demand on the highway system, potentially slowing the need to further expand highways and airports in this portion of the corridor, or reduce the scale of those expansions, including their associated cost and impacts on communities and the environment. Rail improvements would augment the highway system, creating an interconnected, multimodal solution, allowing for better mobility throughout the corridor. Improved rail infrastructure would contribute to the economic viability of the Coast Corridor and provide connectivity with local transit systems. An investment in rail improvements to the Coast Corridor would complement and support other transportation systems that currently or are planned to interface with the rail service. Like the Coast Corridor, the Pacific Surfliner Corridor and Capitol Corridor experience similar challenges regarding travel demand growth, congestion, and capacity constraints. Because many trips span the service of the Coast, Pacific Surfliner, and Capitol Corridors, improvements and upgrades would indirectly benefit all corridors. The Coast Corridor will would connect to the future CA HSR system at Burbank, Los Angeles, Gilroy, and San José, offering a feeder service to passengers originating in counties without proposed high-speed rail stations (such as Santa Cruz, Monterey, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara and Ventura). New communities will would gain access to rail services with the upgrades of existing stations and construction of new stations that are not currently served. In all, many communities between San Francisco and Los Angeles will would see improved transportation access. 1.2.2 NEED The need for the proposed action stems from a number of challenges facing transportation along the Coast Corridor, including but not limited to the following: . Constrained Travel Options – While the Coast Corridor is served by a transportation system that includes air, highway, and rail modes, system access and capacity is insufficient to meet future travel demand. Air access is limited for many residents because major airports are located at a substantial distance from the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the corridor. This portion of the corridor is served by a single major highway – US 101 – which experiences frequent congestion and travel delays, particularly in the San Francisco Bay Area and between Santa Barbara and Los Angeles. Both highway and rail operations in the corridor can be unduly affected by weather conditions in distant locations. For example, winter closures of I-5 at the Grapevine/Tejon Pass Area can divert auto traffic to US 101 because of its lower elevation passes which makes it much less subject to closure. Fires or accidents along the I-5 corridor can also result in substantial diversions to US 101. Amtrak offers a single daily Coast Starlight passenger service along the corridor. Trains are often delayed due to the rail system operating beyond its design capacity, which is primarily single-tracked between Salinas and San Luis Obispo with few sidings of the length necessary to allow passenger trains consistent priority over the typically much longer freight trains. . Anticipated Population Growth – The entire Coast Corridor region (San Francisco to Los Angeles) is home to over 15 million people. By 2040, this population is projected to grow by approximately 32 percent –an additional five million people.4 While most of the existing population and projected growth is along the four counties outside the current project’s study area (San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, and Los Angeles), the four “inner” counties (Monterey, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, and Ventura) serve a population of about two million people, projected to grow by 36 percent by the year 2040. . Significant Highway Congestion – While travel by automobile is expected to meet the majority of future travel demand, anticipated increases in automobile use will result in worsening of existing congestion. Congestion is particularly acute within the corridor’s urban areas and will worsen, making travel times unreliable. . Constrained Rail System Capacity – The existing Coast Starlight service is often fully booked during peak travel periods. Current passenger service is further constrained by a largely single-track railroad with few sidings of the length necessary to accommodate the longer freight trains. Consequently, passenger trains can experience substantial delays which would only worsen in the event of higher levels of freight traffic. . Aging Rail Infrastructure – Investment in corridor rail service has not kept pace with population and travel demand growth. Particularly within the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the corridor, many tracks, signals, and bridges have not been upgraded or improved in decades – and in some cases are over 100 years old. Aging infrastructure in need of maintenance or replacement can result in a decrease in operating safety and can impede trains from operating at top speeds. Aging infrastructure if not properly maintained can, therefore, translate to longer travel times and decrease the attractiveness of rail as a transportation option. 4 Caltrans Division of Rail. 2013b, p. 2-5  . Safety –Although rail travel is one of the safest modes of transportation in the nation (particularly relative to automobile travel). Rail traffic congestion and aging infrastructure in poor condition can be contributing factors in accidents. According to data compiled by Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), for fiscal year 2013, 34 percent of all train accidents nationwide were related to signal or track failures. Another 39 percent of all accidents during that same time period were related to human factors.5 And according to data compiled by FRA’s Office of Safety Analysis, a substantial number of accidents between 2005 and 2014 in Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties were related to track conditions (including derailments) and human factors (which relates to older signaling systems). Given the age and condition of the Coast Corridor infrastructure, whose signaling system is heavily dependent on human factors, there is substantial potential for accidents along this single-tracked corridor. Whether or not any of the Build Preferred Alternative components improvements move forward, corridor safety is expected to be enhanced by the implementation of Positive Train Control (PTC) by December 2015.6 This analysis assumes that given requirements set forth in the Rail Safety Improvement Act, the railroad owner (UPRR) will install and primarily fund the installation of PTC, with Amtrak sharing expenses for existing service. . Need to reduce Air Pollutant Emissions from Mobile Sources – Existing air quality in most coastal portions of California is considered to be poor to deteriorating. The affected air basins are in non-attainment with state standards for ozone and respirable particulate matter (PM10), both of which are heavily linked to mobile sources (cars and trucks). Reducing vehicle miles traveled (VMT) would have substantial benefits in reducing air pollutant emission and improving air quality in the region. Increasing rail travel capacity could reduce VMT and air pollutant emissions by shifting automobile travel to a more environmentally efficient mode.7 By fostering connectivity to the proposed CA HSR Project, rail improvements for the Coast Corridor will further help expand travel capacity in a more environmentally sensitive manner than via roadway expansion or “shorthop” air flights. 5 FRA, 2014, p. 2. 6 PTC systems are integrated command, control, communications, and information systems for controlling train movements with safety, security, precision, and efficiency. 7 FRA 2010. 1.3 ANTICIPATED ENVIRONMENTAL TIERING The San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) and FRA have mutually commenced this environmental review process to comply with federal and state laws, in particular the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 USC § 432, et seq.) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (California Public Resources Code § 21000, et seq.). NEPA requires federal agencies to prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) for proposed actions that have the potential to cause significant adverse environmental impacts. Because of possible FRA actions regarding potential rail system components improvements, FRA is the lead federal agency, working with SLOCOG as the lead state agency, for the environmental review required by NEPA and related statutes. FRA has further determined that the preparation of a program-level (Tier 1) EIS for the proposed rail components improvements is the appropriate NEPA document because of the comprehensive nature and scope of the corridor improvements proposed to date and the conceptual stage of planning and decision-making. Any future decisions related to advancing and ultimately constructing the proposed rail components improvements may constitute a federal action if federal funding or other federal permits are required and may thus require additional project-level environmental review under NEPA. Other federal agencies in addition to FRA may also rely on these project-level environmental reviews to support future decision making. In preparing this environmental document, FRA has coordinated with the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), the US Army, the US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), and the United States Forest Service (USFS). The proposed rail corridor components improvements are also subject to environmental review under CEQA. SLOCOG is both the project sponsor and the lead agency for purposes of CEQA compliance. SLOCOG has identified the Caltrans Division of Rail and Transportation Agency for Monterey County as key responsible agencies. SLOCOG determined that a program environmental impact report (EIR) would be the appropriate CEQA document for this project at this conceptual stage of planning and decision-making. No permits will be sought in this phase of environmental review. If the Build Alternative is selected at the conclusion of the Program EIS/EIR process, one or more of the physical improvements may be carried forward for detailed design and, if necessary, any project level review and permits will be sought at that time. If and when any of the physical components comprising the Preferred Alternative are carried forward for detailed design and project-level environmental review, permits would be sought at that time. This document is being prepared as a combined Program EIS/EIR for compliance with both NEPA and CEQA. The Program EIS/EIR will enable public agencies to evaluate the broad environmental effects of the proposed rail components improvements, evaluate the components improvements against the No Build Alternative, and determine which elements of the Build Alternative, if any, to carry forward. The required contents of a Program EIS/EIR are the same as those of a project-level document. However, the level of detail provided in the two types of documents is different. This program level document evaluated the potential environmental effects of the alternatives based on a general design of the proposed program. Future project-level environmental reviews will be based on detailed and sitespecific engineering and design data. A Program EIS/EIR is an informational document intended to analyze and to disclose to the public and to public decision-makers the environmental effects and benefits of a proposed program and its alternatives. The preparation, circulation, and review of a draft Program EIS/EIR provides for the evaluation of alternatives, including a No Build Alternative; the assessment of all significant/adverse environmental impacts; identification of the appropriate measures to mitigate potential impacts; and the opportunity for public input and comments to help inform the decision-making process. This program-level document has been prepared to allow the lead agencies to consider a future program of improvements to the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the Coast Corridor and to provide information to decide between the No Build Alternative and the Build Alternative. The Build Alternative may include some or all of the service and physical components improvements assessed in this environmental document. As full funding for all components improvements is not available at present, the most likely scenario is that proposed components improvements would be constructed in phases. Exact phasing is contingent on what components improvements are prioritized for detailed, construction-level design, funding availability, and further environmental review. As described in Chapter 3 of this document, this would include site-specific studies as well as and agency coordination, specific measures to avoid or minimize impacts, and an approved mitigation plan. FRA has authority to regulate the safety of railroads, including the proposed project, under 49 United States Code (USC) 20101 et seq. FRA also manages certain financial assistance programs for rail capital investments, for which this project may be eligible. 1.4 RELATIONSHIP TO CALIFORNIA HIGH-SPEED RAIL The California High-Speed Rail Authority (CHSRA), established in 1996, proposes to implement high-speed rail service that would run from the San Diego, Orange County, and Los Angeles metropolitan areas north through California’s Central Valley to the San Francisco Bay Area and Sacramento regions. FRA and the CHSRA have completed two Programmatic EIS/EIRs and project-level EIS/EIRs are underway for all segments of the proposed California High-Speed service, two of which has been completed and certified (Merced to Fresno and Fresno to Bakersfield). In addition, the CHSRA applied for and was selected to receive funding under FRA’s High-Speed Intercity Passenger Rail Program. The CHSRA and FRA have entered into a cooperative agreement and will complete the necessary project-level environmental analysis and preliminary engineering for all segments, as well as for the final design and construction of an operable segment in California’s Central Valley. These funds are being made available through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) and the Department of Transportation and Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Act of 2010. As shown in Figure 1-2, the proposed high-speed rail system will have multiple connections to the Coast Corridor, including major connection points at Los Angeles Union Station and Burbank Airport to the south and San Jose Diridon and San Francisco to the north (all of which are outside the Salinas to San Luis Obispo segment being studied here). However, these connection points, as well as a secondary connection in Gilroy, will enable travelers originating from the Central Coast region (Monterey, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, and Ventura counties) to gain rail access to the statewide high-speed rail system. The Coast Corridor can serve as a feeder to the high-speed rail system, particularly if the Coast Corridor sees increased passenger service. 1.5 ISSUES RAISED DURING SCOPING FRA initiated the formal scoping process by publishing a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare a Program EIS/EIR in the Federal Register on August 17, 2012. Table 1-1 summarizes when the two public scoping meetings were held as part of the public scoping process. Table 1-1 Public Scoping Meetings Salinas San Luis Obispo Transportation Agency for Monterey County San Luis Obispo City/County Library 55-B Plaza Circle 995 Palm Street August 28, 2012 August 29, 2012 3:30 p.m. – 6:00 p.m. 3:30 p.m. – 6:00 p.m These meetings provided an opportunity for the public and agencies to comment on the scope of environmental topics that will be analyzed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Approximately 25 members of the public attended the scoping meetings. Appendix A includes all comments received during scoping. Issues raised included questions about the viability of the project in terms of funding, concerns about the current use of some existing sidings as long-term “parking” or storage for train cars, anticipated operating characteristics and costs of expanded passenger service, and the range of physical components improvements to be contemplated in the environmental document. In addition to the formal scoping meetings, SLOCOG conducted outreach to potentially affected agencies and organizations in preparing this document. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, identifies agencies consulted.                     Page Intentionally Left Blank  2.0 ALTERNATIVES This chapter describes the alternatives being studied for the approximately 130- mile-long portion of the Coast Rail Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, California, as shown in Figure 2-1. This Program EIS/EIR evaluates two alternatives: a Build Alternative and a No Build Alternative. The Draft Program EIS/EIR evaluated two alternatives: a Build Alternative and a No Build Alternative. This Final Program EIS/EIR identifies a Preferred Alternative, which is a version of the Build Alternative modified to reduce impacts in response to public comments. The Build Alternative and the Preferred Alternative includes a list of potential physical components improvements to the railway and expanded passenger rail service (Coast Daylight). Some, all, or none of these improvements may eventually be constructed in order to facilitate the addition of up to 2 round trip Coast Daylight trains per day (4 train trips in all) between San Francisco and Los Angeles. The No Build Alternative assumes the continuation of existing passenger and freight operations in the corridor with no new physical components improvements. SLOCOG, TAMC, Caltrans DOR, and the Coast Rail Coordinating Committee (CRCC), along with FRA developed alternatives through an iterative process that incorporated design and analysis completed by other government agencies, independent planning and feasibility studies, and the scoping process. This chapter describes all alternatives considered by the above agencies, including those rejected from further consideration in the Program EIS/EIR and the basis for rejection. The Chapter is organized into the following sections: . Section 2.1 describes the background and planning context. . Section 2.2 includes a description of the alternatives that were considered but later eliminated and a description of the alternatives that were carried forward and included in this Program EIS/EIS analysis. The section also identifies the Preferred Alternative. 2.1 BACKGROUND AND PLANNING 2.1.1 CALIFORNIA PASSENGER RAIL SYSTEM 20-YEAR IMPROVEMENT PLAN In March 2001, the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) completed the California Passenger Rail System 20-Year Improvement Plan (Amtrak 20-Year Plan). The Amtrak 20-Year Plan identifies and prioritizes rail improvements within the statewide rail network intended to achieve the greatest return on investment in terms of improving capacity and reliability. The Amtrak 20-year plan lists specific improvements for each intercity rail corridor in California (i.e., Capitol Corridor, Pacific Surfliner, San Joaquin, and Coast Corridor). The Amtrak 20-Year Plan serves as a statewide rail blueprint that assists in guiding future planning and investment decisions in the near- and long-term by outlining the 20-year vision of each corridor, including service expansion, increased speeds, trip time, operational reliability, capacity, and ridership.1 1 National Railroad Passenger Corporation, 2001, pp. 1-4 Amtrak developed the improvements in close consultation with a Corridor-specific task force. The Corridor-specific task force provided recommendations that took a number of factors into account, including consideration of state-wide rail system objectives, benefits and trade-offs between economic and environmental factors, and key sensitivities of the entities that manage/operate corridor services. The Amtrak 20-Year Plan identifies a number of potential improvement opportunities in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the Coast Corridor. Although the Amtrak 20 Year-Plan was finalized in 2001, Caltrans considers the recommended improvement opportunities for the Coast Corridor to be valid because activity levels on this portion of the Coast Corridor have generally remained stable since 2001. The May 2013 Coast Corridor SDP lists a number of potential infrastructure improvements for the Coast Corridor, aggregated from the Amtrak 20-Year Plan and from UPRR’s recommendations, and is discussed in greater detail below. 2.1.2 UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD The UPRR owns the railroad infrastructure and operates most freight rail services along the Coast Corridor.2 These services include long-haul and local freight trains. 2 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, p. 1-1 3 Caltrans plans to update the SDP to be consistent with the Preferred Alternative identified in this Final Program EIS/EIR subsequent to publication of this document. Long-haul freight trains are those that travel across the entire Corridor or a significant portion of it. Local freight trains operate over short segments of the corridor, usually less than 50 miles. In a 2011 presentation to Caltrans and SLOCOG (included as Appendix B), UPRR identified several additional physical improvements it deemed necessary in order to accommodate the proposed Coast Daylight service, in addition to the proposed improvements identified in the Amtrak 20-Year Plan. UPRR has identified improvements for the entirety of the Coast Corridor, but this Program EIS/EIR addresses only those physical improvements that would be located between Salinas and San Luis Obispo were considered for inclusion in the Program EIS/EIR. 2.1.3 COAST CORRIDOR SERVICE DEVELOPMENT PLAN The May 2013 Coast Corridor SDP is an element of the California State Rail Plan (CSRP), which sets priorities and implementation strategies for improved intercity passenger rail service in the Coast Corridor. The SDP was originally published May 2013.3 The SDP is included as Appendix C. The SDP proposes improved and expanded rail services and rail infrastructure investments needed to support accommodate projected growth and future capacity constraints to mainline operations. Accordingly, the SDP considers rail capacity capital improvements, operational and maintenance costs, and ridership revenue. Caltrans DOR prepared the SDP in coordination with key stakeholders including FRA, Amtrak, CHSRA, UPRR, SLOCOG, and TAMC.  2.2 ALTERNATIVES The slate of physical and service components improvements comprising the Build and Preferred Alternatives (hereinafter referred to as the action alternatives) was developed from previous planning efforts, most notably the Amtrak 20-Year Plan and the SDP. In addition to the components improvements identified in these documents, the action alternatives Build Alternative include additional components improvements recommended by UPRR. Thus, the action alternatives consist Build Alternative consists of a comprehensive list of desired near, medium, and long-term improvements to rail service along the Coast Corridor in order to understand the potential environmental effects of the entire program of components improvements that have been contemplated in the Coast Corridor from more than 15 years of planning efforts. At this time, there is disagreement as to the extent of physical components improvements needed in order to accommodate increased passenger service (the reinstitution of the Coast Daylight) without unduly affecting freight rail services. Because this document is a program-level evaluation, the Build Alternative includes all action alternatives were intended to be generally exhaustive in incorporating the potential physical components improvements that were considered earlier in the previous planning documents and studies. SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR assume that further discussion, separate from this environmental document and the NEPA/CEQA processes in general, will be required with the railroad owner, UPRR, to ultimately determine which, if any, components improvements that make up the Build Alternative must be in place before passenger service is expanded. 2.2.1 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BUT DISMISSED FROM FURTHER ANALYSIS The list of proposed physical components improvements comprising the Build Alternative action alternatives originated from several previous planning efforts, discussed above in Section 2.1. These earlier efforts, including the Amtrak 20-Year Plan and the SDP, took into account factors of overall feasibility and constructability, but were intended to yield a comprehensive list of near, medium, and long-term improvements to rail service along the Coast Corridor. These earlier studies excluded alternative modes of transportation along the Coast Corridor, such as express buses or increased air travel. Such alternative modes would be inconsistent with the purpose and need for the proposed action (improving intercity rail through the Salinas to San Luis Obispo area, ultimately providing improved passenger rail service between San Francisco and Los Angeles) and are accordingly not given further consideration in this document. These earlier planning efforts also suggested maintaining conventional rail systems and discounted major changes in locomotive technology, such as electrification or conversion of the Coast Corridor to a high-speed rail corridor. Earlier efforts also screened out the potential inclusion of additional passenger rail stations beyond those proposed for Soledad and King City. Soledad and King City are the two largest cities in population along the corridor not currently served by passenger rail. The SDP summarized that adequate population levels, complementary surrounding land uses, and links to other transportation modes are all necessary features for any proposed station to function properly. Communities along the corridor not meeting these criteria would not be considered for new passenger stations. Other communities along the corridor were assumed to have insufficient population to support a passenger station or were in relatively close proximity to existing or proposed rail stations. For instance, Atascadero has a population close to that of Paso Robles (about 29,000 people as of 2013). However, Atascadero is roughly equidistant (about 15 miles) from existing stations in Paso Robles and San Luis Obispo. Many of the proposed components improvements are conceptual in nature. For instance, no design or engineering data is available for the proposed curve realignments and second mainline elements of the Build Alternative action alternatives other than the limits of these components improvements based on mileposts. Exact locations on the ground for these and similar Build Alternative action alternatives’ components improvements have not been determined at this time. However, in order to evaluate the general environmental effects of these elements of the action alternatives, certain assumptions regarding the potential physical footprint of various proposed components improvements was necessary. For example, assumptions made for the purposes of this environmental document included that no new curve realignment, siding extension, or new siding would result in a new crossing of the Salinas River or US 101. 2.2.2 NO BUILD ALTERNATIVE The No Build Alternative offers a basis for comparison with the Build Alternative action alternatives and is included per CEQA Guidelines §15126.6. The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing passenger and freight rail operations upon the existing physical components of the railroad system. Existing passenger operations consist of one daily roundtrip of the Coast Starlight passenger train through the Salinas to San Luis Obispo area. Existing freight operations consist of two daily long-haul trains (80 cars or more) traveling all or the vast majority of the distance between Salinas and San Luis Obispo to points beyond. Local trains are assumed to travel 50 miles or less of the distance between Salinas and San Luis Obispo with origins or destinations within the corridor. The SDP estimates that an average of two long-haul freight trains traverse the corridor daily (year 2012) and estimates this number to increase to four daily trains by 2020. The SDP does not estimate the number of local trains. For the purposes of this Program EIS/EIR whose purpose and need is limited to potential physical rail system improvements and expansion of passenger rail service, the No Build Alternative would include known (funded) rail improvement projects set to take place between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Only two such rail improvements projects are slated for the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor. TAMC is proposing a series of rail capital improvements, including station, platform, rail yard, and parking improvements between San José and Salinas so that commuter rail service can be extended to Salinas. TAMC has also designated funding for the operating costs of this commuter rail extension. The No Build Alternative also assumes the future installation of a PTC along the Coast Corridor in compliance with requirements of the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008. According to FRA, PTC systems are integrated command, control, communications, and information systems that allow for control of train movement in order to improve safety, security, precision, and efficiency.4 PTC sends up-to-date visual and audible information to train crew members about areas where the train needs to be slowed or stopped. This information includes the status of approaching signals, the position of approaching switches, speed limits at approaching curves and other reduced-speed locations, speed restrictions at approaching crossings and speed restrictions at areas where work is being performed on or near the tracks. PTC communicates with the train’s onboard computer, allowing it to audibly warn the engineer and display the train’s safe braking distance based on the train’s speed, length, width, weight, and the grade and curvature of the track. If the engineer does not respond to the ample audible warning and screen display, the onboard computer will activate the brakes and safely stop the train.5 4 https://www.fra.dot.gov/Page/P0152, accessed August 8, 2014. 5 http://www.metrolinktrains.com/agency/page/title/ptc, accessed August 8, 2014. PTC systems vary widely in complexity and sophistication based on the level of automation and functionality being implemented. Most components of a PTC system are internal to a train, including communications equipment and connections to a train’s braking system. Some PTC systems, however, also include external elements, such as antennas and modifications to signaling equipment. Since PTC is a requirement for existing operations, this document assumes funding of PTC would be borne by the owner of the railroad, with potential cost-sharing by Amtrak. 2.2.3 BUILD ALTERNATIVE The Build Alternative consists of a program of potential physical components improvements, signal upgrades, equipment purchases, and operational changes intended to meet the identified purpose and need. Trains cannot operate at maximum allowable speeds in mixed-use settings (passenger and freight) if the underlying infrastructure is substandard. UPRR has made and continues to make infrastructure upgrades consistent with FRA standards. However, the existing Coast Corridor is characterized by single-track operations, short sidings (or no sidings), manually-thrown switches, and an inefficient (automatic block system or ABS) signaling system, each of which individually and all of which collectively result in lower travel speeds and substandard operating conditions. Various components of the Build Alternative are intended to remedy these conditions and otherwise better enable both existing and proposed future passenger and freight rail services to utilize the corridor. Table 2-2 identifies the several corridor-wide proposed components improvements. Table 2-3 lists specific components improvements by location. Both corridor-wide and specific area components improvements are described below. . Corridor-wide Track Upgrades: Track improvements intended to improve performance are proposed along the entire rail alignment between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Proposed corridor-wide track upgrades include replacement of existing rail with continuous welded rail (CWR), track structure realignment, track resurfacing, tie replacement, replacing or upgrading ballasting, rehabilitation of existing sidings, and replacement of existing turnouts. CWR reduces the number of joints and thus enables trains to move more quickly and with less friction and noise. Figure 2-2 illustrates a typical rail section. Rail ties lay perpendicular to the railroad tracks to keep tracks upright and in place. The rail ties sit on top of ballast, composed of coarse gravel or rock to provide stability to the railway and balance the weight load of the train. Most rail ties currently used in North America are made of timber materials that degrade over time and decrease the maximum potential speed of trains. Proposed rail tie improvements would replace warped timber rail ties with continuously welded metal rail ties. Subgrade stabilization and ballasting is also proposed along the corridor to improve strength and integrity. Both track upgrades and curve realignments (further described below) have the potential to increase maximum allowable train speeds. Table 2-4, at the end of this section, identifies existing maximum and potential future maximum speeds along existing sections of the rail alignment and in proposed curve realignment areas. (No other physical components improvements within the Build Alternative have the potential to result in an increase in maximum speed). . Signal System Upgrades: Rail signal systems communicate vital safety information to train conductors. Conductors rely on clear signals regarding maximum allowable speeds, when to slow down or stop, track obstructions, and the like. The existing signal scheme is a mix of older and newer systems. The remainder of the corridor is under an ABS that uses train warrant control (TWC). This requires a dispatcher to communicate directly with each train crew before the train can obtain authority to proceed through “blocks.” At the end of each block, the train must wait for permission to go forward once again. CTC is also managed centrally, but uses remotely controlled signals and switches. CTC reduces the amount of time trains must spend waiting for dispatching instructions. Caltrans estimates that about 40 percent of all delays experienced in the Coast Corridor are to the result of signaling issues.6 6 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, p. 9-7 The Build Alternative proposes that CTC be introduced in two locations: 1) from Salinas to Soledad, via the extension of an existing CTC system to the north and 2) an “island” CTC over 27 miles of the railroad between San Lucas and Bradley (both unincorporated communities in southern Monterey County). Equipment associated with train control systems is largely on-board trains and at dispatching stations. Related physical equipment that would have a footprint on the ground include signals that would be placed at yet undefined control points along the railroad. These signals can be mounted on poles approximately 10 to 12 feet in height or on overhead structures. Figure 2-3 shows some typical signaling equipment associated with CTC. CTC also requires direct wired connections to train switches. Such connections are usually underground and trenched. (The Build Alternative includes a number of new powered switches; see below for details).  . New powered switches: Powered switches are mechanical devices within a railroad track that guide trains from one track to another - such as a siding, or a second mainline. Switching mechanisms include sensors placed on rails/ties and control boxes placed immediately alongside the railroad within the railroad ROW. Powered switches are generally considered an upgrade over manually thrown switches insofar as they facilitate the speed of transition from one track to another. Figure 2-4 shows a photo of a typical powered switch. . Siding extensions/new siding: A siding is a short section of track adjacent to a main track used for passing and dwelling purposes in single track systems. At present, the sidings in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the corridor are generally one mile in length or shorter. Freight trains often exceed one mile in length and, thus, sometimes cannot be accommodated in the existing sidings. The proposed siding extensions are generally located within the railroad ROW and would lengthen existing sidings so that each would be at least 10,000 feet in length. Figure 2-5 shows a diagram of a typical siding extension. While the SDP identifies the sidings to be extended, no entity (neither SLOCOG, Caltrans, or UPRR) has to date prepared any precise layout plans. Given the general north-to-south orientation of the existing railroad alignment and the parallel sidings, sidings could potentially be extended on either their northern or southern ends. Therefore, for the purposes of this environmental review, extensions to existing sidings are contemplated on both their northern and southern ends. The extension lengths are such that either the northern or southern extension area would provide sufficient space to increase the siding to the requisite 10,000 feet in length. (To this end, impacts on siding length/acreage reported in this document are likely overstated). In addition to several siding extensions, the Build Alternative includes entirely new sidings at Chalone Creek near Soledad (MP 147 to MP 149), San Lucas (MP 167.2 to MP 190.4), and Wellsona (MP 205 to MP 207.6). . New second mainline: A second main track is contemplated from South Santa Margarita toward the Cuesta Grade (MP 233 to MP 235), terminating just north of the first tunnel between Cuesta Grade and San Luis Obispo. At present, train speeds through this portion are some of the slowest for the entire alignment - ranging between 25 and 35 mph. Slow speeds here are owing to considered to be related to track curvature and deficient train control systems. A second mainline here would significantly expand mobility. For the purposes of this environmental review, it is assumed that the second mainline would consist of a standard track running within a new 60 foot ROW immediately adjacent to the existing rail alignment. . Curve or other track realignments: The existing Coast Corridor alignment includes some sharp curves that require trains to slow down to reduce the risk of derailment. The Build Alternative contemplates several curve realignments intended to reduce track curvature. If constructed, curve realignments would allow for increased speeds, enhance safety, and reduce trip times. Such realignments typically result in less wear and tear to tracks, reducing the frequency of repair or maintenance. Most of the curve realignments were initially identified as part of the Amtrak 20-Year Plan. These descriptions identified milepost-to-milepost starts and stops of curve realignment areas and further contemplated the potential for each curve realignment to reduce track curvature. For the purposes of this programmatic evaluation, highly generalized and spatially generous curve realignment areas have been identified to enable a better understanding of the type and magnitude of any environmental effects that may result from their construction. This provides a conservative basis for this environmental analysis. Curve realignments would in effect relocate the entire railroad ROW some distance from the existing ROW. The average width of the railroad ROW is about 60 feet. For the purposes of this evaluation, a curve realignment area width of 100 feet has been assumed along with surrounding buffer areas of 200 feet on each side. Given the relative narrowness of the existing ROW, every curve realignment would require the acquisition of land not currently in the railroad ROW or in transportation use. In many cases, a single named curve realignment would consist of multiple, discontinuous sections of realigned track, but are collectively considered part of the same curve realignment. It might also be possible to convert currently existing tracks into sidings or to formally abandon existing tracks. This analysis takes a conservative approach and assumes new curve realignments requiring new infrastructure and potentially, new ROW. Figure 2-6 shows a diagram of a typical curve realignment. . New passenger stations: There are currently three passenger train stations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo: 1) Salinas, 2) Paso Robles, and 3) San Luis Obispo. The Salinas Redevelopment Agency acquired the Salinas Station in 1998, the City of Paso Robles owns the Paso Robles Station, and UPRR owns the San Luis Obispo Station. However, Amtrak is the sole passenger rail user at all of these stations.  The Build Alternative contemplates two new passenger stations in Soledad and King City. The existing Coast Corridor alignment passes through the downtowns of each city. Currently, Coast Starlight passenger trains travel through the downtown areas of each city but do not stop. The proposed Coast Daylight train service may include stops in one or both of these cities. As detailed below, in anticipation of the possible future Coast Daylight service, both Soledad and King City have set forth conceptual station area plans as elements of larger plans for the revitalization of their downtown areas. In the event one or both stations are selected for construction, it is anticipated that each city would be responsible for land acquisition and station planning. . Soledad Station: The City of Soledad’s proposed Downtown Specific Plan includes a conceptual diagram for a station area along Front and Main Streets. The station area comprises approximately 1.9 acres of the full 200-acre Specific Plan area. The station would consist of a passenger boarding platform, ticket depot, bus pull outs, and pedestrian and bike connections. The station is distinct and independent from the proposed development of Soledad’s so-called “Railroad Parcels,” a 12- acre area on the west or opposite side of the tracks from the majority of the city. The Downtown Specific Plan contemplates the possible future buildout of these parcels, as well as one or more new crossings of the railroad to improve access. However, construction and operation of a Soledad passenger rail station is not contingent on the development of or construction on the “Railroad Parcels.” . King City Station: The City of King has developed a conceptual plan for a new passenger station near the intersection of First Street and Broadway in downtown King City. The city included a conceptual plan for a multi-modal transportation center in two recent plans: the First Street Corridor Master Plan and the Historic Corridor Revitalization Plan. The city’s conceptual plans call for a 1,200-foot train platform alongside the existing tracks, a station building for ticket sales and restrooms, onstreet bus pullout areas, and an off-street parking lot. In the longer term, the City of King may implement a third plan, the “Downtown Addition Plan” which would extend Broadway from its current terminus at First Street across both the street and the railroad tracks, effectively creating a new at-grade crossing area. This extension would require the demolition of an existing warehouse building. However, the development of a King City station and the implementation of the Downtown Addition Plan are separate projects with independent utility. . Grade Crossing and Mobility Improvements: Table 2-1 identifies all existing atgrade railroad crossings of public, paved roads between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. In addition to these crossings of public, paved roads, the 130-mile stretch of the existing railroad crosses scores of mainly private dirt roads/driveways. Safety provisions at existing crossings of public, paved roads range from passive warning devices (static wood/metal signage) to more active warning devices (e.g., flashing lights and gates). Table 2-1 Existing At-Grade Crossings of Public, Paved Roads between Salinas and San Luis Obispo Stations Monterey County San Luis Obispo County John Street, Salinas 14th Street, San Miguel Harkins Road, Salinas 11th Street, San Miguel Somavia Road, between Salinas and Chualar Wellsona Road, Paso Robles Main Street, Chualar 21st Street, Paso Robles Foletta Road, Gonzales 16th Street, Paso Robles Katherine Street, Gonzales 13th Street, Paso Robles Gonzales River Road, Gonzales 12th Street, Paso Robles Lanini Road, Gonzales 10th Street, Paso Robles Elm Avenue/G16, Greenfield Marquita Avenue, Templeton Spreckels Road, north of King City Phillips Road, Templeton East San Antonio Drive, King City Chico Road, Atascadero Lyons Street Bitterwater Road, King City Curbaril Avenue, Atascadero East Pearl Street, King City Halcon Road, Atascadero Lonoak Road, King City Santa Clara Road, Atascadero Wildhorse Road, south of King City Asuncion Road, Atascadero Hare Canyon Road, south of Bradley State Route 58/Estrada Avenue, Santa Margarita  Encina Avenue, Santa Margarita  Wilhelmina Avenue, Santa Margarita  Foothill Boulevard, San Luis Obispo  Marsh Street, San Luis Obispo Source: Circlepoint 2015 The MP 172 curve realignments has the potential to create a single new atgrade crossing of an existing public, paved road at Cattlemen Road, about 10 miles south of King City. The Build Alternative would install as-yet undefined signal, signage, and other similar improvements at as-yet unspecified existing at-grade crossings (potentially public and private). . Coast Daylight Service and new rolling stock: The SDP contemplates the reinstitution of Coast Daylight passenger rail service, which was discontinued in 1971. The SDP proposes initial service of 1 daily southbound and 1 daily northbound train between San Francisco and Los Angeles, requiring 2 full trainsets for 2020 service and 2 additional trainsets for 2040 service. Preliminary proposed schedules indicate trains leaving San Francisco and Los Angeles in the early morning (approximately 7 a.m.), and arriving at their respective destinations between 6:30 p.m. and 7 p.m. Future expanded service would see the addition of 1 additional daily southbound and northbound departure. This expanded service would be overnight, leaving San Francisco or Los Angeles in the early evening and arriving at the respective destination early the following morning. Coast Daylight trains would stop at existing Amtrak stations in the Coast Corridor and potentially also at proposed new stations identified in the SDP (Soledad and King City). The proposed Coast Daylight service would require the acquisition of locomotives and passenger railcars. The Build Alternative components improvements are analyzed at the existing level of conceptual design appropriate for a program-level review. Detailed designs for curve realignments, new sidings/siding extensions, or a proposed segment of a second mainline have not yet been developed. The SDP identified milepost areas in which such components improvements would occur but no further specific area of disturbance. In order to meaningfully analyze such features in this Program EIS/EIR, analysts identified appropriate buffer areas for review where such components improvements would be developed within the noted mileposts. In doing so, this analysis avoided creating any new curve realignments or siding extensions that would have either resulted in the need for a new crossing of the Salinas River or substantial excavation or tunneling. Creating new river crossings or new tunnels would represent infeasible development costs and additional environmental impacts. Therefore, the areas identified for curve realignments and sidings discussed in this analysis omit any river crossing/tunneling/major excavation scenarios given likely constraints related to technical feasibility, environmental impact, and cost. Table 2-2 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components Improvements – Corridor-Wide Location Component Improvement Type Corridor-Wide Extend Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) from Salinas to Soledad; install island CTC from San Lucas to Bradley Corridor-Wide Grade crossing safety and mobility enhancements Corridor-Wide Tie replacement, installation of continuous welded rail (CWR), ballasting, track surfacing, track structure realignment, rehab existing Salinas and Soledad sidings; replace turnouts. Corridor-Wide Rolling stock purchases Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b Table 2-3 Summary of Build Alternative Proposed Components Improvements – Site Specific Mile Post (MP) Location Component Improvement Type Approximate Length/Acreage of Proposed Component Improvement 1 Monterey County    114.9 Existing Salinas siding New powered switch NA 121 - 123.4 Spence New siding 1.89 miles; 19.3 acres 130 Existing Gonzales siding New powered switch NA 140 Existing Soledad siding New powered switch NA 140 Soledad New station 1.9 acres 143.9 -151.3 Harlem to Metz Curve/track realignment 3.43 miles; 41.6 acres 147 – 149 Chalone Creek New siding 1.89 miles 14.9 acres 154.3 - 154.7 Coburn Curve/track realignment 2.27 miles; 27.5 acres 160 Existing King City siding Siding extension 2.41 miles; 25.1 acres 160.3 King City New station 3.4 acres 160.3 Existing King City siding New powered switch NA 165 South of King City Curve/track realignment 1.06 miles; 12.8 acres Mile Post (MP) Location Component Improvement Type Approximate Length/Acreage of Proposed Component Improvement 1 167.2 -190.74 San Lucas New siding 1.89 miles; 22.9 acres 172 South of San Lucas Curve/track realignment 2.07 miles; 25.1 acres 177 -179 Existing San Ardo siding New powered switch NA 181.5 – 191 Getty to Bradley Curve/track realignment 1.50 miles; 18.2 acres 190 -192 Existing Bradley siding Siding extension 2.68 miles; 50.2 acres 190 -192 Bradley New powered switch NA San Luis Obispo County  200 – 207 McKay to Wellsona Curve/track realignment 2.06 miles; 24.9 acres 200 -203 Existing McKay Siding New powered switch NA 205 - 207.6 Wellsona New siding 1.89 miles; 22.8 acres 208.3 - 216.7 Wellsona to Paso Robles Curve/track realignment 0.43 miles; 5.2 acres 217 - 218.59 Templeton Siding extensions 2.78 miles; 46.8 acres 218-223 Templeton to Henry Curve/track realignment 0.47 miles; 5.7 acres 229-232 Henry to Santa Margarita Curve/track realignment 2.19 miles; 26.5 acres 226 - 228 Existing Santa Margarita siding New powered switch NA 233 - 235.62 Cuesta New second mainline 1.89 miles; 25.8 acres Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b 1 Reported acreages and lengths of proposed siding extensions take a conservative approach and likely overstate actual values. As described in Subsection 2.2.2 above, no specific siding extension plans have been developed to date. All existing sidings could potentially be extended to 10,000 feet by adding track at either their north or south ends. For a more conservative basis of analysis, siding extensions areas developed for this EIS/EIR contemplate extensions on both north and south ends. For example, an existing 5,000 foot long siding could be extended to 10,000 feet with a 5,000 foot addition on either end. The siding extensions examined here include both extensions. Therefore, generally speaking, likely siding extension lengths and acreages could be computed by dividing in half the numbers reported in the table above. Table 2-4 Potential Maximum Speed Increases for Build Alternative Components Build Alternative Components Current Maximum Speed Range (mph) Future Maximum Speed Range (mph) Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 60-70 90 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 35-40 and 60-70 60 and 90 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 35-40 and 60-70 60 and 60-70 (no change to latter zone) Coburn Curve Realignments 35-40 60 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 60-70 90 MP 165 Curve Realignment 60-70 90 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 40-55 and 60-70 70 and 90 MP 172 Track Realignment 60-70 90 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 40-55 70 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 40-55 70 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 40-55 70 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 40-55 70 Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 40-55 70 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 40-55 70 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 35 and 40-55 70 Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignments 35 and 40-55 No Change Cuesta Second Main Track 20-30 No Change Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 20-30 No Change Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b  Phasing Potential The SDP provides rough cost estimates for all of the proposed physical improvements. The full list of improvements and equipment purchases are estimated to cost several hundred millions of dollars to design and implement. The SDP notes that the project partners have approximately $26 million available from State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) programming and funds received through Proposition 1B. Additionally, there is $25 million in Proposition 1B funding dedicated to the Coast Daylight, totaling $51 million in funding. As full funding for all improvements is not available at present, the most likely scenario is that proposed improvements would be constructed in phases. Exact phasing is contingent on what improvements are prioritized for further design and development, funding availability, and as warranted, any further environmental review. 2.2.4 PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE Based upon the analysis in this Program EIS/EIR and public comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR have identified the Build Alternative (with modifications) as the Preferred Alternative for potential future implementation on the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Preferred Alternative would result in safety and transportation capacity components that would not be accomplished under the No Build Alternative. In addition to better meeting the purpose and need, the Preferred Alternative would also provide environmental benefits in the form of improved travel conditions, including mobility, safety, reliability, travel times, and connectivity and accessibility; and reduced air pollutant emissions along the existing rail corridor. The Preferred Alternative modifies the Build Alternative as follows: . Modifications requested by the City of King to siding extension and station area . Exclusion of four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County . Inclusion of “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita This Final Program EIS/EIR includes analysis of the potential environmental effects of the action alternatives and the No Build Alternative.  2.2.4.1 Modifications Requested by City of King The City of King provided extensive written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, advising that the City had updated its draft plans for the City of King siding extension and passenger station. These updates were not known to FRA, SLOCOG, Caltrans, or TAMC until the City of King provided its comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Siding Extension Precise plans for new sidings or siding extensions were not available prior to publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Accordingly, the analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR made reasonable assumptions regarding the extension of the existing sidings. It was assumed that the sidings extensions would result in sidings of about 10,000 feet in length (generally, enough to accommodate a freight train) and that this length could potentially be achieved by adding all additional track to either the northern or southern end of each siding. As a result, the Draft Program EIS/EIR examined a larger total area for the sidings than would have been necessary to achieve the desired 10,000 foot length. The existing City of King siding extends from MP 159.19 to MP 160.64 and is about 1.45 miles in length (7,650 feet). The Draft Program EIS/EIR analyzed two siding extensions (between MP 158.5 and 159.19 to the north and MP 160.64 and 161.19 to the south). Either the northern or southern extension would have been sufficient to provide a 10,000 foot long siding. Since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR and as noted in the City’s comments, the City of King engaged a railroad engineer (RailPros) to consider modifications to rail facilities in the area. The RailPros study (prepared for and endorsed by the City of King in its comment letter) proposed that the siding extension be greater than 10,000 feet in length and that the extension would most feasibly be achieved by extending the siding on the north side exclusively. The RailPros study considered extending the siding from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length. According to the Railpros study, the updated siding extension design is intended to allow passenger rail and freight rail trains to pass each other along the King City siding without limiting or disrupting the service operations for either party. The larger proposed siding length outside of the downtown area is anticipated to better accommodate freight rail size. After review, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR concur that the City’s proposed revision to the siding extension would avoid or reduce the intensity of several potential environmental effects of the previously identified siding extension discussed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The revised siding extension would avoid the need for a new creek crossing and would also avoid including any portion of the siding extension within a 100-year flood plain. The revised siding would also be located outside of populated areas, so would have reduced potential for any community effects compared to the previously identified siding extension. Because the City’s proposed modification to the siding extension is reasonable and is likely to reduce the impacts of the project, FRA, SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR agree that it should be included and analyzed in the Final Program EIS/EIR. Passenger Station The analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR used conceptual plans from adopted City documents that proposed a station site near the intersection of First Street and Broadway. Operating details were assumed to include a station building, parking, and bus pullout areas. However, as noted in the City’s comments, the RailPros plan shows a slightly smaller passenger station in generally the same part of downtown, with similar features, plus an area set aside for military personnel transfers. The RailPros plan also calls for the relocation of an existing at-grade crossing (at Pearl Street) to move about one block northwest to Broadway Street.7 Such plans reflect the most detailed layout and design of the station and are included in this Program EIS/EIR as the best available data. 7 Such a relocation would be subject to an approval by the California Public Utilities Commission. 2.2.4.2 Exclusion of Curve Realignments in San Luis Obispo County During the public hearing on the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR at SLOCOG’s board meeting on January 7, 2015, many of the comments from members of the public focused on several of curve realignments proposed for various locations in San Luis Obispo County. Commenters stated that the curve realignments had the potential to result in property acquisitions, split of parcels, and have other adverse environmental and socioeconomic effects. In response to the public comments, the SLOCOG Board adopted a motion requesting SLOCOG staff drop from further consideration the following curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County: 1. McKay/Wellsona 2. Wellsona/Paso Robles 3. Templeton/Henry 4. Henry/Santa Margarita Excluding these curve realignments would not substantially compromise future ontime performance of passenger and freight trains and would reduce the potential impacts identified by the public. As documented in the SDP, an acceptably high rate of on-time performance in near and long-term horizon years was shown to be achievable with the inclusion of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita -- which corresponds roughly to the same area in which the excluded curve realignments were contemplated. Excluding the curve realignments would also eliminate or substantially reduce several potential adverse environmental effects, including: . Land Use: Without these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require fewer property acquisitions than the Build Alternative. . Agricultural Lands: Without the curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require substantially less conversion of agricultural lands than the Build Alternative. . Air Quality: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, construction-related emissions (fugitive dust, diesel equipment) would be lower in the Preferred Alternative than in the Build Alternative. . Noise and Vibration: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would generally retain the existing railroad alignment through San Luis Obispo County. In the Build Alternative, the curve realignments would have altered the railroad alignment relative to the location of sensitive receptors. 2.2.4.3 Inclusion of “Island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita In the Draft Program EIS/EIR, Build Alternative components were carried forward from the SDP. As noted above, the Build Alternative specified the extension of CTC from Salinas to Soledad, as well as installation of an “island” of CTC from San Lucas to Bradley in southern Monterey County. Analysis in the SDP contemplated an additional “island” of CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). The SDP noted that this 27-mile section of the corridor currently uses TWC, a non-automated signaling system. The four sidings in this section of the corridor using TWC were presumed to contribute substantially to delays that impair overall on time performance of both passenger and freight trains.  However, this particular island CTC was not explicitly referenced in the SDP’s list of Build Alternative components. Notwithstanding, SLOCOG and Caltrans DOR have clarified that it was each agency’s intent that this island CTC area be included in the Build Alternative. Since the Draft Program EIS/EIR did not specifically include this improvement, this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the island CTC as part of the Preferred Alternative.                    Page Intentionally Left Blank  3.0 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT, ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES INTRODUCTION This purpose of this chapter is to describe existing environmental conditions in the areas that would be affected by the No Build Alternative, and the Build Alternative, and the Preferred Alternative; evaluate potential environmental impacts associated with the No Build Alternative and with constructing and operating the Build Alternative and the Preferred Alternative, and present potential program-level mitigation strategies to avoid or reduce those impacts. The analysis presented in this chapter addresses the general effects of a program of actions that would make up the proposed Coast Corridor Improvements project. This chapter describes the general differences in potential environmental consequences between the No Build Alternative, the Build Alternative and the Preferred Alternative. The description of environmental issues among various components will help to guide possible future design refinements and/or projectlevel studies. This chapter will provides the technical environmental analysis for each resource topic. Each section in this chapter will discusses the existing conditions of the study area, with regard to the resource topic, and how each alternative would potentially affect the environment. Much of this analysis was facilitated through the use of geographic information system (GIS) spatial data. Appendix D (and Appendix 1) is a compilation of the data gathered for this analysis. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination and Appendix 2, include the comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. HOW THIS CHAPTER IS ORGANIZED This chapter is divided into several sections, roughly grouped by resource topic. The resource topic groups are as follows . Transportation and related topics (air quality, noise and vibration, energy) . Human Environment (land use and community impacts, visual resources, agricultural resources, public utilities and services, hazardous materials/wastes) . Cultural Resources (historic architecture, archaeological resources, paleontological resources) . Natural Environment (geology and soils, mineral resources, hydrology and water resources, and biological resources) Each resource topic discussion will contains the following information: . Regulatory Requirements . An overview of relevant federal, state, and local policies within the study area. . Methods of Evaluation . An identification of the proposed study area relative to the resource, approaches taken to evaluate each resource topic, and potential issues that may occur. . Affected Environment . Background information and discussion of the existing conditions within the study area defined for the resource topic analysis. . Environmental Consequences . A comparison of the existing conditions of the study area to the Build Alternative action alternatives and No Build Alternative. For each resource topic, the environmental consequences section analyzes potential effects that might occur if any of the Build Alternative or Preferred Alternative components improvements are implemented. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) section 1508.8 defines “effects” as the following: Direct effects: are caused by the action and occur at the same time and place. Such direct effects, which may potentially result from construction and/or operation of the Build Alternative improvements action alternative components, are discussed for each resource topic.  Indirect effects: are caused by the action and are later in time or farther removed in distance, but are still reasonably foreseeable. Such indirect effects are discussed, as necessary, for the resource topics with pertinent indirect effects. . Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation Strategies . These sections will outline potential measures to fully avoid, minimize the effects of, or compensate for substantial environmental impacts. The discussion will includes design and construction practices that would be developed into project-specific mitigation measures to avoid or minimize impacts as project-level plans are advanced in subsequent stages. . Subsequent Analysis . This discussion will defines studies that would be required for project-level environmental documentation in the future.              Page Intentionally Left Blank 3.1 TRAFFIC AND TRAVEL This section describes existing traffic and circulation conditions in the project corridor and identifies the potential transportation impacts related to the No Build and the Build Alternative action alternatives. This section also describes the potential traffic impacts associated with the Preferred Alternative in comparison with the No Build and Build Alternatives. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. Several of the City of King’s comments relate to Section 3.1 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Of these, only comment A-3.11 requires a change to the text of the Affected Environment section. Other comments from the City of King related to transportation are addressed in this section in the analysis of the Preferred Alternative and in Section 3.15, Cumulative Impacts Analysis. 3.1.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.1.1.1 Federal Federal Railroad Administration The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) was created by the Department of Transportation Act of 1966, and is concerned with intermodal transportation. FRA issues, implements, and enforces safety regulations, selects investments to develop the rail network across the country, and conducts research and technology development. The Rail Passenger Service Act of 1970 relieved private rail carriers of their obligation to provide passenger rail service and led to the creation of Amtrak in 1971. The Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 (PRIIA) created new railroad investment programs and reauthorized Amtrak for five years. The FRA’s Office of Railroad Policy and Development provides financial assistance, quantitative analysis, environmental research, project reviews, research and development, technical assistance, and supports development of intercity passenger rail policy. 3.1.1.2 State Caltrans Division of Rail The Caltrans DOR manages and coordinates statewide intercity passenger rail service (Amtrak) that helps to improve the state’s air quality and reduce highway congestion and fuel consumption. Caltrans contracts with National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) to provide daily operation and maintenance of Amtrak California service. 3.1.1.3 Local Monterey County General Plan The General Plan for Monterey County includes goals aimed at optimizing the use of the County’s transportation facilities, achieving acceptable level of service for County roads and intersections, promoting viable transportation alternatives, and encouraging a rail system that offers efficient and economical transport of people and commodities. City of Salinas General Plan The Salinas General Plan contains goals related to providing and maintaining a circulation system that meets the current and future needs of the community, working with other local and regional agencies to develop regional transit and transportation systems, and promoting an efficient public transportation network. City of Soledad General Plan The Soledad General Plan outlines goals aimed at providing a safe and efficient circulation network to meet the present and future needs of the city, encouraging the use of alternate forms of transportation, and specifically calling for coordination with appropriate agencies to establish a train station in the city. City of King (King City) General Plan The city’s General Plan contains goals and policies calling to provide an integrated transportation system that adequately serves residential, commercial, industrial, and recreational uses, as well as public facilities and agricultural properties. Goals also pertain to providing a public street and highway system that accommodates existing and projected traffic volumes within the city. Additionally, as described in Section 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design ((MMTC) 2014). San Luis Obispo County General Plan The San Luis Obispo County General Plan outlines goal and objectives related to transportation and circulation including integrating land use and transportation planning so that necessary transportation facilities and services can be provided to accommodate urban and rural development, coordinating the transportation system between different travel modes, and designing a transportation system that provides for safe travel within attainable and feasible economic and technical means. City of El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles) General Plan The Paso Robles General Plan contains goals and policies to establish a safe, balanced, efficient, and multimodal circulation system, focusing on the mobility of people, and preserving the city’s small town character and quality of life, as well as to promote regional, interstate, and intrastate rail service. City of San Luis Obispo General Plan Transportation-related goals outlined in the San Luis Obispo General Plan include encouraging transit development, expansion, coordination, and aggressive marketing throughout San Luis Obispo County to serve a broader range of local and regional transportation needs including commuter service. Additionally, policies supporting increased availability of rail service for travel within the county, state, and among states are encouraged. 3.1.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION The analysis herein methodology used to identify potential transportation impacts was based in part on Appendix G of the CEQA Guidelines and FRA’s Environmental Procedures. Construction-Period Effects To assess potential road traffic and transportation environmental impacts, construction-related roadway traffic impacts resulting from implementation of the various improvements components were analyzed qualitatively. Effects on Rail Operations To determine potential environmental impacts related to railway transportation and travel, ridership projections and operations modeling (RailOPS) from the Service Development Plan (SDP) were used.1 The SDP modeled multiple scenarios for three planning horizon years: 2012 (Existing Year), 2020, and 2040. The modeling includes all rail activity in the Corridor, including freight, intercity passenger rail and commuter rail. For the year 2020, the SDP considered whether adding projected passenger and freight volumes and any physical components improvements to the Year 2020 Base Case network could result in achievement of the on-time performance (OTP) goal of 87 percent for all passenger train services. 1 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b. 2 Class 1 railroads are regulated by the Surface Transportation Board and are subject to the Uniform System of Accounts (49CFR1201) and are defined as carriers with annual carrier operating revenues of $433.2 million or more (2011). 3 Long-haul refers to freight trains traveling across the entire Corridor or a significant portion of it. Effects on Local Roadways Roadway impacts resulting from operation of the various physical components improvements and new service were qualitatively assessed. The analysis included a review of aerial mapping to determine if any new at-grade crossings would be created. Local traffic impacts resulting from new station areas were assessed qualitatively based on projected ridership and conditions of local roadways providing access to the stations. 3.1.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 3.1.3.1 Existing Freight Rail Freight rail operations in California facilitate the State’s participation in both domestic and international markets. The freight railroad system in California is an expansive network comprised of Class 1 railroads,2 short line railroads, and switching yards and terminals covering over 5,000 miles across the State. Freight rail volume within the project area is relatively low as the Coast Corridor is considered a “secondary” or “relief” line to the busier Central Valley line to the east. The UPRR owns the railroad and operates freight trains along the Coast Corridor. The 2013 Coast Corridor SDP reports that 2 daily long-haul3 freight trains run daily between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Freight service in the Corridor does not follow a particular schedule, and service throughout the network is not uniform. Train length, railcar type, and number of locomotives vary depending on the type(s) of cargo in transit and distance to be traveled. Outside the Salinas-San Luis Obispo portion being studied here, local freight trains also operate over shorter (less than 50 mile) segments of the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Jose and between Oxnard and Los Angeles.4,5 4 County of San Luis Obispo, 2013, p. 4.12-8 5 Refer to Section 3.16, Cumulative Impacts, for a discussion of future freight operations on the corridor. 6 Amtrak, 2012b 3.1.3.2 Existing Passenger Rail Amtrak operates the Coast Starlight passenger train service, which runs between Seattle and Los Angeles, and carried just over 454,000 passengers in 2012.6 The Coast Starlight runs through the project area on the Coast Corridor. This long-haul passenger train is intended to serve the needs of interstate leisure/recreational travelers. With limited service and relatively few stops between the San Francisco Bay Area and Los Angeles, the Coast Starlight does not provide a widely practical service for intrastate commuters (refer to Table 3.1-4 for a station arrival schedule). As of 2014, the Coast Starlight provides one daily round trip between Seattle and Los Angeles. The Coast Starlight makes stops at three stations along the study corridor: Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo. Table 3.1-1 shows year 2012 ridership (boardings and alightings) for each station, as well as average daily ridership. It should be noted that San Luis Obispo is the northern terminus of Amtrak’s Pacific Surfliner route, which provides twice-daily plus weekend service to Los Angeles Union Station and continuing service to San Diego. Ridership reported in Table 3.1-1 for San Luis Obispo thus comprises both Coast Starlight and Pacific Surfliner passengers. Table 3.1-1 Coast Corridor Passenger Station Ridership, 2012 Station Location Annual Riders Average Riders per Day Salinas 11 Station Place 19,879 54.5 Paso Robles 800 Pine Street 11,728 32.1 San Luis Obispoa 1011 Railroad Avenue 108,439a 297.1a Total  140,046 383.7 a Ridership includes Pacific Surfliner and Coast Starlight passengers Source: Amtrak, 2012a Track capacity constraints and shared-track conflicts exist between passenger and freight trains. According to the SDP, over 90 percent of the Corridor has only singletrack operations resulting in constrained passing capabilities. As a result, long freight trains must be given priority over passenger trains when the two meet because most existing sidings are not long enough to accommodate the typically longer length of freight trains.7 Additionally, all trains, but particularly passenger trains, can “stack” at either end of single-track sections, resulting in delays and thus reducing the attractiveness of passenger rail as a travel mode choice. 7 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, p. 4-2 3.1.3.3 Adjacent Roadways The roadway network in the vicinity of the Corridor is comprised of a US highway, state routes, country routes, and local arterial streets. The majority of the Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo runs parallel to US Highway 101 (US 101) and the Salinas River. A general overview of the regional transportation network for this section of the Corridor is provided below. US 101 US 101 connects northwestern Washington, Oregon, and California, terminating in Los Angeles. In central California, US 101 is primarily oriented in a north-south direction, and transitions to a rough east-west orientation between Santa Barbara and Los Angeles. It is used most heavily in urban areas (between San Francisco and San Jose and between Santa Barbara and Los Angeles) where it serves as a primary travel corridor. US 101 also provides secondary highway access between San Francisco and Los Angeles (the primary route being Interstate 5). Table 3.1-2 shows US 101 traffic count data at relevant locations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. US 101 roughly parallels the Coast Corridor from Salinas to the Cuesta Grade north of San Luis Obispo. In this area, the railroad tracks are as close as immediately adjacent to the US 101 right of way and as distant as 2-3 miles away. From Salinas to Soledad, US 101 is to the immediate west of the Coast Corridor. At Soledad, the tracks pass underneath US 101. From Soledad south to the Cuesta Grade, US 101 is to the east of the Coast Corridor. North of the peak of the Cuesta Grade, US 101 overpasses the Coast Corridor as the railroad transitions to the west of the freeway.  Table 3.1-2 Traffic and Vehicle Data for US 101 (2012) Region Location Average Daily Traffic Volume Peak Hour Vehicle Trips Peak Month Vehicle Trips Salinas Junction Route 183 73,900 6,700 82,000 East Market Street 73,900 6,700 82,000 Soledad North Soledad 38,200 4,250 47,000 King City First Street 16,500 1,600 20,200 Paso Robles 13th Street 33,300 3,300 36,000 Cuesta Grade Junction Route 58 East, Santa Margarita 43,800 4,800 47,000 San Luis Obispo California Blvd 47,400 4,700 52,000 Junction Route 1 North 60,300 5,900 68,000 Junction Route 227 67,100 6,700 72,000 Source: Caltrans Traffic Operations Division, 2013 Other Roads Local circulation in the vicinity of the Coast Corridor is provided by several local roads that parallel and traverse the railway. In Monterey County these roads are primarily two lane rural roads. The railway also crosses several driveways, and other private and agricultural unpaved roads along this portion of the alignment. Within cities and near station areas much of the travel is provided by paved arterial public roadways. In San Luis Obispo County much of the circulation is provided by paved city streets as agricultural uses decline in this portion of the rail corridor. Near Santa Margarita, the railroad crosses under US 101 into the Cuesta Grade. Through the grade, the railroad diverges from US 101 and travels through several tunnels in the mountains before descending into the City of San Luis Obispo.  At-Grade Crossings As noted in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, the existing railroad crosses a number of existing local roads at-grade. As shown in the Table 3.1-3, the existing railway crosses public roads in about 36 locations along the Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Through Monterey County there are 16 paved, public road atgrade crossings, and there are 20 in San Luis Obispo County. A spectrum of safety provisions are in place at these crossings, ranging from passive warning devices, active warning devices, crossbucks (x-shaped signs), pavement markings, and flashing lights and gates. The railway also crosses several driveways, and other private and agricultural unpaved roads along the alignment. Safety provisions at these locations are typically minimal, consisting mainly of crossbucks and pavement markings, although many such private crossings are entirely unsigned. Table 3.1-3 Summary of Existing Paved Public Road At-Grade Crossings Monterey County San Luis Obispo County John Street, Salinas 14th Street, San Miguel Harkins Road, Salinas 11th Street, San Miguel Somavia Road, between Salinas and Chualar Wellsona Road, Paso Robles Main Street, Chualar 21st Street, Paso Robles Foletta Road, Gonzales 16th Street, Paso Robles Katherine Street, Gonzales 13th Street, Paso Robles Gonzales River Road, Gonzales 12th Street, Paso Robles Lanini Road, Gonzales 10th Street, Paso Robles Elm Avenue/G16, Greenfield Marquita Avenue, Templeton Spreckels Road, north of King City Phillips Road, Templeton East San Antonio Drive, King City Chico Road, Atascadero Lyons Street Bitterwater Road, King City Curbaril Avenue, Atascadero East Pearl Street, King City Halcon Road, Atascadero Lonoak Road, King City Santa Clara Road, Atascadero Wildhorse Road, south of King City Asuncion Road, Atascadero Monterey County San Luis Obispo County Hare Canyon Road, south of Bradley State Route 58/Estrada Avenue, Santa Margarita  Encina Avenue, Santa Margarita  Wilhelmina Avenue, Santa Margarita  Foothill Boulevard, San Luis Obispo  Marsh Street, San Luis Obispo Source: Circlepoint, 2013 Station Areas Salinas The Salinas train station is located at 11 Station Place, 1 block north of Market Street. The station has a ticket office, enclosed waiting room, payphone, and restrooms. Currently, the station is served by Coast Starlight trains; in 2012, average annual passenger boardings and alightings in Salinas was 8,760, which translates to 54 average daily riders.8 Amtrak Thruway buses provide connections at the Salinas train station to the Coast Starlight, Capitol Corridor and Pacific Surfliner Routes, as well as to other intermediate destinations. 8 Amtrak, 2012a 9 LOS is a qualitative measure of traffic levels. LOS A-C indicates free-flowing traffic with little delay, LOD D-E indicates congestion, and LOS F indicates gridlock and severe delay. Automobile access to the station is primarily through two major arterial roadways - West Market Street/State Route 183 (SR 183) and North Main Street/SR 183. West Market Street/SR 183 is a two-way four lane road that travels east/west through central Salinas. North Main Street is oriented in the north to south direction and starts in North Salinas. North Main Street intersects with US 101 at the north of the city and in the center as a four-lane road, then splits off into a couplet of two oneway two-lane roads under the railway until it intersects with West Market Street. From there, it splits into two one-way, three-lane arterials, northbound Monterey Street and southbound Salinas Street. Several two-lane residential collector streets terminate at West Market and North Main Streets. The Salinas General Plan (2002) reports that North Main Street operates at an unacceptable level of service (LOS)9 E  between Market Street and Bernal Drive, adjacent to the train station. The stopcontrolled station approach at Station Place and West Market Street operates at LOS F during peak commute hours.10 Salinas strives to maintain LOS D or better for all intersections and roadways. 10 TAMC, 2006, p. 3 11 TAMC, 2004 Bus service is provided at the Salinas Transit Center, about a quarter mile south of the train station (110 Salinas Street). Access is primarily provided by Salinas Street, Lincoln Avenue, Central Avenue, and West Gabilan Street, all major arterial roadways. Salinas Street is a three-lane one-way street traveling in the north-south direction. Lincoln Avenue, Central Avenue, and West Gabilan Street are all two-lane local roadways. Monterey-Salinas Transit (MST) buses serve the transit center, operating a number of routes throughout Monterey County. Greyhound, located just one block south of the Salinas Transit Center at 19 West Gabilan Street, offers service to major cities including San Francisco, Santa Barbara, and Los Angeles. New train stations are planned in Pajaro/Watsonville and Castroville to expand the Capitol Corridor passenger rail service 68 miles from San Jose to Salinas. The service is initially expected to offer 2 daily round trips during commute periods, increasing to up to six round trips per day as demand warrants. Projected annual ridership is approximately 150,000 passengers. Capital improvements would include a train layover facility, intermodal bus facility, commuter parking in Salinas, and new platforms and parking facilities at Pajaro/Watsonville and Castroville.11 Soledad At present, there is no passenger train station in Soledad, although passenger (as well as freight) trains pass through the railroad alignment that traverses the city. The Build Alternative includes the construction of a new passenger station in Soledad. The City of Soledad has adopted a Downtown Specific Plan, which anticipates Coast Daylight passenger service and includes a conceptual plan for a train station to be located on Front Street, at the end of Main Street. Both Front Street and Main Street are two-lane major arterial roadways in Soledad. The traffic report prepared for the City of Soledad Downtown Specific Plan (2012) reported that the Front Street and Main Street intersection operates at LOS B.  The station area comprises approximately 1.9 acres of the larger 200-acre Specific Plan area. The Specific Plan indicates that the station is to consist of a passenger boarding platform, ticket depot, bus pull outs, and pedestrian and bike connections. The station is envisioned as a multimodal facility, serving both train and bus passengers.12 12 City of Soledad, 2012,Chapter 3 13 City of King, 2013, pp. 154-156 14 City of El Paso de Robles, 2006 King City At present there is no passenger train station in King City, although both freight and passenger trains pass through the city on the existing alignment. The Build Alternative includes the construction of a new passenger station in King City. King City has adopted a conceptual plan for a new passenger station near the intersection of First Street and Broadway in downtown King City. King City also included a conceptual plan for a multi-modal transportation center in two recent plans: the First Street Corridor Master Plan and the Historic Corridor Revitalization Plan. The conceptual plans included in the cited documents call for a 1,200-foot train platform alongside the existing tracks, a station building for ticket sales and restrooms, on-street bus pullout areas, and an off-street parking lot.13 Primary entry to the station would be via First Street, a two-lane north-south arterial roadway that is also provides connection to US 101. The King City General Plan Final EIR reports that existing traffic operations for First Street and for the US 101/First Street Interchange are at acceptable levels. Paso Robles The Paso Robles Intermodal Station is located within the North County Transit Center near the south end of the city at 800 Pine Street. Access to the station is provided via 8th Street and Pine Street, both two lane local streets, which intersect at the station. 8th and 9th Streets are the primary linkages to Spring Street, a four lane arterial thoroughfare that is the main local north-south road on the west side of the city. Traffic volumes on these local streets are generally low. Intersections within the vicinity of the station, namely 13th Street at Paso Robles Street and Spring Street at 1st Street/Niblick Road, have been identified to operate at acceptable LOS levels.14  The station consists of an enclosed waiting and ticketing area, a platform, restroom facilities, and parking/waiting areas. Several buses serve the station, including Amtrak Thruway, Greyhound, Paso Express, San Luis Obispo Regional Transportation Authority (SLORTA), and MST. Station ridership (boarding or alighting from Coast Starlight trains) averages about 11,680 annual riders (about 32 riders per day).15 15 Amtrak, 2012a 16 City of El Paso de Robles, 2009, p. 24 17 Amtrak, 2014 18 City of San Luis Obispo, 2006, p. 2-53 Currently there are 10 short-term and 10 long-term parking spacing onsite, as well as taxi service and car rental opportunities nearby. Bicycle access is available along local roadways in the area. Vine Street, located three blocks east of Spring Street, is designated a Class II bikeway, and several Class II and III bikeways are proposed that would lead directly to the existing Amtrak station.16 San Luis Obispo The Amtrak Station in San Luis Obispo is located at 1011 Railroad Avenue, along the southeast edge of the downtown area. It has an enclosed waiting area, ticket office, self-service ticket kiosk, and restrooms. Access to the station is primarily via Santa Barbara Avenue/Osos Street, Leff Street, and/or Santa Rosa Street. Santa Rosa Street and Osos Street both terminate at Railroad Avenue, providing direct access to the station and associated parking areas. The station provides 20 short-term and 30 long-term parking spaces.17 Santa Barbara Street/Osos Street operates at an acceptable LOS between Broad Street and Higuera Street.18 The station is served by San Luis Obispo Transit, Greyhound, and Amtrak Thruway buses. Car rental and taxi services are available within one mile of the station, as well as an extensive network of Class I, II, and III bicycle routes. 3.1.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES The programs of proposed physical components improvements and service changes comprising the Build Alternative action alternatives are specifically intended to expand passenger rail services from existing levels while accommodating existing and anticipated future freight operations. The components of the Build Alternative action alternatives would have varying potential to result in significant environmental effects related to transportation and travel. 3.1.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service. Rail Operations Under the No Build Alternative, passenger rail operations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo would not change. Coast Starlight service would continue through the corridor. Pacific Surfliner service to Southern California would continue to originate/terminate in San Luis Obispo. Freight traffic would likely increase from 2 daily long-haul trains to 4 daily long-haul trains by year 2020, per the SDP. The only physical component improvement expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of positive train control (PTC) along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. Therefore, there would be no substantial change to rail operations in the Corridor. Roadway Operations Under the No Build Alternative, the existing number of passenger trains traveling the Corridor would increase from existing passenger service. No construction would occur to construct proposed physical components improvements. Given that rail service would not be expanded under the No Build Alternative, traffic and transit activity near existing stations would not be expected to increase substantially. The No Build Alternative would not create any new at-grade crossings. 3.1.4.2 Build Alternative Operations Modeling Chapter 9 of the SDP sets forth an estimated timetable for proposed Coast Daylight Service at both existing and proposed stations in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo project corridor. Table 3.1-1 below summarizes the existing Starlight and projected Daylight station arrival times for the year 2020 and Table 3.1-5 summarizes the existing Starlight and projected Daylight station arrival times for the year 2040. Table 3.1-4 Existing and Projected Station Arrivals for 2020 Station Southbound  Northbound   Starlight Daylight Starlight Daylight Salinas 11:48am 10:11am 6:47pm 3:31pm Soledad NA 10:52am NA 3:05pm King City NA 11:17am NA 2:40pm Paso Robles 1:30pm 12:12pm 4:45pm 1:20pm San Luis Obispo 3:20pm 1:49pm 3:43pm 12:07pm Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, Chapter 9. Table 3.1-5 Existing and Projected Station Arrivals for 2040 Station Southbound  Northbound   Starlight Daylight Starlight Daylight Salinas 11:48am 10:11am, 12:10am 6:17pm 3:31pm, 3:26am Soledad NA 10:52am, 12:51am NA 3:05pm, 3:00am King City NA 11:17am, 1:11am NA 2:40pm, 2:39am Paso Robles 1:50pm 12:12pm, 2:06am 4:15pm 1:20pm, 1:35am San Luis Obispo 3:20pm 1:49pm, 3:43am 3:13pm 12:07pm, 12:30am Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, Chapter 9. As shown in the tables above, the proposed new Coast Daylight service would initially reach existing and proposed stations in the Salinas-San Luis Obispo corridor during midday hours - between 10 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., with at least a 90-minute gap between the arrival of southbound and northbound Coast Daylight trains at any single station. Year 2040 expanded service would continue to reach existing and proposed stations in the Salinas-San Luis Obispo Corridor during midday hours - between 10 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., and would offer an additional service reaching existing and proposed stations in the Corridor between 12 a.m. and 4 a.m. Rail Operations Construction-Period Effects The Build Alternative includes the potential future construction of one or more physical components improvements to facilitate expanded passenger service without disruption of freight services. Construction of any of the proposed physical components improvements would have potential to temporarily disrupt freight and passenger rail, but such effects would be temporary. Some of the physical improvements Build Alternative components are more substantial than others (such as track realignments, siding extensions, etc.) and could limit activity on the railway during the constructionperiod. These potential disruptions would be coordinated with UPRR and Coast Starlight service to reduce service delays to the maximum extent feasible. Operational Effects The SDP attempted a “sensitivity” analysis by testing to see how future performance would be affected by the inclusion of a single improvement Build Alternative component, namely the introduction of CTC in the 27-mile stretch of rail alignment from the Santa Margarita siding (milepost 229.6) to the McKay siding (milepost 202.3). As reflected in Master Response 3 in Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, it was the intention of Caltrans DOR and SLOCOG to include island CTC as part of the Build Alternative. However, island CTC was inadvertently omitted from the list of Build Alternative components included in the Draft Program EIS/EIR, even though it was referenced in Chapters 9 and 14 of the SDP. The Preferred Alternative identified in this Final EIS/EIR clarifies the intention to include island CTC as a physical component SLOCOG and Caltrans would like to carry forward. And as noted in the SDP (and further described below), the inclusion of island CTC alone - without any other physical components - was found to allow for on-time passenger and freight train performance in two horizon year scenarios. Given the conceptual nature of many of the other Build Alternative components, no detailed modeling of their operational effects on on-time performance were evaluated at this stage. Therefore, the rail operations analysis of the Build Alternative continues to assume the introduction of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita as a means of demonstrating the efficacy of this component. It is possible that one or more other components in the Build Alternative, if carried forward, would result in equally robust train performance, but such scenarios are speculative at this point given that the plans have not been developed beyond the conceptual stage and, thus, cannot be expected to generate verifiable modeling results. Within this 27 mile portion of the alignment The 27 miles between McKay and Santa Margarita are currently single-tracked and have four existing sidings that use subpar signaling infrastructure. As many of the delays within the Corridor are attributable to subpar signaling infrastructure, implementing CTC between Santa Margarita and McKay, a single tracked region with four siding locations, could significantly improve on-time-performance (OTP).19 Therefore, the SDP modeled performance based on implementing island CTC through this area. 19 Rail OPS considers a train on-time to a station if it arrives within five minutes of its scheduled arrival time. OTP values in actual operations are likely to be lower than model results due to random realworld delays, such as passenger loading, medical emergencies, severe weather, etc. OTP values of less than 100 percent in model results are typically due to train interference effects only. 20 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, p. 9-19. 21 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, pp. 9-26, 9-27 The model was run with Year 2020 freight and passenger rail service and the results indicated 100 percent OTP for both Coast Starlight and Coast Daylight at each new existing and proposed station on the Corridor.20 The SDP determined that with the implementation of CTC alone, existing freight and existing passenger train movement would not be significantly affected by the introduction of expanded passenger service. Moreover, the SDP found that the installation of “island” CTC would substantially improve OTP throughout this region. It should be noted that in real-world operations, OTP levels could be somewhat lower due to random and unforeseeable events, such as severe weather and passenger emergencies. For the year 2040, the SDP considered the impact of projected passenger and freight volumes and any physical components improvements to the Year 2040 Base Case network necessary to reach the OTP goal of 87 percent for all passenger train services operating in 2040. The Year 2040 Base Case model infrastructure is identical to the Year 2020 Base Case model as no necessary physical components improvements were identified for the Year 2020 aside from the implementation of CTC between Santa Margarita and McKay in the Existing Year. The model was run with Year 2040 freight and passenger rail traffic and yielded 100 percent OTP for the Coast Starlight at each station on the Corridor. The Coast Daylight had 100 percent OTP for each station except San Jose, which yielded 96 percent OTP.21 As described in the results for the Year 2020, the level of traffic in Year 2040 results in sufficient network capacity to schedule trains such that there is little to no impact from train interference effects, resulting in high OTP levels. In real world operations, OTP levels may be slightly lower due to random and unforeseeable events. Roadway Operations Construction-Period Effects Construction of the proposed improvements under the Build Alternative components would result in temporary impacts to local roadways in the form of increased construction traffic (e.g., equipment, trucks, and materials hauling, etc.). Construction of the new passenger stations and curve realignments would require more significant construction activities that could result in increased traffic impacts to surrounding roadways in the way form of delays and detours. These construction-related period impacts would vary by location, however, given that because the duration of construction period of most for most physical components improvements would be relatively short, and the impacts of construction on local roadways would not be considered significant. Operational Effects Existing and Proposed Stations With the introduction of new Coast Daylight trains, ridership is anticipated to increase, which may result in increased traffic and transit demand near existing and proposed station areas. Table 3.1-6 illustrates the estimated ridership between San Jose and San Luis Obispo for 2020 and 2040.22 22 These ridership forecasts have not been disaggregated to distinguish between passengers traveling south to San Luis Obispo and those traveling north through San Luis Obispo. Those passengers travelling from the south are included in these ridership forecasts. Table 3.1-6 Existing, 2020, and 2040 Ridership Forecasts Service Existing Year 2012 (Seattle to Los Angeles) Forecast Year 2020 (San Jose to San Luis Obispo) Forecast Year 2040 (San Jose to San Luis Obispo) Annual Ridership Coast Daylight N/A 124,000 274,000 Coast Starlight 454,4431 105,000 150,000 SUBTOTAL 454,443 229,000 424,000 1 Ridership forecasts are available for the segment from San Jose to San Luis Obispo, existing ridership for the Coast Starlight is only reported for the entirety of the Coast Corridor (Seattle to Los Angeles). Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, Chapter 8; Amtrak, 2012b. Annual ridership for both the Coast Daylight and Coast Starlight trains is anticipated to increase through the year 2040. In turn, activity at existing stations would increase, and new activity would take place at the new stations. The number of passengers traveling through existing and new stations is unknown. However, based on the increase in ridership, traffic surrounding the stations would likely worsen, and the demand for public transit may increase. Such increases in activity at the new stations were anticipated to some degree in planning documents prepared by Soledad and King City, as discussed in greater detail below. Both of the cities in which the Build Alternative contemplates new passenger stations have planned for these stations in their General and/or Specific Plans and accompanying environmental documents. The traffic report prepared for the City of Soledad Downtown Specific Plan reported that all studied intersections currently operate at acceptable LOS. However, several all-way-stop-controlled intersections along Front Street would degrade to unacceptable LOS with buildout of the Specific Plan, which includes development and operation of the proposed passenger station. Installation of traffic signals at these intersections has been recommended to achieve acceptable LOS for year 2030 volumes. The King City General Plan Final EIR reports acceptable LOS for First Street and for the US 101/First Street Interchange, and with buildout of the General Plan (which includes development and operation of the new station), LOS is projected to remain at acceptable levels for both. Ridership projections have not been developed for the proposed new stations. However, it is reasonable to assume that ridership at the new stations would be at or below the current ridership of Paso Robles station (about 10,000 riders per year), because Soledad and King City are smaller communities that are not considered major activity centers. There would be relatively few riders per average day (up to approximately 27 per day, using Paso Robles ridership estimates); given train schedules, most riders would be accessing the stations outside peak road traffic hours. The additional night service commencing in 2040 would pass through in the middle of the night, resulting in negligible ridership and low traffic levels effects on peak period traffic. Transit demand may increase around the new station areas; however, given the low levels of riders expected per day, no substantial effects are expected to result.  Given that the new stations are included in city planning documents and the offpeak timing of trains through Soledad and King City, the only potentially significant impact to local roadways would occur in the vicinity of the Soledad station at Front Street. However, the City of Soledad Downtown Specific Plan EIR describes requires mitigations measures for each intersection, including those along Front Street, which would, when enacted, achieve acceptable LOS. As passenger rail activity increases, demand for parking near station areas could increase at both new and existing stations. However, current and planned parking at the existing and new stations will would likely be adequate given the low ridership expected with the new service. Additionally, Soledad and King City are relatively small, somewhat isolated communities where abundant street parking is available within reasonable proximity of the rail stations. Projected growth in each community is relatively modest, such that on-street parking would likely remain abundant even with the implementation of new train stations. Furthermore, parking adequacy itself is not necessarily a physical environmental impact, but inadequate parking can result in secondary physical effects, such as increased traffic congestion and/or air pollutant emissions resulting from the search for available parking. Coast Daylight service would reach existing and proposed stations in the Salinas-San Luis Obispo corridor during midday hours - between 10 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., and expanded service by 2040 would offer an additional service reaching existing and proposed stations in the Corridor between 12 a.m. and 4 a.m. Given that Because the new service would occur during off-peak hours, anticipated new or increased ridership is anticipated to be relatively low, and other parking is available near stations, it is unlikely that secondary environmental impacts from parking inadequacy would occur. Existing stations in the Corridor, located in Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo, will would experience additional service (two additional stops per day). As noted in Table 3.1-1 above, existing passenger levels at these stations are generally low (the highest is in San Luis Obispo, which averages about 300 passenger trips per day). It is reasonable to estimate that ridership may double by 2020 - based on the SDP ridership projections, and that there will would be some increase in traffic that would result.23 Under these projections, Coast Starlight ridership would not increase significantly; however, 124,000 additional trips north of San Luis Obispo are projected to occur. Given that these trips would be spread across the five stations 23 Ridership projections for these particular stations have yet to be developed, but it is reasonable to assume that some increase in passenger traffic would occur. (existing and proposed) along the Coast Corridor, and some of the travel associated with getting to stations would be served by public transit, it is unlikely that any substantial adverse impacts to local roadways would occur as a result of the Build Alternative. Furthermore, roadways serving existing stations are generally large thoroughfares that already accommodate station-related traffic, and are likely adequate to meet projected additional passenger travel demands. Current transit accessing the existing stations may experience an increase in ridership resulting from new train service; however, given the SDP ridership projections, no substantial effects are anticipated. At-Grade Crossings As previously discussed, the existing railroad crosses paved public roads at 36 more than 30 locations along the 130 miles between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Implementation of the Build Alternative will would result in additional trains crossing through these roads. Improved, yet-to-be-determined warning devices would be installed at some of the crossings, which would result in improved safety at these locations. The Build Alternative would result in some minor additional delays occurring from increased train traffic; new passings of each Coast Daylight train would take approximately one minute. One new at-grade crossing may be created by the track realignment proposed for mile post (MP) 172 at Cattlemen Road. In this area, Cattlemen Road is a 2-lane, paved rural road about ten 10 miles south of King City. It is unlikely that a significant amount of delay resulting from a new at-grade crossing could would occur in this location due to its rural/agricultural setting and low existing traffic volumes. Furthermore, some type of warning device would be implemented at the new at-grade crossing to ensure the safety of motorists and others at this location.24 24 In two additional locations, elements of the Build Alternative could result in crossings of paved public roads where the existing rail alignment already causes an at-grade crossing. These additional potential crossings (Lone Oak Road by the King City Siding Extension and Asuncion Road by the Henry-Santa Margarita curve realignment) would not be considered “new” at-grade crossings. Both of these existing at-grade crossings occur in areas with low traffic volumes and thus substantial new traffic delay is not expected from any additional crossings that the Build Alternative may create. Additionally, several new at-grade crossings would occur across private, typically dirt roads in agricultural holdings. Traffic levels in these rural areas are very low. The implementation of new and additional at-grade crossings would not be expected to result in any significant travel delays or traffic impacts as a result. 3.1.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative (see Tables 3.1-1 and 3.1-2 above) and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the location-specific physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative incorporates revised draft plans for the City of King passenger station (known locally as the City of King Multimodal Transit Center or MMTC), includes a modified footprint for the King City siding extension, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes the aforementioned 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects on traffic and travel for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative, except in the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess traffic and travel effects as a result of modified or excluded components. Rail Operations Construction-Period Effects Construction of any of the physical components associated with the Preferred Alternative would have the same potential as the Build Alternative to disrupt freight and passenger rail, but such effects would be temporary. Some of the physical components are more substantial than others (such as track realignments, siding extensions, etc.) and could limit activity on the railway during the construction period. These potential disruptions would be coordinated with UPRR and Coast Starlight service to reduce service delays to the maximum extent feasible. Because the Preferred Alternative does not include four of the curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County proposed under the Build Alternative, construction-period interruptions would be reduced. Thus, the Preferred Alternative would not result in any substantial adverse construction-period effects. Operational Effects Rail operational effects of the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative. This analysis found that the installation of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita would allow for on-time performance of passenger and freight trains in the years 2020 and 2040. The Preferred Alternative would, thus, not result in any substantial adverse rail operational effects. Roadway Operations Construction-Period Effects Construction of any of the physical components associated with the Preferred Alternative would have the same general potential as the Build Alternative to disrupt roadway traffic, but such effects would be temporary. The Preferred Alternative would have reduced location specific effects because the Preferred Alternative does not include four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County, the construction of which would have involved temporary disruptions to nearby local roadways. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would not result in any substantial adverse construction-period impacts to roadway operations. Operational Effects Existing and Proposed Stations With one exception, existing and proposed stations are identical to those included in the Build Alternative. The exception is the City of King passenger station, which per revised draft plans submitted by the City of King, shifts slightly northwest within the downtown area and would be located near the intersection of First Street and Broadway, adjacent to the existing railroad tracks. The revised draft station area plan has a smaller footprint than what was analyzed in the Build Alternative, but it is reasonable to assume that operational effects at this station would be similar to those described for the Build Alternative. At-grade Crossings With one exception, the number and location of at-grade crossings would be the same in the Build and Preferred Alternatives. The exception is that the Preferred Alternative incorporates revised draft plans for the City of King passenger station. At present, Pearl Street in the City of King has an at-grade crossing with the Coast Corridor railroad. This plan calls for the shifting of the existing at-grade crossing in the City of King from Pearl Street in the northwest direction to Broadway Street. The City of King’s revised draft station area plan calls for this at-grade crossing to be closed and a new at-grade crossing to be opened at Broadway Street. This plan would require the review and approval of the California Public Utilities Commission, which would include conditions or measures on this relocation to help ensure safe rail and roadway operations through the City of King. 3.1.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The following strategies have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potential significant impacts. The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. MIN-TRA-1. During the construction of any railway physical component improvement selected for design, disruption to existing rail operations would be minimized to the maximum extent feasible by scheduling construction at times to minimize interference. Appropriate construction and operational strategies would be developed for project-level reviews through coordination between FRA, Amtrak, UPRR, Caltrans DOR, and other interested agencies. MIN-TRA-2. Transportation System Management (TSM)/Signal Optimization (including retiming, re-phasing, and signal optimization) may would be implemented, as well as other measures including turn prohibitions, use of one-way streets, and traffic diversion to alternate routes, to reduce impacts to roadways and intercity travel. MIN-TRA-3. Local spot widening of existing curved areas of the railroad could would be implemented to allow for geometric improvements that could would allow for increased rail speeds without significant right-of-way acquisition. Spot widening could would avoid or minimize some of the effects associated with full implementation of curve realignments. MM-TRA-4. Project-level environmental review would include consultation and coordination with public transit services in order to encourage the provision of adequate bus feeder routes to serve proposed station areas, which could would mitigate potential transit impacts. Where proposed improvements components have the potential to require a new atgrade crossing, the following approaches would apply: A-TRA-5. Further develop project design to avoid the need for a new at-grade crossing. The one identified new at-grade crossing is associated with a potential track realignment (MP 172, Cattlemen Road). The primary strategy for avoiding the creation of the new at-grade crossing at Cattlemen Road would be to omit the MP 172 Track Realignment all together, or at least any portion that would result in the creation of a new at-grade crossing at Cattlemen Road. No specific layout for that track realignment has been defined to date. MIN-TRA-6. If the MP 172 Track Realignment is carried forward for further design and the design cannot feasibly avoid the creation of a new at-grade crossing, the development process would include a detailed Traffic Study, consultation and approval from the CPUC, and implementation would be required to follow all pertinent federal, state, and local policies regarding new at-grade crossings.25 25 CPUC policy typically requires the removal of one or more existing at-grade crossing in order to permit any newly requested at-grade crossings. MM-TRA-7. In the event that any of the Build Alternative or Preferred Alternative components improvements are carried forward for funding, design, and construction, and the above measures cannot be successfully employed to avoid or minimize roadway traffic effects, major or minor intersection improvements would be employed to reduce any potential adverse traffic effects. This would likely require significant right-of-way acquisition to accommodate additional left-turn and/or through lanes. Adverse effects from such components improvements would be assessed during future project-level review. 3.1.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS 3.1.6.1 Construction-Period Effects Subsequent analysis of potential construction-related effects would need to be conducted once some or all of the proposed improvements project components are approved. Future project-level environmental review should focus on potential service disruptions resulting from railway construction activities, as well as potential traffic and roadway effects resulting from detours and delays. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may be identified during the project-level environmental review. 3.1.6.2 Rail Operations As the entire program of proposed improvements components is currently unfunded, future project-level environmental review would focus on some subset of the proposed improvements components. Any improvements components identified for an initial phase of construction would need to be analyzed for potential impacts to existing freight and passenger rail, particularly for components involving the existing railway (continuous welded rail (CWR)/track upgrades, powered switches). This could require modeling of the existing and rail network, along with proposed modifications, to determine the ultimate outcome of the initial phases of construction. 3.1.6.3 Roadway Operations Subsequent multimodal access and circulation studies may would be conducted at all station areas as plans for alignments, stations, and operations are refined. Additional environmental analysis would be required in conjunction with these studies to ascertain the exact locations of potential project-generated traffic impacts and potential parking demand impacts. Station area circulation studies, including site-specific parking demand evaluations, would be expected as part of project-level environmental documentation. Additionally, as Build Alternative project components are further refined, they would need to be analyzed and ideally be designed to avoid the creating a new at-grade crossing at Cattlemen Road. Additional mitigation measures may be identified during project-level review as necessary.              Page intentionally left blank  3.2 AIR QUALITY AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS This section describes existing air quality conditions in the project area and vicinity, including the attainment status for air pollutants of concern within the two air basins traversed by the project corridor. This section also includes ; provides an overview of the regulatory framework for air quality management in the project area, a discussion of potential environmental consequences; describes the potential air quality and greenhouse gas (GHG) impacts associated with the Preferred Alternative in comparison with the No Build and Build Alternatives; and identifies mitigation strategies for both construction and operational phases. This section also describes updates and modifications made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District (SLOAPCD) provided several comments regarding air quality and GHG emissions discussions of the Draft Program EIS/EIR (see comments A-4.1 through A- 4.10). As shown below, one of SLOAPCD’s comments resulted in a text revision to the air quality and GHG emissions section. Air pollution is a general term that refers to one or more substances determined to degrade the quality of the atmosphere. Eight air pollutants have been identified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as being of nationwide concern, based on standards for human health: . carbon monoxide (CO) . sulfur oxides (SOx), including sulfur dioxide (SO2) . hydrocarbons (HC) . nitrogen oxides (NOx) . ozone (O3) . particulate matter sized 10 microns or less (PM10) . particulate matter sized 2.5 microns or less (PM2.5) . lead (Pb) All of these pollutants are further described below.  With the exception of hydrocarbons, these pollutants (NOx in the form of NO2 and SOx in the form of SO2) may be referred to collectively as criteria pollutants. Pollutants that are considered greenhouse gases also affect air quality. Greenhouse gases include NOx, HC, and carbon dioxide (CO2). The precise sources of these pollutants, their effects on human health and general welfare, as well as their final disposition in the atmosphere vary considerably. In addition, diesel particulate matter (DPM) is also considered here. 3.2.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS The alternatives are subject to a number of air quality regulations developed and implemented at the federal and state levels. An overview of all relevant policies governing air quality in the project area can be found below. 3.2.1.1 Federal Clean Air Act Air quality is regulated at the federal level under the Clean Air Act (CAA) of 1970 and the related Final Conformity Rule.1 The CAA Amendments of 19902 empower the EPA to establish environmental policies and regulations to ensure better air quality. In response, the EPA set National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for all air pollutants identified as being of nationwide concern, established emission standards for certain mobile sources (airplanes and locomotives), and designed procedures to oversee state air programs. 1 Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations [CFR], Parts 51 and 93 2 Public Law [P.L.] 101-549, November 15, 1990 3 42 U.S.C. § 7404[d][1][A] The CAA requires that states submit a State Implementation Plan (SIP) for all areas designated as nonattainment by federal air quality standards. Nonattainment is defined as any area that does not meet (or that contributes to ambient air quality in a nearby area that does not meet) the NAAQS for the pollutant.3 The SIP, which is reviewed and approved by the EPA, must identify a plan for achieving the federal standards. Failure to follow this procedure could lead to denial of federal funding and permits. In cases where a SIP is submitted by the state but a nonattainment area remains below federal standards, the EPA is directed to prepare a federal implementation plan. EPA has established de minimis thresholds4 for criteria pollutant emissions to help determine whether conformity determinations will be required for a given project. Table 3.2-1 lists the de minimis thresholds for the various criteria pollutants. 4 http://www.epa.gov/air/genconform/deminimis.html Table 3.2-1 General Conformity De Minimis Thresholds Pollutant Area Type Tons/Year Ozone (VOC or NOx) Serious nonattainment 50 Severe nonattainment 25 Extreme nonattainment 10 Other areas outside an ozone transport region 100 Ozone (NOx) Marginal and moderate nonattainment inside an ozone transport region 100 Maintenance 100 Ozone (VOC) Marginal and moderate nonattainment inside an ozone transport region 50 Maintenance within an ozone transport region 50 Maintenance outside an ozone transport region 100 Carbon monoxide, SO2 and NO2 All nonattainment and maintenance 100 Inhalable Particulate Matter (PM10) Serious nonattainment 70 Moderate nonattainment and maintenance 100 Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5) Direct emissions, SO2, NOx (unless determined not to be a significant precursor), VOC or ammonia (if determined to be significant precursors) All nonattainment and maintenance 100 Lead (Pb) All nonattainment and maintenance 25 Source: EPA, 2014 Consistent with the CAA, “No federal agency may approve, accept or fund any transportation plan, program or project unless such plan, program or project has been found to conform to any applicable SIP in effect under this act.”5 5 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq. 6 42 U.S.C. § 7506[c][1] Conformity is defined as follows: conformity to an implementation plan’s purpose of eliminating or reducing the severity and number of violations of the NAAQS and achieving expeditious attainment of such standards; such activities will not cause any of the following occurrences. . Cause or contribute to any new violation of any NAAQS in any area. . Increase the frequency or severity of any existing violation of any NAAQS in any area. . Delay timely attainment of any NAAQS or any required interim emissions reductions or other milestones in any area.6 EPA’s General Conformity Rule establishes NAAQS for six principal pollutants. Pursuant to the Rule, the lead federal agency must make a Conformity Determination for all federal actions in non-attainment or maintenance areas where the total of direct and indirect emissions of a non-attainment pollutant or its precursors exceeds levels established by the regulation. Federal conformity for projects under FRA FRA projects is called “General Conformity.” In an area without a SIP, a federal action can be shown to "conform" by demonstrating there will be no increase in emission in the nonattainment or maintenance area from the Federal action that could cause new violations of the standards and/or no increase in the frequency or severity of previous violations. In an area with a SIP, conformity can be demonstrated in one of four ways: . By showing that the emission increases caused by an action are included in the SIP, . by demonstrating that the State agrees to include the emission increases in the SIP, . through offsetting the action’s emissions in the same or nearby area, . through mitigation to reduce the emission increase, or . through an air quality modeling demonstration in some circumstances. Urban Air Toxics In addition to NAAQS for criteria pollutants, the CAA identified a list of 188 urban air toxics, alternatively known as toxic air contaminants (TACs). In its final ruling in March 2001, EPA narrowed this list to a group of 21 mobile-source air toxics (MSAT).7 From this list of 21 MSATs, EPA identified six priority MSATs: benzene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, diesel particulate matter/diesel exhaust organic gases, acrolein, and 1, 3-butadiene. To address emissions of MSATS, EPA has introduced a number of measures targeting cleaner fuels and cleaner engines. 7 Control of Emissions of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources, 66 F.R. 17235 Most air toxics originate from human-generated sources, including road mobile sources (e.g., cars, trucks, buses), non-road mobile sources (e.g., airplanes, locomotives), stationary sources (e.g., factories, refineries, power plants) and indoor sources (e.g., building materials). A smaller proportion of air toxics are released from natural sources such as volcanic eruptions and forest fires. Human health risks caused by exposure to urban air toxics at sufficiently high concentrations or extended durations include increased risk for cancer or other serious health effects, including damage to the immune system; and neurological, reproductive, developmental and respiratory problems. In March 2001, EPA issued regulations requiring the producers of urban air toxics to decrease emissions of these pollutants by target dates in 2007 and 2020. As a result, on-highway emissions of benzene, formaldehyde, 1.3-butadiene and acetaldehyde will be reduced by amounts ranging from 67 percent to 76 percent between 1990 and 2020. On-highway DPM emissions will be reduced by 90 percent. These reductions are expected as a result of the national mobile source control programs, including: . The reformulated gasoline program; . A new threshold for the toxic content of gasoline; . The national low-emission vehicle standards; . The Tier 2 motor vehicle emissions standards and gasoline sulfur control requirements; and . The heavy-duty engine and vehicle standards and on-highway diesel fuel sulfur control requirements. The predicated improvements are net emission reductions, which will be experienced even after growth in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) is taken into account. Tools and modeling techniques exist for quantitative PM and CO hot-spot analysis associated with motor vehicles. However, neither EPA nor FRA has released guidance on how to evaluate the effect of future rail lines on ambient concentrations of urban air toxics in the context of NEPA. Specifically, EPA has not established NAAQS or provided other project-level standards for hazardous air pollutants. Furthermore, neither federal or state of California ambient standards exist for mobile source air toxics, although FHWA has developed interim guidance for the evaluation of such toxics generated within a highway context (from automobile and truck sources).8 8 FHWA, 2014 9 US EPA, 2013a 10 US EPA, 2013c 11 US EPA, 2013b 12 CEQ, 2014 Greenhouse Gas Regulatory Considerations In December 2009, the EPA Administrator issued findings under the U.S. Clean Air Act that the current and projected GHG concentrations in the atmosphere threaten the health and welfare of current and future generations. In response, the United States EPA has introduced a series of policies designed to slow the growth of emissions, invest in science and technology, and enhance international cooperation. These policies include a Renewable Fuel Standard Program that mandates a minimum volume of renewable fuel in all transportation fuel sold in the United States. The EPA partnered with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) to enable the production of a new generation of clean vehicles with improved fuel economy and reduced emissions of greenhouse gases.9 Lastly, the EPA introduced the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program. Through this program, the EPA tracks greenhouse gas data from large emission sources across a range of industry sectors.10 In addition, the EPA has established multiple incentive-based programs that encourage voluntary GHG reductions. These programs include “ENERGY STAR,” “Climate Leaders,” and Methane Voluntary Programs.11 In 2010, CEQ released draft guidance explaining how Federal agencies should analyze the environmental impacts of GHG emissions and climate change when they describe the environmental impacts of a proposed action under NEPA. It provides practical tools for agency reporting, including a presumptive threshold of 25,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions from the proposed action to trigger a quantitative analysis, and instructs agencies how to assess the effects of climate change on the proposed action and their design.12 3.2.1.2 State Air Quality Regulations The responsibility for controlling air pollution in California is shared by 35 local or regional air pollution control/air quality management districts, CARB, and EPA. As noted above, EPA establishes the NAAQS, sets emission standards for certain mobile sources (including locomotives), oversees state air programs, and reviews and approves the SIP. The California Clean Air Act of 198813 (CCCA) and other provisions of the California Health and Safety Code (HSC)14 entrusts CARB with preparing the SIP for EPA review and approval. CARB also sets state ambient air quality standards, adopts and enforces federal and state emission standards for mobile sources, and adopts standards and suggested control measures for TACs. 13 Assembly Bill [AB] 2595 14 HSC § 39000 et seq. CARB must enforce the CCAA, which requires that all districts designated as nonattainment areas for any pollutant “adopt and enforce rules and regulations to achieve and maintain the state and federal ambient air quality standards in all areas affected by emission sources under their jurisdiction.” CARB also oversees local and regional air pollution control or air quality management districts. For the proposed project, the relevant air pollution control districts are the Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District (MBUAPCD) and the San Luis Obispo Air Pollution Control District (SLOAPCD). See Figure 3.2-1, Regional Air Basins, for a map depicting the two air pollution control districts. Per the CCA, e Each local district is charged with the distribution of permits for industrial pollutant sources and the development of plans and policies to meet standards set at the State and National level. Greenhouse Gas Regulations Order S-3-05 This executive order set targets for the reduction of California’s Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions to: 1. 2000 levels by the year 2010, 2. 1990 levels by the year 2020, and 3. 80 percent below the 1990 levels by the year 2050. The executive order also calls for the California Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA) to prepare biennial reports on the potential impact of increased warming of the atmosphere on certain sectors of the California economy. The first of these reports, Scenarios of Climate Change in California: An Overview (Climate Scenarios report), was published in February 2006 (California Climate Change Center 2006). . In September 2006, the State Assembly passed new legislation to address GHG emissions in California, Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32) or the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006. Through AB 32, California established a new model for GHG emissions reduction, effectively acknowledging the political threat of climate change due to anthropogenic emissions. AB 32 further directed CARB to lay the foundation for tighter climate legislation through a series of measures with discrete deadlines. Since 2007, CARB has approved a scoping plan for GHG reductions in California that includes direct regulations, alternative compliance mechanisms, monetary and non-monetary incentives, voluntary actions, and market-based mechanisms;15 identified 1990 levels of statewide GHG emissions, thereby articulating a 2020 emissions target;16 implemented a series of nine discrete early action GHG emission reduction measures including regulations for landfills, motor vehicle fuels, refrigerants in cars, tire pressure, port operations and other sources;17 adopted regulation requiring the largest industrial sources to report and verify their GHG emissions;18 and established both the Environmental Justice Advisory Committee (EJAC) and the Economic and Technology Advancement Advisory Committee (ETAAC) to provide guidance to CARB throughout the development of related regulation.19 . In 2011, CARB adopted cap-and-trade regulation designed to meet the emissions reduction targets established in AB 32 through market-based mechanisms. The cap-and-trade program sets an enforceable emissions cap for major sources of GHG emissions, including refineries, power plants, industrial facilities, and transportation fuels. The State will oversee the distribution of tradable permits to these major emitters, the sum of which will equal the emissions allowed under the cap. This cap will reduce over time.20 15 HSC §38561 16 HSC §38550 17 HSC §38560.5 18 HSC §38530 19 HSC §38591 20 HSC §38562(c) . On December 6, 2007 CARB approved and adopted a statewide GHG emissions limit that is equivalent to the 1990 level, which is 427 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (an approximately 25 percent reduction in existing statewide GHG emissions); . In 2007, CARB approved a list of nine discrete early action GHG emission reduction measures. The proposed Scoping Plan was approved in August 2011. The Scoping Plan summarizes quantifiable, verifiable, and enforceable emission reduction measures by regulation that will achieve the statewide GHG emissions limit by 2020. Among the measures that became operative on January 1, 2012 are GHG reporting regulations, alternative compliance mechanisms, and potential monetary and nonmonetary incentives that reduce GHG emissions from any sources. Cap-and-trade programs began on January 1, 2013 with a GHG emissions cap that will decline over time. The first update to the Scoping Plan was approved by CARB in May, 2014, which builds upon the initial Scoping Plan with new strategies and recommendations. AB 32 also takes into account the relative contribution of each source or source category to help limit adverse impacts on small businesses and others by requiring CARB to recommend a minimum threshold of GHG emissions below which emissions reduction requirements would not apply. AB 32 also allows the Governor to adjust the deadlines established therein for individual regulations or the entire state to the earliest feasible date in the event of extraordinary circumstances, catastrophic events, or threat of significant economic harm. The Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008 (SB 375) advanced California’s GHG legislation by tying regional land use, housing, and transportation planning to emissions reduction targets. SB 375 directs CARB to develop regional GHG reductions targets for emissions associated with passenger vehicles in 2020 and 2035. Each of California’s Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPO) must then prepare a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS), wherein the MPO articulates a plan to meet the target established by CARB. The SCS must be reviewed by CARB and incorporated into the federally enforceable regional transportation plan. Governor’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard (Executive Order #S-01-07): Executive Order #S-01-07 establishes a statewide goal to reduce the carbon intensity of California’s transportation fuels by at least 10 percent by 2020 through the introduction of a Low Carbon Fuel Standard. The Low Carbon Fuel Standard will be incorporated into the State Alternative Fuels Plan as required by AB 1007 and represents one of the proposed discrete early action GHG reduction measures identified by CARB pursuant to AB 32. Ambient Air Quality Standards Table 3.2-2 lists the relevant national and state ambient air quality standards for the criteria pollutants in the project corridor. Federal primary standards are intended to protect the public health with an adequate margin of safety; secondary standards are intended to protect the nation’s welfare, accounting for air-pollutant impacts on soil, water, visibility, vegetation, etc. Areas that violate these standards are designated nonattainment areas. Areas that once violated the standards but now meet the standards are classified as maintenance areas. 3.2.1.3 Local Monterey County General Plan Monterey County has adopted a draft Municipal Climate Action Plan (MCAP). The MCAP was prepared pursuant to policies and subsequent mitigation in the Monterey County General Plan (2010) to address GHG emissions associated with the County’s own operations. The MCAP outlines a three-phased approached to achieve GHG emission reductions through 2020 by implementing many of the measures outlined in the AB 32 Scoping Plan. Beginning in phase 3 (2017) of the MCAP, the County will commence planning for the post 2020 period.21 21 Monterey County, 2013 22 Air Pollution Control District: San Luis Obispo County, 2012b San Luis Obispo County General Plan SLOCAPCD has adopted a set of GHG significance thresholds to ensure that new land use development is consistent with County GHG reduction goals. According to these thresholds, non-stationary sources shall be determined insignificant and consistent with AB 32 when they are in compliance with either a Qualified Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategy or with the Bright-Line or Efficiency Threshold. The Bright-Line threshold of 1,150 Megatons of CO2 emitted per year attempts to include all projects for which emissions would be less than “cumulatively considerable” to global climate change. The Efficiency Threshold includes all projects for which GHG emissions are below 4.9 megatons of CO2 emitted per service population per year. For this analysis, construction emissions shall be amortized over the life of a project and added to the operational emissions.22 Table 3.2-2 Ambient Air Quality Standards Pollutant Averaging Time CAAQSb NAAQSa North Central Coast Air Basin† San Luis Obispo County‡ Primary Secondary State Standards National Standards State Standards National Standards Ozone (O3) 1-hour 0.09 ppmc -- -- Nonattainment Attainment/ Unclassified d Nonattainment Attainment Western SLO County Non-Attainment Eastern SLO County 8-hour 0.070 ppm 0.075 ppm 0.075 ppm Carbon Monoxide (CO) 1-hour 20 ppm 35 ppm -- Attainment Attainment/ Unclassified Attainment Unclassified 8-hour 9 ppm 9 ppm -- Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) 1-hour 0.18 ppm 0.1 ppm** -- Attainment Attainment/ Unclassified e Attainment Unclassified Annual*** 0.030 ppm 0.053 ppm 0.053 ppm Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) 1-hour 0.25 ppm 0.075 ppm**** -- Attainment Attainment f Attainment Unclassified 3-hour -- -- 0.5 ppm 24-hour 0.04 ppm -- -- Inhalable Particulate Matter (PM10) 24-hour 50 .g/m3 c 150 .g/m3 150 .g/m3 Nonattainment Attainment Nonattainment Unclassified/ Attainment  Annual*** 20 .g/m3 -- -- Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5) 24-hour -- 35 .g/m3 * 35 .g/m3 ** Attainment Attainment/ Unclassified g Attainment Unclassified/ Attainment Annual*** 12 .g/m3 12 .g/m3 15 .g/m3 Sulfates 24-hour 25 .g/m3 -- -- Attainment No federal standard Attainment No federal standard Pollutant Averaging Time CAAQSb NAAQSa North Central Coast Air Basin† San Luis Obispo County‡ Primary Secondary State Standards National Standards State Standards National Standards Lead (Pb) 30-day 1.5 .g/m3 -- -- Attainment Attainment/ Unclassified h Attainment No Attainment Information Rolling 3 month average -- 0.15 .g/m3 0.15 .g/m3 -- Attainment -- Attainment Notes: a The National Ambient Air Quality Standards, other than O3 and those based on annual averages, are not to be exceeded more than once a year. The O3 standard is attained when the expected number of days per calendar year with maximum hourly average concentrations above the standard is equal to or less than one. b The California Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS) for O3, CO, SO2 (1-hour and 24-hour), NO2, PM10, and PM2.5 are values not to be exceeded. All other California standards shown are values not to be equaled or exceeded. c ppm = parts per million by volume, .g/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter d On March 12, 2008, EPA adopted a new 8-hour ozone standard of 0.075 ppm. In April 2012, EPA designated the NCCAB attainment/unclassified based on 2009- 2011 data, with a design value of 0.070 ppm. e In 2011, EPA indicated it planned to designate the entire state as attainment/unclassified for the 2010 NO2 standard. As of 2013, however, final designations have yet to be made by EPA. f In June 2011, the ARB recommended to EPA that the entire state be designated as attainment for the 2010 primary SO2 standard. Final designations have yet to be made by EPA. g In 2006, EPA revised the 24-hour standard for PM2.5 from 65 to 35 .g/m3. In 2009, EPA designated the NCCAB as attainment/unclassified. h On October 15, 2008 EPA substantially strengthened the national ambient air quality standard for lead by lowering the level of the primary standard from 1.5 .g/m3 to 0.15 .g/m3. Final designations were made by EPA in November 2011. I CARB has identified vinyl chloride as a toxic air contaminant with no threshold level of exposure for adverse health effects yet determined. * 98th percentile, averaged over 3 years **Annual Arithmetic Mean *** 99th percentile of 1-hour daily maximum concentrations, averaged over 3 years † North Central Coast Air Basin Attainment Status – January 2013 is based on 2009 to 2011 air monitoring data. ‡ San Luis Obispo County Attainment Status reflects the status as of October, 2012. Sources: EPA, 2012; CARB, 2009; CARB, 2012 3.2.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION Potential program-level impacts to air quality and GHG emissions were assessed using significance thresholds established by each of the two relevant air quality districts: each of which incorporate relevant NAAQS. The CEQA Guidelines air quality impact criteria contained in Appendix G were also consulted. SLOAPCD has established five categories of evaluation for determining the significance of a proposed project’s impacts: . Consistency with the most recent Clean Air Plan for San Luis Obispo County; . Consistency with a plan for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions that has been adopted by the jurisdiction in which the project is located and that, at a minimum, complies with State CEQA Guidelines Section 15183.5; . Comparison of predicted ambient criteria pollutant concentrations resulting from the project to state and federal health standards, when applicable; . Comparison of calculated project emissions to SLOAPCD emission thresholds; and, . The evaluation of special conditions that apply to certain projects.23 23 Air Pollution Control District: San Luis Obispo County, 2012a, p. 3-1 24 Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District, 2008, p. 5-1 In Monterey, the MBUAPCD outlines similar criteria for determining a project’s impact on air quality, in accordance with CEQA guidelines: . Consistency with the applicable air quality plan; . Consistency with any air quality standard and avoidance of contributing substantially to an existing or projected air quality violation; . Avoids a cumulatively considerable net increase of any criteria pollutant for which the project region is nonattainment; . Avoids exposing sensitive receptors to substantial pollutant concentrations; . Avoids the creation of objectionable odors that would affect a substantial number of people.24 In accordance with the guidelines for each air district, a thorough emissions analysis would be performed during project-level evaluations to address both construction phase and operational phase impacts of the proposed components improvements. This section will also include a qualitative evaluation of the alternatives’ consistency with SB 375. While primarily concerned with land use, a key intent of SB 375 was to help the applicable regional transportation plan comply with the Clean Air Act. To the extent any of the proposed physical components improvements are carried forward, such components improvements would be subject to General Conformity review under the Clean Air Act. As stated in Chapter 1.0, Purpose and Need, and Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, there is considerable uncertainty as to whether some, all, or none of the physical components improvements will be carried forward for further design, further environmental review, and eventual construction. Several components of the Build Alternative action alternatives are highly conceptual in nature, like curve realignments; further design would be essential before any meaningful analysis could be completed. Therefore, a programmatic General Conformity determination at this Tier 1 level was deemed to be both impractical and infeasible. Additionally, as described in more detail below, implementation of the Build Alternative action alternatives is expected to reduce VMT and associated emissions. Thus, it is not expected that the proposed components improvements would result in the generation of air emissions that would exceed conformity threshold levels of pollutants for which the air basins are designated as nonattainment or maintenance areas. 3.2.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT The proposed project would be located within two air quality district jurisdictions: the MBUAPCD and the SLOAPCD. This analysis has been structured to estimate the potential impacts on the two air basins directly affected by the Build Alternative. The two associated air basins are the North Central Coast Air Basin and the South Central Coast Air Basins. Table 3.2-2 above shows these air basins state and federal attainment statuses. State criteria pollutants are classified as in attainment (or unclassified) for the following pollutants: . Carbon monoxide . Nitrogen dioxide . Sulfur dioxide . Fine particulate matter (PM2.5) . Sulfates . Lead . Hydrogen sulfide Both districts are in nonattainment for: . ozone (nonattainment in Eastern SLO County only; western SLO County is in attainment) . particulate matter (PM10.) Both air basins are considered in attainment (or unclassified) and below the federal thresholds for all of the criteria air pollutants. Sensitive receptors are people that have an increased sensitivity to air pollution or environmental contaminants. Sensitive receptor locations include schools, parks and playgrounds, day care centers, nursing homes, hospitals, and residential dwelling units. The location of sensitive receptors is used to assess the impacts of project-related emissions on public health.25 The project corridor traverses primarily agricultural lands between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. There is some concentration of sensitive receptors where the railway travels through urban areas, which include existing and proposed station areas. 25 Air Pollution Control District: San Luis Obispo County, 2012a 3.2.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.2.4.1 No Build Alternative Without the proposed passenger service enhancement contemplated as part of the Build Alternative, passenger rail operations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo would not change. Coast Starlight service would continue through the corridor. Amtrak service to Southern California would continue to originate/terminate in San Luis Obispo. Options for passenger travel along the corridor would remain limited to automobiles and bus. Therefore, potential emissions reductions associated with improved passenger rail service would not be realized, and there would be little or no change in air pollutant/ greenhouse gas emissions related to passenger rail service in the Corridor. As set forth in Chapter 9 of the SDP, freight rail operations in the Corridor are projected to increase. As of 2013, 2 daily long-haul freight trains travel between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. By the year 2020, the SDP projects that a total of 4 daily long-haul freight trains would travel along the Corridor. Accordingly, air pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions originating from freight rail sources would likely increase by up to 100 percent over existing conditions unless new freight rail service includes newer, less polluting locomotive technology. The No Build Alternative also assumes the installation of PTC along the corridor. Neither the construction nor the operation of PTC would generate substantial emissions, as most PTC equipment would be located within trains. The operation of such equipment would not be expected to substantially alter emissions of air pollutants or greenhouse gases from existing levels. 3.2.4.2 Build Alternative Rail Operations The Coast Corridor SDP includes a preliminary, high-level calculation of potential air quality effects for the set of components improvements proposed for the entirety of the system (Los Angeles to San Francisco) based on system-wide ridership projections, and other rail uses (including freight). The SDP projects state rail ridership by region using the Amtrak/California Intercity Passenger Rail Forecasting Model,26 and uses both the FHWA’s Freight Analysis Framework database and the Surface Transportation Board’s Confidential Carload Waybill Sample to predict future freight flow. 26 The Amtrak/Caltrans Model is based on extensive market and traveler behavior research throughout California (and nationwide), historical rail ridership and revenue data and trends, and demographic data. According to this preliminary assessment, the Build Alternative presents some small potential reductions in emissions of air pollutants and GHGs. These reductions would be achieved through the implementation of Coast Daylight rail service and its related potential to attract passengers from other travel modes (especially automobile and airplane). The SDP projects that the Coast Daylight service would generate about 100,000 annual person trips by the year 2020. This averages to about 300 trips per day and translates in projected reduction about 11,000 daily VMT for the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region as a whole. The projected expansion of Coast Daylight service by the year 2040 would further reduce VMT in the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region by an additional 15,000 daily miles (26,000 daily miles total). These VMT reductions comprise relatively small amounts of total regional VMT and are thus expected to translate to small reductions in criteria  pollutants - well below 1 percent of each of the criteria pollutants generated in the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region.27 Moreover, it should be noted that passenger rail has considerably lower greenhouse gas emissions per passenger mile than other modes, including aircraft, passenger cars and light-duty trucks.28 27 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, pp. 13-4 – 13-7 28 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013a, p. 26, exhibits 2.9 and 2.10 29 City of Soledad, 2012b 30 City of King, 2013 31 Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality Management District, 2014 There is potential for some relatively small increases in emissions resulting from increased vehicles trips to and from the new stations proposed in Soledad and King City. However, the Soledad Specific Plan proposes substantial public transit improvements, including additional local bus services connecting residential and commercial areas. Improved pedestrian and bicycle access is also planned within the city.29 The station design in King City includes parking for Amtrak Thru-Way buses, Greyhound buses, and bus pull-outs for two fixed route bus services.30 These new activities in the station areas could result in increased emissions levels above existing conditions at the immediate station areas. However, these transit-related improvements and activities would ultimately contribute to emissions reductions on a more regional basis to the extent the improvements were associated with trips diverted from automobile to bus or train. Physical Improvements Construction-Period Effects Emissions would be expected to result from the use of heavy machinery during construction. Additional temporary emissions, potentially including criteria pollutants like particulate matter, would result from idling or slowed locomotives due to any construction-related interruptions to existing rail operations. Emissions generated from common construction activities include: . Exhaust emissions of PM, NOx, and other GHGs from fuel combustion for mobile heavy-duty diesel- and gasoline-powered equipment, portable auxiliary equipment, material delivery trucks, and worker commute trips. . Fugitive PM dust from soil disturbance and demolition activity. . Evaporative emissions of ROG or VOC from paving activity and the application of architectural coatings.31 Construction activity related to signal upgrades would be expected to result in minor emissions because substantial use of heavy equipment would not be necessary to install signals. Air pollutant emission would primarily be associated with delivery of construction materials. Track upgrade construction would involve replacement of existing rail (wooden rail ties, etc.) with CWR, track structure realignment, track resurfacing, tie replacement, rehabilitation of existing sidings, and replacement of existing turnouts, as well as installation of powered switches at selected locations. Construction of curve/track realignments, new siding/siding extensions, the new second mainline, and new stations would result in emissions due to fuel use for heavy construction machinery. Additional temporary emissions would result from idling or slowed locomotives due to any construction-related interruptions to existing rail operations. Operational Effects Upgrading existing tracks (including replacing wooden rail ties with steel ties) would reduce friction and vibration. Improved stabilization would also require less frequent maintenance of the railway infrastructure. Less frequent maintenance would reduce emissions associated with maintenance vehicle trips and idling, as well as maintenance equipment use. The increase in efficiency associated with track upgrades would reduce the severity of localized carbon monoxide and particulate matter emissions, as well as other pollutants. New powered switches and CTC signals would improve the efficiency of train travel and result in better control of the railroad tracks. These features could be expected to reduce the amount of time trains spend waiting for dispatching instructions, improve train safety, and improve the overall reliability of service.32 These components improvements may enable traffic control to safely manage denser rail use and emissions would also be reduced as a result of less time idling. 32 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, pp. 9-4 Since the curve realignments are designed to improve operating efficiencies by reducing the need for deceleration and acceleration around existing curves, the proposed components improvements may affect emissions. Currently, trains must slow down on the approach to a curve, and then speed back up following the curve. The proposed realignments would improve train operations by reducing these inefficiencies, thereby incrementally reducing air pollutant emissions associated with getting back up to speed. There may thus be additional emissions reductions  associated with improved fuel economy. As exact curve realignments are yet to be developed, no specific quantification of emissions reductions is possible as part of this program-level analysis. Siding extensions and new sidings would be expected to increase train efficiency and reduce the overall time that passenger trains idle in sidings. This would be expected to result in a slight decrease in emissions. The proposed siding components improvements are meant to serve longer freight trains, allowing passenger trains to pass by more efficiently. Since passenger trains currently idle in short sidings while (much longer) freight trains pass, the expected idling time for freight trains while (comparatively shorter) passenger trains is expected to represent an overall decrease in idling time. The decrease in idling time would be expected to reduce overall air pollutant emissions for trains on the rail. A new second mainline would allow for increased speeds through the Santa Margarita/Cuesta Grade area, where track curvature and grades contribute to low average speeds through this portion of the railroad. Enhanced train movement with less dwelling would lead to an overall decrease in air pollutant emissions. Implementation of new train stations would require new stops along the Coast Corridor route, and could be expected to increase emissions associated with deceleration, acceleration, and added idling at each station. In terms of potential indirect effects, it should be noted that improved train service could result in an increase in ridership numbers. The increase in service, and corresponding increase in ridership, could be expected to decrease passenger travel by personal vehicle or bus, as well as freight transport by auto, truck or bus. These changes would collectively result in an overall decrease in air pollutant emissions. Potential emissions could be offset by implementation of the components improvements, corresponding increase in ridership, and subsequent reduction in emissions. 3.2.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Overall, air quality and GHG emissions effects for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative because of the regional nature of air quality/GHG emissions. Construction emissions would change slightly for the areas where the changed or deleted features are located. The discussions below assess air quality and GHG emissions relative to such modified or excluded features. Rail Operations Under the Preferred Alternative, the railway would retain the same overall systemwide operations as the Build Alternative and thus would result in similar effects to air quality and GHG emissions as those identified for the Build Alternative. Physical Improvements Construction-Period Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative, but the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County that were included in the Build Alternative. Accordingly, construction emissions would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than the Build Alternative. Operational Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, the proposed components would have similar operational period effects as the Build Alternative and would thus result in similar air pollutant/GHG emissions as the Build Alternative. No new or worsened operational air quality or GHG emissions effects would be expected with the Preferred Alternative. 3.2.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES In addition to the minimization strategies MIN-AQ-1 through MIN-AQ-20 listed below, it can be expected that components improvements in air pollution controls for locomotives would result in continued reductions of pollutant emissions per mile of locomotive travel if freight and passenger locomotives use newer, higher-tech equipment. Over time, these new technologies and locomotive emission standards, paired with the mitigation measures outlined below, would contribute to an overall decrease in air pollutant emissions as a result of the action alternatives Build Alternative. The timeline for implementation of these new technologies and emission standards is not certain; however, mitigation measures must be identified  to address near-term solutions to the potential impacts, particularly those related to the construction of some or all of the components of the action alternatives Build Alternative. The Build Alternative will action alternatives would be designed to reduce air quality and GHG impacts along the Corridor. The following strategies have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. 3.2.5.1 Construction-Period Strategies During project implementation, all strategies should be evaluated to determine their appropriateness and effectiveness at reducing regional and localize criteria pollutant emissions. Strategies that should be considered would be implemented during construction include: MIN-AQ-1. Apply water suppression at least twice a day to all active construction areas to minimize dust. MIN-AQ-2. Tarp all trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose materials or require that all trucks maintain at least two feet of freeboard. MIN-AQ-3. Pave, apply water three times daily, or apply (non-toxic) soil stabilizers on all unpaved access roads, parking areas and staging areas at construction sites. MIN-AQ-4. Use water sweepers to sweep all paved access roads, parking areas and staging areas at construction sites daily. MIN-AQ-5. Use water sweepers to sweep all streets daily if visible soil material is carried onto adjacent public streets. MIN-AQ-6. Hydroseed or apply (non-toxic) soil stabilizers to inactive construction areas (previously graded areas inactive for ten days or more). MIN-AQ-7. Enclose, cover, water twice daily or apply (non-toxic) soil binders to exposed stockpiles (dirt, sand, etc.). MIN-AQ-8. Limit traffic speeds on unpaved roads to 15 miles per hour. MIN-AQ-9. Introduce appropriate erosion control measures to reduce silt runoff to public roadways. MIN-AQ-10. Replant vegetation as quickly as possible to minimize erosion in disturbed areas. MIN-AQ-11. Use alternative fuels for construction equipment when feasible. MIN-AQ-12. Minimize equipment idling time. MIN-AQ-13. Maintain properly tuned equipment. 3.2.5.2 Operational Strategies Strategies that should would be considered implemented during the operational phase include: MIN-AQ-14. Require filters for diesel particulate on locomotives. MIN-AQ-15. Require liquefied natural gas for engines. MIN-AQ-16. Reduce idling time to reduce DPM and other emissions. MIN-AQ-17. Where possible, install anti-idling devices on all locomotives. These devices automatically shut-off the main diesel internal combustion engine that is used for locomotive motive power after a set amount of time when specified parameters (e.g., engine water temperature, ambient temperature, battery charge, railcar brake pressure, etc.) are at acceptable levels. The device can automatically restart the engine when parameters are determined to no longer be at acceptable levels. These can reduce emissions at sidings and while trains dwell at stations. MIN-AQ-18. Retrofit head-end power sources (HEPs) in passenger locomotives with after-treatment technologies to reduce emissions. MIN-AQ-19. Use a combination of lean-NOx catalyst and diesel particulate filter. MIN-AQ-20. Design stations and associated ingress/egress to provide efficient vehicle movements, to reduce idling time and congestion. 3.2.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS As specific program elements components are implemented, more detailed air quality analysis may be appropriate in order to fully determine potential impacts. This analysis could include the following: . Hotspots can form, particularly around existing and new stations, as a result of changes in train service. Local traffic counts can help identify these potential hotspots near access roads to any new station location. . Potential sensitive receptors for air toxics must be identified for any new air quality conditions. A risk assessment of the potential impacts to health will be performed in consultation with appropriate regulatory agencies. Additional evaluation of potential construction impacts may also be warranted to quantify the emissions associated with construction vehicle traffic, excavation, worker trips, and other related construction activities. A construction-period monitoring program may also be appropriate.   3.3 NOISE AND VIBRATION This section identifies noise and vibration sensitive land uses along the existing Coast Corridor rail alignment and identifies potential noise and vibration impacts of the No Build and the Build Alternative action alternatives. This section describes updates and modifications made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments regarding the noise and vibration discussions of the Draft Program EIS/EIR (see comments A-3.15 – A-3.20 and A- 3.32). All of these comments relate to project components that have been incorporated as part of the Preferred Alternative. See Master Response 2 for detail regarding the modifications to the siding extension and station area requested by the City of King. 3.3.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.3.1.1 Federal Noise Pollution and Abatement Act of 1972 The Noise Pollution and Abatement Act This act addresses excessive noise as a potential threat to human health and welfare, including noise related to transportation, machinery, appliances, and other products in commerce. Following adoption of this act, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA published Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety (EPA 1974). In this document, EPA provided recommendations for maximum noise exposure levels below which there would be little to no risk from any of the identified health or welfare effects of noise. Federal Noise Emission Compliance Regulation Code FRA’s Railroad Noise Emission Compliance regulations1 prescribe compliance requirements for enforcing railroad noise emission standards adopted by the EPA.2 1 49 CFR 210 2 40 CFR 201 The provisions apply to the total sound emitted by moving rail cars and locomotives (including the sound produced by refrigeration and air conditioning of units that are an integral element of such equipment), and associated equipment. Train Horn Rule and Quiet Zones Under the Train Horn Rule,3 locomotive engineers must begin to sound train horns at least 15 seconds, and no more than 20 seconds, in advance of all public grade crossings. The maximum volume level for the train horn is 110 decibels (dB), and the minimum sound level is 96 decibels. 3 49 CFR Part 222 4 Health and Safety Code Section 46010 5 A decibel (dB) is a unit that describes the amplitude of sound. A dBA describes A-weighting in noise measurements, which accounts for the relative frequencies at which humans perceive sound. In a quiet zone, railroads have been directed to cease the routine sounding of their horns when approaching public highway-rail grade crossings. Localities desiring to establish a quiet zone are first required to mitigate the increased risk caused by the absence of a train-mounted horn. Measures to reduce risk include gated crossings with flashing signals, other signage, fencing, and related measures. 3.3.1.2 State California Noise Control Act of 1973 The California Noise Control Act4 establishes the Office of Noise Control in the Department of Health Services to assist local communities developing noise control programs and provide guidance for cities and counties developing noise elements of the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65302. California Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) The California OSHA requires employers to provide employees with proper protection against the effects of noise exposure when sound exceeds certain level (an 8-hour time weighted average of 90 A-weighted decibels [dBA]).5 The protective measures may be provided either through engineering or administrative controls. If these control measures fail to reduce the noise within the acceptable limits, personal protective equipment shall be provided and used. Additionally, whenever employee noise exposures equal or exceed an 8-hour sound level of 85 dBA, the employer shall develop and administer a Hearing Conservation Program. California Noise Insulation Standards California Noise Insulation Standards6 detail requirements for new multi-family structures located within the 60 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)7 contour adjacent to roads, railroads, rapid transit lines, airports or industrial areas. Residential buildings or structures located within exterior community noise equivalent level contours of 60 dB of an existing or adopted freeway, expressway, major street, thoroughfare, railroad or rapid-transit line shall require an acoustical analysis showing that the proposed building has been designed to limit intruding noise to the allowable interior noise levels prescribed in Section 1092 (e)(2). 6 Title 25, Section 1092 7 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is a 24-hour average sound level that includes both an evening and nighttime weighting, as further discussed in Subsection 3.3.2. 8 Title 24, California Code of Regulations California Building Standards Code The California Buildings Standards Code8 contains the regulations that govern the construction of buildings in California. The Code requires that for any habitable room within a multi-family residential development, interior noise levels shall not exceed a CNEL of 45 dBA for noises attributable to exterior sources. Multi-family residential uses must comply with pertinent requirements in addition to and separate from CEQA. However, the State does not regulate noise levels within single-family detached homes. 3.3.1.3 Local Government Code Section 65302 requires cities and counties to include a noise element as part of their general plans. The Noise Element identifies the major sources of noise in the area and establishes ways to minimize exposure to sensitive receptors. A city or county must quantify the current and projected noise levels from highways and freeways, passenger and freight railroad operations, ground rapid transit systems, air travels, and other sources. Monterey County General Plan The main sources of noise in Monterey County include transportation facilities (highways, roads, railroads, and aircraft), several industrial and food-packing plants, mining operations, and power-generation. The Safety Element includes policies that establish acceptable limits of noise exposure. New noise-sensitive land uses may only be allowed in areas where existing and projected noise levels are deemed acceptable. Furthermore, the County requires the inclusion of standard noise protection measures into all construction contracts. These measures limit construction hours, require noise muffling equipment, and set forth other regulations to reduce potential noise effects. City of Salinas General Plan The Noise Element identifies existing and projected noise sources in the community and identifies ways to reduce potential impacts. The Noise Element contains policies and programs to achieve and maintain noise levels compatible with various types of land uses. Like most urbanized areas, Salinas experiences increasing noise levels associated with transportation and other sources. In addition to standard policies to shield sensitive receptors from noise exposure, Salinas has developed a Noise Plan that defines the City’s specific programs along with an implementation plan. Programs include specific land use compatibility guidelines with maximum noise level amounts, based on the land use designation. City of Soledad General Plan The major source of noise in Soledad is car and truck traffic on US 101. However, other noise generators that contribute to local ambient noise levels include railroads, aircraft, farming activities, quarry activities, and industrial facilities. Policies and implementation programs outlined in the Noise Element focus on establishing noise projections for proper planning and reducing the noise impacts at sensitive receptor locations. The Soledad Downtown Specific Plan (2012) contemplated a variety of new land uses in central portion of the City, including conceptual plans for a proposed new passenger rail station (identical to the station included here as part of the Build Alternative action alternatives). In its environmental review of the specific plan as a whole, the City concluded that build out would result in temporary construction noises, but with mitigation, such noises would not result in any significant impacts.9 9 City of Soledad,2012, p. 1-3 and appendix 10City of King, 1998, pp. 25-29 City of King (King City) General Plan According to the King City Noise Element, primary noise sources are US 101, the railroad, and industrial activities. King City has adopted goals and policies to encourage land use patterns that reduce the level of human noise exposure.10 King City adopted the First Street Corridor Master Plan, in which the city contemplated a number of land use changes, including conceptual plans for a passenger rail station (identical to the station included here as part of the Build Alternative).11 Additionally, as described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design [(MMTC) (2014)]. 11 City of King, 2013, p. 29, p. 82 San Luis Obispo County General Plan The main sources of noise in San Luis Obispo County are from roadways, railroads, airports, and agricultural and commercial activities. The County General Plan includes policies and mitigation to reduce noise impacts from railroads and these other sources. The noise exposure ranges depicted on noise contour maps are used to determine the land use designation of the area and where new development may occur. Noise created by new transportation noise sources must be consistent and not exceed the levels specified within each land use designation. 3.3.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION Information for the noise and vibration analysis was obtained/developed from several sources. A qualified acoustical professional, with specific subject-matter expertise as an author of FTA’s Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment Manual (2006) (FTA Guidance Manual), reviewed aerial mapping of proposed components improvements as well as considerable background information (including but not limited to Appendices B, C, and D) and recommended appropriate screening distances to assess noise and vibration impacts based on relevant criteria. The acoustical professional based the screening distances on potential future train speed estimates and the type of construction work for each component improvement type. Recommended noise screening distances along the corridor are shown in Table 3.3-1 for train operations in both 2020 and 2040. Vibration screening distances are shown in Table 3.3-2. Federal Transit Administration Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment The Federal transit Administration FTA Guidance Manual, Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment (2006) contains methods for combining transit/rail noise sources with traffic and bus noise sources at stations using both FTA criteria (which are identical to the FRA criteria) and Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) criteria. FHWA provides a model to assess roadway construction noise near  sensitive receptors. Accordingly, Table 3.3-3 outlines typical construction equipment and their relative noise levels from the FHWA criteria to assess potential noise effects.12 12 Federal Highway Administration. 2006. Roadway Construction Noise Model User’s Guide. The purpose of the document is to provide understanding of noise and vibration effects of mass-transit projects located in population centers and populated land use types. Furthermore, the document provides noise and vibration fundamentals for subject-matter understanding and context. Noise Compatibility Based on the recommended screening distances, the second component of the analysis was to inventory the surrounding land uses within the screening areas. Generally, land use categories characterize the density of people and intensity of nearby development. As a result, land use typology is a helpful gauge of the potential presence of sensitive receptors. A review of aerial maps was conducted to determine the presence of potentially sensitive land uses near the existing rail alignment and proposed component improvement areas. Sensitive land uses for this analysis include residences, schools, hospitals, parks, and historic structures. Land use assumptions are as follows: . Agricultural: Fields of crops, fences, farm equipment, rural dirt roads, electrical distribution lines, barns, and crop processing buildings are dominant features in an agricultural area. Agricultural areas may also include residential uses - typically farmhouses or other farmworker housing. . Urban/Suburban: Urban/suburban areas include residential and commercial buildings, parking lots, and landscaping along streets and sidewalks. Generally, urban/suburban areas have many residential sensitive receptors. . Industrial/Institutional: Industrial areas typically include utility lines, equipment, machinery, freight tracks, and factories. Sensitive receptors in these areas would be employees working in factories or operating machinery. . Open Space/Undeveloped: Open space and undeveloped areas include rolling hills, mountain ranges, valleys, and trees and shrubs are visible on the horizon. Residential and commercial developments are not prevalent in these areas. The analysis then compares future noise and vibration created by each alternative with the existing land use to determine the level of compatibility with each existing land use type: . High compatibility indicates areas where the alternative would affect none or very few sensitive receptors, either because sensitive land uses are not present within the provided screening distances or that the nature of the proposed work would not produce noticeable noise and vibration effects. . Medium compatibility indicates areas where there may be a moderate number of sensitive land uses nearby within the screening distances and would be moderately affected. . Low compatibility indicates areas where there are many sensitive land uses nearby within the screening distances and would be highly affected. Trains and train horns sounding at at-grade crossings are main contributor to ambient noise levels in the immediate vicinity of the existing railroad, particularly where the railroad is separated from US 101 by more than 0.25 miles. As neither alternative would remove any existing at-grade crossings, screening distances are sized to assume the ongoing use of horns (i.e., the distances are larger than if no horns were sounding). Table 3.3-1 below reflects the screening distances used in this analysis which reflect existing or new mainline operations as well as siding increases. Table 3.3-1 Noise Screening Distances Segment 2020 2040 Start Point (Mile Post) End Point (Mile Post) Mainline Operations (Feet) Siding Increase (Feet) Mainline Operations (Feet) Siding Increase (Feet) MP 114.9 Salinas MP 116.9 Salinas 100 200 200 0 MP 116.9 Firestone MP 144.9 Soledad 500 100 600 0 MP 144.9 Harlem MP 155.5 Harlem 500 0 700 0 MP 155.5 Detector MP 160.3 Detector 50 100 100 100 MP 160.7 King City MP 163.7 King City 50 200 100 100 MP 163.7 Welby MP 185.7 San Ardo 500 100 600 0 Segment 2020 2040 Start Point (Mile Post) End Point (Mile Post) Mainline Operations (Feet) Siding Increase (Feet) Mainline Operations (Feet) Siding Increase (Feet) MP 185.7 Wunpost MP 207.6 McKay 500 100 600 0 MP 207.6 Wellsona MP 210.7 Wellsona 600 0 700 0 MP 210.7 Detector MP 218.4 Paso Robles 500 100 600 0 MP 218.4 Templeton MP 226.9 Atascadero 600 0 700 0 MP 226.9 Detector MP 229.6 Detector 50 100 50 100 MP 229.6 Santa Margarita MP 233.1 Santa Margarita 100 200 300 0 MP 233.1 South Santa Margarita MP 234 South Santa Margarita 300 100 500 0 MP 234 Cuesta MP 238.8 Cuesta 500 100 700 0 MP 238.8 Serrano MP 244.8 Chorro 600 0 900 0 MP 244.8 Detector MP 248.4 Detector 500 100 700 0 MP 248.4 N. San Luis Obispo MP 248.5 N. San Luis Obispo 500 0 800 0 Source: Cross-Spectrum Acoustics, 2013 Vibration Compatibility Table 3.3-2 shows proposed screening distances for vibration. These distances were recommended in order to assess potential human annoyance and potential damage to historic and potentially historic properties. The vibration distances are for both 2020 and 2040 because there is no difference between the operating scenarios for vibration. Table 3.3-2 Vibration Screening Distances Segment Vibration Screening Distance Start Point End Point (Feet) MP 114.9 Salinas MP 116.9 Salinas 80 MP 116.9 Firestone MP 144.9 Soledad 130 MP 144.9 Harlem MP 155.5 Harlem 100 MP 155.5 Detector MP 160.3 Detector 100 MP 160.7 King City MP 163.7 King City 100 MP 163.7 Welby MP 185.7 San Ardo 130 MP 185.7 Wunpost MP 207.6 McKay 120 MP 207.6 Wellsona MP 210.7 Wellsona 120 MP 210.7 Detector MP 218.4 Paso Robles 120 MP 218.4 Templeton MP 226.9 Atascadero 120 MP 226.9 Detector MP 229.6 Detector 120 MP 229.6 Santa Margarita MP 233.1 Santa Margarita 80 MP 233.1 South Santa Margarita MP 234 South Santa Margarita 60 MP 234 Cuesta MP 238.8 Cuesta 50 MP 238.8 Serrano MP 244.8 Chorro 40 Segment Vibration Screening Distance Start Point End Point (Feet) MP 244.8 Detector MP 248.4 Detector 50 MP 248.4 N. San Luis Obispo MP 248.5 N. San Luis Obispo 40 Source: Cross-Spectrum Acoustics, 2013 3.3.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Noise Fundamentals Noise is defined as unwanted sound. Airborne sound is a rapid fluctuation of air pressure above and below atmospheric pressure (frequency). Sound levels are usually measured and expressed in dB, with zero dB corresponding roughly to the threshold of hearing. A decibel is a unit that describes the amplitude of sound. Most of the sounds heard in the environment do not consist of a single frequency, but rather a broad band of frequencies, with each frequency differing in sound level. The intensities of each frequency add together to generate a sound and form the overall ambient noise level. The method commonly used to quantify environmental sounds consists of evaluating all of the frequencies; human hearing is less sensitive at low frequencies and extreme high frequencies than in the frequency mid-range, which is called "A" weighting and is how humans perceive noise. A-weighting deemphasizes low-frequency and very high-frequency sound in a manner similar to human hearing. The use of A-weighting is required by most local agencies as well as other federal and state noise regulations (e.g., the California Department of Transportation, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). In practice, the level of a sound source is measured using a sound level meter that includes an electrical filter corresponding to the A-weighting curve. Typical Aweighted levels measured in the environment are shown in Figure 3.3-1 for different types of noise. In determining the daily level of environmental noise, it is important to account for the difference in response of people to daytime and nighttime noises. During the nighttime, exterior background noises are generally lower than the daytime levels. However, most household noise also decreases at night and exterior noise becomes very noticeable. Further, most people sleep at night and are very sensitive to noise intrusion. To account for human sensitivity to nighttime noise levels, a descriptor, Ldn (day/night average sound level), was developed. The Ldn divides the 24-hour day into the daytime of 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM and the nighttime of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM. The nighttime noise level is weighted 10 dB higher than the daytime noise level. The CNEL is another 24-hour average that includes both an evening and nighttime weighting. Vibration Fundamentals Ground vibration consists of rapidly fluctuating motions or waves with an average motion of zero. Peak Particle Velocity (PPV) is typically used to quantify vibration amplitude. The PPV is defined as the maximum instantaneous positive or negative peak of the vibration wave and are used to evaluate human response to vibration. To sensitive individuals, vibrations approaching the threshold of perception can be annoying. Figure 3.3-2 displays the reactions of people and the effects on buildings that continuous typical ground-borne vibration levels can produce. Low-level vibrations frequently cause irritating secondary vibration, such as a slight rattling of windows, doors, or stacked dishes. The rattling sound can give rise to exaggerated vibration complaints, even though there is very little risk of actual structural damage. In high noise environments, which are more prevalent where groundborne vibration approaches perceptible levels, this rattling phenomenon may also be produced by loud airborne environmental noise causing induced vibration in exterior doors and windows. Construction activities can cause vibration that can vary in intensity. The use of pile driving and vibratory compaction equipment typically generates the highest construction related ground-borne vibration levels. Because of the impulsive nature of such activities, the use of the PPV peak particle velocity descriptor has been routinely used to measure and assess ground-borne vibration and almost exclusively to assess the potential of vibration to induce structural damage and the degree of annoyance for humans. Railroad Noise and Vibration Transit noise is generated by transit vehicles in motion, as well as from locomotive engine exhaust. Speed also plays a direct factor in noise levels; however, according to the FTA’s Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment Guidance Manual, locomotive exhaust noise dominates at low speeds for diesel-powered trains. As speed increases, wheel-rail noise becomes dominant. Trains are also equipped with horns and bells for use in emergency situations as well as to signal to pedestrians  and vehicles before traveling through an intersection or at-grade crossings. Horns and bells combined with moving vehicle noise can generate noise levels that are considered annoying to nearby residents and other sensitive receptors.13 13 Federal Transit Administration (FTA), 2006, pp. 2-6 – 2-7 14FTA, 2006,.pp. 7-11 15 County of Monterey, 2006, figure 4.8-3; County of San Luis Obispo , 1992, Noise Element and Appendix A Ambient vibration is usually characterized with a continuous 10- to 30-minute measurement of vibration. Passenger and freight trains usually create high levels of vibration, but intermittently and for short periods of time. Train vibration results from the type of wheel, texture of the railway tracks, and train speed. Effects upon sensitive receptors will vary based on structural components of the nearby building as well as geology of the underlying bedrock and soil.14 The study area encompasses a spectrum of land uses, all of which differ in ambient noise level. Rural, undeveloped areas have lower noise levels in comparison to noise levels near roadways and urban developments. Much of the study area encompasses agricultural, open space areas as well as industrial/institutional and urban/suburban areas. US 101 and the existing Coast Corridor alignment are the largest contributors to the ambient noise levels in the study area. According to information from the applicable county general plans, existing noise levels along the US 101 corridor - near which much of the existing railroad is located -are between 60 and 70 CNEL.15 3.3.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.3.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative would involve maintaining existing physical conditions along the Coast Corridor study area. The No Build Alternative contemplates rail service components improvements in Salinas and points north along the railroad tracks in Monterey County that are intended to facilitate expanded passenger rail service (toward San José). According to the SDP, freight rail operations are likely to increase by the year 2040, doubling from 2 daily freight trains today to 4 daily trains in 2040. Implementation of these projects would occur regardless of whether or not any of the proposed physical components improvements comprising the Build Alternative are ultimately constructed. The No Build Alternative may thus result in noise and vibration impacts to sensitive land uses, but primarily north of Salinas, as these areas would see both increased passenger and freight service. The Salinas to San Luis Obispo study area would see only increased freight service. If additional freight service is proposed for late night hours, the additional service could result in somewhat more pronounced noise effects along the corridor, because people are somewhat more sensitive to nighttime noises. As reflected herein in the discussion of cumulative effects (Section 3.15), the Phillips 66 Company Rail Spur Extension Project is currently undergoing CEQA-only review for the proposed construction and operation of a rail spur into an existing oil refinery (Nipomo Mesa), south of the City of San Luis Obispo. 3.3.4.2 Build Alternative Construction-Period Noise and Vibration Effects The Build Alternative contemplates a number of physical components improvements throughout the Coast Corridor study area. To the extent any of these improvements components are ultimately carried forward for further design leading to construction, heavy equipment and vehicles could result in temporary increases in noise and vibration levels. These temporary construction impacts would be more pronounced at nighttime when overall ambient noise levels are lower. Table 3.3-3 outlines typical construction equipment and their relative noise levels. Proposed Project improvements components that require extensive grading or excavation, such as curve realignments, siding extensions, and new stations would have a more noticeable noise and vibration effect owing to anticipated construction time. Additionally, some of the components would likely require site clearing and earthmoving activities, such as excavation, grading, and vibratory rolling, toward the construction of new rail tracks. Powered switches and other track/signal upgrades would generally not require such extensive use of heavy construction equipment and, thus, would have less potential to result in significant noise or vibration effects upon sensitive receptors. However, the anticipated equipment required for construction is unclear at this time, since the Build Alternative improvements are conceptual at the programmatic level.  Table 3.3-3 Typical Construction Equipment Noise Levels Construction Equipment Maximum Noise Level (Lmax) dBA at 50 feet Maximum Noise Level (Lmax) dBA at 300 feet Backhoe 78 63 Compactor (ground) 83 68 Compressor (air) 78 63 Concrete Mixer Truck 79 64 Concrete Pump Truck 81 66 Crane 81 66 Dozer 82 67 Dump Truck 76 61 Excavator 81 66 Front End Loader 79 64 Generator 81 66 Paver 77 62 Pneumatic Tools 85 70 Pumps 81 66 Roller 80 65 Scraper 85 70 Source: FHWA Roadway Construction Noise Model User’s Guide, 2006 Operational Noise and Vibration Effects The Build Alternative proposes an increase of two passenger trains per day through the corridor by 2020 and two additional passenger trains per day by the year 2040. The components improvements included in the Build Alternative would also provide improved efficiency in the movement of existing freight rail through the corridor. As a result, the Build Alternative has the potential to increase operational noise and vibration within the Coast Corridor study area. For diesel-powered commuter rail trains at low speeds, locomotive exhaust is typically the greatest source of noise. This would occur primarily as trains approach and pass through urban areas. As speed increases, wheel-rail noise becomes the dominant noise source. Additionally, the railway itself can radiate noise as it vibrates in response to the dynamic loading of the moving train. Trains are also  equipped with horns and bells for use in emergency situations and as a general audible warning to track workers and trespassers within the right-of-way as well as to pedestrians and motor vehicles at highway grade crossing.16 16 FTA, 2006 Noise Compatibility Table 3.3-4 summarizes the potential for the proposed physical improvements components and service expansion comprising the Build Alternative to result in operational period noise impacts. The table identifies each proposed improvement component’s noise compatibility within the screening distances identified in Table 3.3-1. Table 3.3-4 also notes existing and proposed maximum speeds for each rail segment. For a more conservative analysis, a potential top speed of 90 mph was assumed even though the SDP contemplates maintaining the Coast Corridor as an FRA Class IV railroad, in which a maximum top speed of 80 mph is permitted. Table 3.3-4 Noise Compatibility of Build Alternative Build Alternative Components/Current and Future Maximum Train Speeds in the Area Predominant Land Use Types within Screening Distance Noise Compatibility Salinas Powered Switch Current Max Speed: 40-60 mph Future Max Speed: No Change N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Industrial/Institutional; Urban/Suburban; Some Agricultural High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Spence Siding Extension Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Agricultural N/A High Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 Current Max Speed Zones 60-70 mph; 35-40 Future Max Speed Zones: 90 mph; 60 mph Mostly Agricultural; Urban/Suburban near Chualar, Gonzales, and Soledad High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Gonzales Powered Switch Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph N/A N/A Soledad Powered Switch Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph N/A N/A Build Alternative Components/Current and Future Maximum Train Speeds in the Area Predominant Land Use Types within Screening Distance Noise Compatibility Soledad New Passenger Station Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Industrial/Institutional; Urban/Suburban; Vosti Park Medium Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments Current Max Speed: 35-40 mph Future Max Speed: 60 mph Agricultural; Open Space/Undeveloped; Some Residential High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Chalone Creek New Siding Current Max Speed: 35-40 mph Future Max Speed: 60 mph Agricultural; Open Space/Undeveloped; Some Residential N/A High in Agricultural areas; Medium in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 Current Max Speed Zones: 35-40 mph; 60-70 mph Future Max Speed Zones: 60 mph; 60-70 mph (no change) Agricultural; Open Space/Undeveloped; Some Industrial High Coburn Curve Realignments Current Max Speed: 35-40 mph Future Max Speed: 60 mph Agricultural; Open Space/Undeveloped; Some Industrial High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas King City Siding Extension Current Max Speed: 60 mph Future Max Speed: No Change Some Agricultural; Urban/Suburban N/A High in Agricultural areas; Medium in Residential areas King City New Passenger Station Current Max Speed: 60 mph Future Max Speed: No Change Industrial/Institutional; Urban/Suburban Medium King City Powered Switch Current Max Speed: 60 mph Future Max Speed: No Change N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Agricultural; Some Industrial/Institutional; Some Residential High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas MP 165 Curve Realignment Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Agricultural; Some Industrial/Institutional; Some Residential High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas San Lucas New Siding Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Agricultural; Urban/Suburban N/A High in Agricultural areas; Medium in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 Current Max Speed Zones: 60-70 mph; 40-55 mph Future Max Speed Zones: 90 mph; 70 mph Agricultural; Open Space/Undeveloped; some Industrial; some Residential High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Build Alternative Components/Current and Future Maximum Train Speeds in the Area Predominant Land Use Types within Screening Distance Noise Compatibility MP 172 Track Realignment Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph Agricultural; Open Space/Undeveloped; some Industrial; some Residential High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas San Ardo Powered Switch Current Max Speed: 60-70 mph Future Max Speed: 90 mph N/A N/A Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments Current Max Speed Zones: 60-70 mph; 40-55 mph Future Max Speed Zones: 90 mph; 70 mph Open Space/Undeveloped High Bradley Siding Extension Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Open Space/Undeveloped; some Residential N/A High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Medium in Residential areas Bradley Powered Switch Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Open Space/Undeveloped; some Industrial and Residential near Camp Roberts High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Low in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Urban/Suburban; some Agricultural High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Open Space/Undeveloped; some Residential High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Low in Residential areas McKay East Powered Switches Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph N/A N/A Wellsona New Siding Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Open Space/Undeveloped; some Residential High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Medium in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Urban/Suburban; some Industrial; some Open Space/Undeveloped High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Low in Residential areas Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Agricultural; Industrial; some Residential High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Build Alternative Components/Current and Future Maximum Train Speeds in the Area Predominant Land Use Types within Screening Distance Noise Compatibility Templeton Siding Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Urban/Suburban N/A Medium in Residential areas Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments Current Max Speed: 40-50 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Urban/Suburban; Agricultural High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 Current Max Speed Zones: 40-55 mph; 35 mph Future Max Speed Zones: 70 mph (between mp 218.4-223.0) Urban/Suburban; Santa Margarita Community Park; Pine Mountain Cemetery High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Low in Residential areas Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment Current Max Speed Zones: 40-55 mph; 35 mph Future Max Speed: No Change Urban/Suburban; Open Space/ Undeveloped; some Industrial Low Santa Margarita Powered Switch Current Max Speed 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: No Change N/A N/A Cuesta Second Main Track Current Max Speed: 20-30 mph Future Max Speed: No Change Utilities/Open Space High Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 Current Max Speed: 20-30 mph Future Max Speed: No Change Urban/Suburban; Parks Medium Source: Circlepoint, 2013; Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013 Generally speaking, physical improvements project components in urban/suburban areas (where residential uses are common) generally have lower noise compatibility because there are more sensitive land uses located within the noise screening distances. Less populated areas like open space/undeveloped lands have few sensitive land uses, but are considered more sensitive because increased noise levels could degrade the quality of recreational activities. Conversely, areas that have agricultural land use types are less likely to be affected by proposed improvements project components because there are few people present in these areas to experience increased noise.  The noise compatibility level also depends on the type of improvement Build Alternative component because modifications to the existing rail alignment may would potentially expose new sensitive land uses to operational impacts of the train. The existing railway alignment passes through all areas potentially affected by curve realignments; thus, the noise generated by passing trains is currently experienced at these locations. Additionally, curve realignments would serve to straighten the alignment to some degree; therefore, noise associated with reduced train speeds would likely decrease. The Build Alternative considers curve realignments mostly within agricultural and open space/undeveloped areas, but some (particularly Wellsona/Paso Robles, Templeton/Henry, and Henry/Santa Margarita) have the potential to affect residential properties within the operative noise screening distances. The McKay/Wellsona curve realignment is proposed for lands adjacent to and within the Big Sandy Wildlife Area. These curve realignments would alter noise levels in these areas by relocating portions of the railway. However, given the land uses in this area, noise compatibility would be considered low. The proposed King City and Soledad passenger rail stations are located in relatively densely populated areas through which existing passenger and freight rail trains pass without stopping. There are many noise sensitive uses located near the footprint of the proposed stations. Train service associated with the Build Alternative would result in trains that would potentially stop at the proposed new passenger stations. Trains coming to a stop at a passenger station would travel at lower speeds and thus result in a different noise profile than trains passing through without stopping. Locomotive exhaust noise may be more apparent at such low speeds, but wheel noise would be lower. Additionally, a train traveling through a populated area would likely sound the train’s horn for standard safety purposes. As a result, existing noise levels would not drastically change. Therefore, noise compatibility in these locations would be moderate. Proposed new sidings or siding extensions are generally less likely to affect sensitive land uses because the new tracks would be placed within existing right-of-way of the rail alignment. However, some proposed siding additions or new sidings (Templeton, Wellsona, Bradley, and King City) could expose populated areas to potential new noise from train idling. Noise compatibility in these populated locations would be moderate; trains currently travel along these areas, but the incremental addition of idling noise could affect sensitive receptors.  Upgrades to tracks along the existing alignment would allow for trains to safely travel at faster speeds, which may have additional noise impacts. Moreover, increases in noise due to increased rail service would be gradual over time and would be intermittent, rather than sudden and sustained. Along several segments of the existing railroad (#1, #2, #4, and #6), proposed train speeds would increase from a maximum of 60 mph to as high as 90 mph 80 mph. Because there are some sensitive land uses in proximity to this segment, the incremental noise increase leads to a conclusion of medium compatibility. Along existing alignment segment #3, train speeds would not substantially increase and few sensitive land uses are present. Accordingly, noise compatibility would be high. Along existing alignment segments #7, #8, and #9, trains could increase from a maximum speed of 55 mph to 70 mph. Resultant noise compatibility would be high along portions that are in agricultural use; low in areas with residential uses. Speeds along existing alignment #10 would not substantially increase, but since this is a residential area, the resultant noise compatibility would be medium. Vibration Compatibility Generally, vibration effects are more localized near the proposed improvement Build Alternative components, thus the screening distance is shorter than noise compatibility. Similarly to the noise compatibility assessment, proposed improvements project components within urban/suburban areas have low vibration compatibility because there are more sensitive land uses located within the vibration screening distances. Vibration impacts are not as prevalent for agricultural and open space/undeveloped areas, owing to sparse population and limited developed infrastructure in these areas. Table 3.3-5 Vibration Compatibility of Build Alternative Build Alternative Components Land Use/Probability of Sensitive Receptors Vibration Compatibility Salinas Powered Switch N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 Some potentially Residential buildings; Mostly Agricultural land uses High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Spence Siding Extension Agricultural High Build Alternative Components Land Use/Probability of Sensitive Receptors Vibration Compatibility Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 Some potentially Residential buildings; Mostly Agricultural land uses High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Gonzales Powered Switch N/A N/A Soledad Powered Switch N/A N/A Soledad New Passenger Station Some potentially Residential buildings; 8 potentially Historic buildings and 1 potentially Historic park resource Medium Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments Mostly Agricultural and Open Space/Undeveloped; Some potentially Residential properties; 4 potentially Historic properties High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Chalone Creek New Siding Mostly agricultural and open space/undeveloped; Some potentially residential properties; 1 potentially historic property High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 Mostly Agricultural and Open Space/Undeveloped; Some potentially Residential properties; 2 potentially Historic properties High in agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Coburn Curve Realignments Mostly Agricultural; Some potentially Residential properties High in agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions King City Siding Extension Mostly potentially Residential properties; some Agricultural; 6 potentially Historic properties High in agricultural portions; Medium in Residential portions King City New Passenger Station Mostly potentially Residential properties; 3 potentially Historic properties Medium King City Powered Switch N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 Mostly agricultural and open space/undeveloped; Some potentially residential properties; 3 potentially historic properties High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions MP 165 Curve Realignment Mostly agricultural; Some potentially residential properties; 2 potentially historic properties High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Build Alternative Components Land Use/Probability of Sensitive Receptors Vibration Compatibility San Lucas New Siding Mostly agricultural; Some potentially residential properties High in Agricultural portions; Medium in Residential portions Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 Agricultural; open space/undeveloped; some industrial; some residential High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions MP 172 Track Realignment Mostly Agricultural; some potentially Residential properties; 1 potentially Historic property High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions San Ardo Powered Switch N/A N/A Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments Open Space/Undeveloped; 1 potentially Historic property Medium Bradley Siding Extension Open Space/Undeveloped High Bradley Powered Switch N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 Open Space/Undeveloped; some Industrial and Residential near Camp Roberts; 3 potentially Historic properties High in Open Space/Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 Many potentially Residential properties; some Open Space/Undeveloped; 3 potentially Historic properties High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments Mostly Open Space/Undeveloped; some potentially Residential properties; 1 potentially Historic property High in Open Space/ Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions McKay East Powered Switches N/A N/A Wellsona New Siding Mostly open space/undeveloped; some potentially residential properties; 2 potentially historic properties High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Medium in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 Many potentially residential properties; some open space/ undeveloped; 3 potentially historic properties High in Open Space/Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions Build Alternative Components Land Use/Probability of Sensitive Receptors Vibration Compatibility Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments Mostly Open Space/Undeveloped; some potentially Residential properties; 3 potentially Historic properties High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Templeton Siding Many potentially Residential properties Low Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments Many potentially Residential properties Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 Many potentially Residential properties; some Open Space/Undeveloped; 3 potentially Historic properties High in Open Space/Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment Many potentially Residential properties; 2 potentially Historic properties Low Santa Margarita Powered Switch N/A N/A Cuesta Second Main Track Open Space; 1 potentially Historic property High Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 Many potentially Residential properties; some Open Space/Undeveloped; 1 potentially Historic property High in Open Space/Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions Note: Sensitive receptors reported here may differ in some instances to those reported in Table 3.3-4. This is due to different screening distances used in the noise and vibration analyses. Source: Circlepoint, 2013; AECOM, 2013; ICF, 2013 Similar to noise compatibility, vibration compatibility is based on the potential to result in new effects upon sensitive land uses. Proposed curve realignments could potentially move train tracks closer to potential residential buildings, as well as allow trains to travel at faster speeds, thereby increasing vibration effects on sensitive land uses. The Harlem/Metz and Mile Post 165 curve realignments occur in a primarily agricultural area; however, several potentially historic structures are located within the vibration screening distances. The proposed Wellsona/Paso Robles, Templeton/Henry, and Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments are located in relatively populated areas that also include potentially historic buildings. Vibration compatibility of these proposed components improvements is therefore low. There are several potentially historic structures surrounding the footprint of the proposed Soledad and King City stations. Freight and passenger train services already travel through these downtown districts. The Build Alternative would potentially result in increased passenger service but also new stations in these communities. If new stations are developed, the result would be that the new Coast Daylight passenger service would pass slowly through these communities, resulting in a lower level of vibration than if trains passed through at high speed.17 Freight and Coast Starlight trains would continue to pass through Soledad and King City without stopping at the new stations. 17 FTA, 2006, p. 7-10 Similarly to proposed curve realignments, new sidings or siding extensions in mostly developed areas, such as the proposed King City, San Lucas, and Wellsona sidings, could expose populated areas to potential new noise from train idling. Although trains currently travel along these areas, new sidings could result in incremental addition of idling vibration impacts. Vibration compatibility in these areas is moderate. As with the noise compatibility assessment, track components improvements to existing alignment areas would allow trains to safely travel at higher speeds and would accommodate a higher capacity of trains on the corridor. Both of these factors would contribute to increased vibration to sensitive receptors. Several notable historic structures and bridges occur within existing alignment areas. The Mission San Miguel and the Rios Caledonia Adobes area both within the vibration screening distance of segment #7 of the existing alignment. In this area, which includes nearby residential lands, track components improvements would allow for maximum speeds to increase from 55 mph to 70 mph. The Bradley Bridge, which is eligible for the National Record Register of Historic Places (NRHP) (and discussed in Section 3.10, Cultural Resources), is located within segment #6 of the existing alignment where speeds would increase from a maximum of 60 55 mph to 90 70 mph. Therefore, vibration compatibility both these areas (segments #6 and #7) would be low. 3.3.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects related to noise and vibration for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded features are located. The discussions below assess noise and vibration effects from the modified or excluded components. Construction-Period Noise and Vibration Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative, but the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County that were included in the Build Alternative. Therefore, related construction-period noise and vibration impacts would be reduced under the Preferred Alternative. Under the Preferred Alternative, construction of an additional 27 miles of “island” CTC would involve minor construction of signaling equipment, which would be similar to noise and vibration impacts for corridor-wide components identified within the Build Alternative, which were found not to be substantial/adverse. The Preferred Alternative incorporates the revised draft station area plans for the City of King passenger station. The proposed station remains in the same general area as the plans examined/evaluated as part of the Build Alternative. Implementation of the revised draft station area plan would not alter the type of construction equipment or extend the construction duration in a manner that would increase noise and vibration impacts. In addition, the existing railroad tracks would not be relocated, and the level of rail activity would be similar to what was assumed for the Build Alternative. Operational Noise and Vibration Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, the project components would have similar operational period effects as the Build Alternative and would thus result in similar noise and vibration impacts as the Build Alternative. The Preferred Alternative would include an additional 27 miles of “island” CTC; however, after this feature is constructed, no operational noise effects are expected. No new or worsened noise and vibration effects would be expected with the Preferred Alternative. Noise Compatibility Noise compatibility of the Preferred Alternative would be the same as identified above in Table 3.3-4, except for certain areas where the Preferred Alternative introduces modifications from the Build Alternative. These modified areas and their respective projected noise compatibility are summarized below in Table 3.3.6. Table 3.3-6 Noise Compatibility of Preferred Alternative Preferred Alternative Components/Current and Future Maximum Train Speeds in the Area Predominant Land Use Types within Screening Distance Noise Compatibility King City Siding Extension Current Max Speed: 60 mph Future Max Speed: No Change Agricultural High Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 (Including Island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita) Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Urban/Suburban; some Agricultural High in Agricultural areas; Low in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 (Including Island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita) Current Max Speed: 40-55 mph Future Max Speed: 70 mph Urban/Suburban; some Industrial; some Open Space/Undeveloped High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Low in Residential areas Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 Current Max Speed Zones: 40-55 mph; 35 mph Future Max Speed Zones: 70 mph (between mp 218.4-223.0) Urban/Suburban; Santa Margarita Community Park; Pine Mountain Cemetery High in Open Space/Undeveloped areas; Low in Residential areas Source: Circlepoint, 2013; Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013 As shown in Table 3.3-6 above, the Preferred Alternative is located in similar noise compatibility areas as the Build Alternative, except the King City Siding Extension, which as revised in the Preferred Alternative, would be located exclusively within an agricultural area where noise sensitivity is low and, thus, noise compatibility would be high. This would reduce potential noise impacts compared to the Build Alternative. Along existing alignment segments #7, #8, and #9, trains could increase from a maximum speed of 55 mph to 70 mph. Resultant noise compatibility would be high along portions that are located in agricultural use and low in areas with residential uses. Therefore, construction and operation of the Preferred Alternative would not result in new noise and vibration impacts from those identified for the Build Alternative. Because the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County, there is no new potential for additional noise related effects resulting from curve realignments in this area. The inclusion of island CTC from McKay to Santa Margarita would not introduce any new potential sources for additional noise over existing conditions. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would have a reduced noise impact compared to the Build Alternative. Vibration Compatibility Under the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative, but the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County that were included in the Build Alternative. Accordingly, vibration impacts would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than the Build Alternative. Under the Preferred Alternative, the proposed components would have similar operational period effects as the Build Alternative and would, thus, result in similar vibration impacts as the Build Alternative. No new or worsened operational vibration effects would be expected with the Preferred Alternative. Table 3.3-7 Vibration Compatibility of Preferred Alternative Preferred Alternative Components Land Use/Probability of Sensitive Receptors Vibration Compatibility King City Siding Extension Agricultural High in agricultural portions; King City New Passenger Station Mostly potentially Residential properties; 3 potentially Historic properties Medium Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 Many potentially Residential properties; some Open Space/Undeveloped; 3 potentially Historic properties High in Agricultural portions; Low in Residential portions Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 Many potentially residential properties; some open space/ undeveloped; 3 potentially historic properties High in Open Space/Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 Many potentially Residential properties; some Open Space/Undeveloped; 3 potentially Historic properties High in Open Space/Undeveloped portions; Low in Residential portions Source: Circlepoint, 2013; AECOM, 2013; ICF, 2013 Note: Sensitive receptors reported here may differ in some instances to those reported in Table 3.3-4. This is due to different screening distances used in the noise and vibration analyses. Under the Preferred Alternative, the section between Soledad and King City would retain all Build Alternative components without modification, with the exception of the King City siding extension. The relocated siding extension would extend from MP 156.38 to the north end of the existing siding (MP 158.18), immediately adjacent to the existing railroad and within the railroad ROW. Under the Preferred Alternative, the siding extension would be located in an entirely agricultural area with low or no vibration sensitivity. Because the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County, there is no new potential for additional vibration related effects resulting from curve realignments in this area. The inclusion of island CTC from McKay to Santa Margarita would not introduce any new potential sources for additional vibration over existing conditions. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would have a reduced vibration impact compared to the Build Alternative. 3.3.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and were identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. Individual components improvements comprising the Build Alternative would be designed to minimize noise and vibration impacts along the Corridor. Strategies have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures would also be identified during that review. Mitigation strategies for construction noise and vibration impacts would generally include noise control measures that would be applied as needed. Such strategies include the following: A-NO-1. Avoid nighttime construction in residential neighborhoods. MIN-NO-2. Use specially quieted equipment with enclosed engines and/or highperformance mufflers. MIN-NO-3. Locate stationary construction equipment as far as possible from noisesensitive sites. MIN-NO-4. Construct noise barriers, such as temporary walls or piles of excavated material, between noisy activities and noise-sensitive receivers. MIN-NO-5. Re-route construction-related truck traffic along roadways that will cause the least disturbance to residents.  MIN-NO-6. Where construction of components improvements requires deep foundations, avoid impact pile driving near noise-sensitive areas, where possible. Drilled piles or the use of a sonic or vibratory pile driver are quieter alternatives where the geological conditions permit their use. If impact pile drivers must be used, their use will be limited to the periods between 8:00 AM and 5:00 PM on weekdays. MIN-NO-7. Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies for operational noise and vibration impacts can would generally be applied to the trains and the path between the train and the receiver or property. . Noise barriers are a common approach to reducing noise impacts from surface transportation sources. Noise walls constructed near the railroad ROW can would shield sensitive receptors from train noise as well. Building sound insulation can would also be an effective mitigation strategy. . Sound insulation to improve the outdoor-to-indoor noise reduction has been widely applied around airports and has seen limited application for rail projects. Although this approach has no effect on noise in exterior areas, it may be the best choice for sites where noise barriers are not feasible or desirable, and for buildings where indoor sensitivity is of most concern. Substantial improvements in building sound insulation (on the order of 5 to 10 dBA) can often be achieved by adding an extra layer of glazing to the windows, by sealing any holes in exterior surfaces that act as sound leaks, and by providing forced ventilation and air-conditioning so that windows do not need to be opened. . Localities wishing to reduce train horn noise may take the steps needed to establish a new quiet zone. This would cease the use of train horns at public highway-rail grade crossings. The locality would be required to mitigate the increased risk associated with the absence of a horn before receiving approval of the quiet zone. . Vibration impacts can would generally be reduced by vehicle wheel and track maintenance efforts. Additional track work and materials such as rail fasteners with soft and resilient elements can would provide greater vibration isolation than standard fasteners. Ballast mats made of rubber-like material can be placed on asphalt or concrete base with the normal ballast, ties, and rail on top. The reduction in ground-borne vibration provided by a ballast mat is strongly dependent on the frequency content of the vibration and design and support of the mat. The appropriateness of these strategies would be determined upon subsequent analysis of project improvements components and ground conditions. 3.3.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Prior to implementing specific elements of the Build Alternative any of the project components, additional noise and vibration analysis would be conducted to determine existing noise and vibration levels within the areas to be specifically affected and to calculate any increases in noise levels and vibration that may result from implementing the specific improvement component. If noise and vibration levels would increase substantially as a result of the proposed improvement component and would affect sensitive land uses, the evaluation will identify specific mitigation measures to be applied based on those discussed above.   3.4 ENERGY This section provides an analysis of the energy effects of the No Build and action alternatives measured in terms of estimated fuel consumption. The analysis also considers and construction period energy usage. The evaluation is based on preliminary estimates of projected increases in rail ridership and related potential diversions from other modes of transportation, as well as estimates of energy consumption during construction based data from similar projects. This section describes updates and modifications made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. Of all comments received, 2 include reference to the energy analysis of the Draft Program EIS/EIR (A-3.21 and A-3.22) but do not warrant any changes to any of the Program EIS/EIR analysis (refer to Chapter 5.0 for responses to comments). 3.4.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.4.1.1 Federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) requires vehicle manufacturers to comply with the gas mileage, or fuel economy, standards set by the Department of Transportation (DOT). CAFE values are obtained using the city and highway fuel economy test results and a weighted average of vehicle sales. The EPA administers the testing program that generates the fuel economy data. The National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration NHTSA, part of DOT, is authorized to assess penalties based on the information EPA supplies and to modify the standards. Executive Order 12185, Conservation of Petroleum and Natural Gas Executive Order 12185 encourages additional conservation of petroleum and natural gas by recipients of Federal financial assistance.1 1 December 17, 1979, § 44 F.R.75093 3.4.1.2 State California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, Energy Efficiency Standards Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations, Energy Efficiency Standards, ensures efficient energy use in new buildings constructed, or for additions and alterations to, residential and nonresidential buildings in California. The standards regulate energy consumed for heating, cooling, ventilation, water heating, and lighting. The standards are updated approximately every three years and are enforced through the local building permit process.2 These standards may apply to the proposed passenger stations included within the Build action alternatives. 2 California Energy Commission, 2014 3.4.1.3 Local Monterey County General Plan The Monterey County General Plan Conservation/Open Space Element provides policies to promote efficient energy use. The use of solar, wind, and other renewable resources in new buildings is encouraged, minimization of energy expenditure for transportation, and directed development to conserve energy is favored. San Luis Obispo County General Plan The San Luis Obispo County General Plan Conservation and Open Space Element contains policies and implementation strategies related to energy conservation. These policies prioritize increased conservation and efficiency in all sectors of energy use, development and use of renewable resources, local control of energy decisions and sources, decreasing energy consumption, offering incentives for energy conservation, and integrating green building practices and incentives. 3.4.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION This section describes the methods used to estimate the potential energy-related impacts and benefits associated with the project components proposed rail improvements under study. Impacts resulting from construction and operation are identified and evaluated. Operational Energy Use Energy use from operations is the energy consumed in the actual operation of the train as it moves down the track. This energy usage accounts for more than half of the total energy used when analyzed in terms of the life of a project. The analysis of transportation-related energy consumption focuses on the estimated fuel consumption relative to the use of existing transportation modes (auto, air, etc.). The energy consumption factors for automobiles were obtained from the Transportation Energy Data Book: Edition 32, which bases its estimates on national averages for road, traffic, and weather conditions and are intended for general comparisons.3 The analysis uses ridership findings, diversions from other modes of transportation, and any difference in energy usage. Reviewing the ridership forecasts from the Coast Daylight SDP provides a quantitative basis for calculating the energy consumption from VMT reduction due to increased passenger rail ridership. 3 USDOE, 2013 4 U.S. Congress, Budget Office 1977; U.S. Congress, Budget Office 1982; California State Department of Transportation 1983; ICF International, 2013 Construction Energy Usage Construction energy usage is the energy needed to construct and maintain a facility, and manufacture and maintain vehicles using the facility. The primary construction energy consumption for this analysis is the energy that would be used to construct and maintain new rail infrastructure. This method uses construction energy intensity factors4 to calculate energy consumption. Table 3.4-1 presents the construction energy consumption factors used in this analysis. These estimates are appropriate for comparison purposes. Additional energy resources would be consumed by the manufacturing and transportation of materials and equipment to and from any work sites. The amount of energy resources cannot be reasonably estimated without detailed construction plans and greater certainty about which elements of the Build Alternative action alternatives will move forward for further design and potential construction. Therefore, energy consumption associated with such uses would be evaluated during any subsequent project-level environmental review. Table 3.4-1 Construction-Related Energy Consumption Factors Type of Facility Rural Compared to Urbang Factor (billions of BTUs) Highway – At grade Rurala 17.07/one-way lane mile Urbanb 26.28/one-way lane mile Highway – Elevated Rurala 130.38/one-way lane mile Urbanb 327.31/one-way lane mile Railway – At Grade Ruralc 12.29/one-way trackway mile Urband 19.11/one-way trackway mile Railway – Elevated Ruralc 55.46/one-way trackway mile Urband 55.63/one-way trackway mile Railway – Tunnel NAd 99.51/one-way trackway mile Railway – Station NAe 78f/station a Estimates reflect average roadway construction energy consumption. b Estimates reflect range maximum for roadway construction energy consumption. c Estimates reflect typical rail system construction energy consumption. d Estimates reflect energy consumption for BART system construction as surrogate for rail construction through urban area. e Discreet (i.e., non-alignment-related facilities) are not differentiated between rural or urban because the data used to develop the respective values were not differentiated as such. Some difference between the actual values might be expected. f Value for construction of freight terminal. Used as proxy for station consumption factors. g Differences between the construction-related energy consumption factors for urban and rural settings reflect differences in construction methods, demolition requirements, utility accommodation, etc Source: U.S. Congress, Budget Office 1977; U.S. Congress, Budget Office 1982; California State Department of Transportation 1983; ICF International, 2013  3.4.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT The study area for energy use is the portion of the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, including the areas inside and outside of the existing railroad ROW in which potential physical components improvements would be constructed. 3.4.3.1 Regional Environment The transportation sector consumes the most energy of all sectors in California, making up approximately 38 percent of the total energy budget.5 According to the California Energy Commission (CEC), the population in California is expected grow at an annual compound average rate of 1.1 percent between 2009 and 2030.6 By 2020, California’s infrastructure will face increased demands given the estimated 11 million more people and 98 million added intercity trips. This anticipated population growth is expected to result in increased demand for travel in California. 5 EIA, 2011 6 CEC, 2010, p. 11 7 CEC, 2005a 8 PG&E, 2013 In general, demand for transportation services (and, therefore, transportationrelated energy use) mirrors growth in population and economic output. In California, the CEC used historical trends coupled with current population and economic growth and gasoline price projections to estimate that on-road miles traveled will increase by 41 percent between 2003 and 2025 statewide—from 314 billion to 446 billion. Notwithstanding this large increase, the CEC predicts that instate road transportation fuel gasoline usage is anticipated to remain steady at about 15 billion gallons of gasoline (315 million barrels of oil-equivalent) per year, as a result of the introduction of more fuel-efficient cars.7 3.4.3.2 Electricity Demand The portion of the Coast Corridor considered in this document is located within the 70,000 square-mile service area of Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), a large investorowned utility that serves 15 million people throughout northern and central California. PG&E produces or buys its energy from a mix of conventional and renewable generating sources, which is then delivered via 141,215 circuit miles of electric distribution lines and 18,616 circuit miles of interconnected transmission lines. 8 3.4.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.4.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative assumes that the only physical rail component improvement that would be added between Salinas and San Luis Obispo would be the implementation of PTC. Construction-period energy use would be assumed during implementation of such improvements components; operation of PTC would also require additional energy usage above existing levels. Under the No Build Alternative, enhancement of passenger rail operations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo would not occur and existing passenger rail service would continue, including the Coast Starlight and Amtrak service to Southern California. Therefore, there would be little or no change in operational energy consumption related to passenger rail service in the Corridor. As set forth in Chapter 9 of the SDP, freight rail operations in the Corridor are projected to increase. As of 2013, 2 daily long-haul freight trains travel between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. By the year 2020, the SDP projects that a total of 4 daily long-haul freight trains would travel along the Corridor. Accordingly, energy consumption related to freight rail would likely increase over existing conditions, though new freight rail service would potentially utilize newer, more energy efficient locomotive technology. 3.4.4.2 Build Alternative Construction-Period Energy Usage The Build Alternative would result in construction energy usage for the manufacture of materials, construction activities and equipment associated with implementation of the proposed rail improvements Build Alternative components, travel of construction workers, and potential traffic delays and/or detours (rail and auto) as a result of construction. Energy-related consumption factors for construction activities are presented in Table 3.4-1. Construction-related energy consumption for locomotives varies between 12 and 60 million British thermal units (BTU), depending on the location of construction (i.e., urban/rural and elevated/at-grade).  The energy used during construction would be any additional energy consumption beyond what is associated with the No Build Alternative. This would constitute irretrievable energy expenditure. Specific design and construction plans are needed to calculate the construction-related energy consumption associated with each physical improvement Build Alternative component. Operational Energy Consumption The Build Alternative would result in operating 2 additional trains per day, which would result in additional energy consumption. Implementation of new service would likely result in increased ridership. It is expected that some, if not all of the additional passengers would have traveled via personal automobile or bus. Reviewing the ridership forecasts from the Coast Daylight SDP can provide a quantitative basis for calculating the energy consumption from VMT reduction due to increased passenger rail ridership. Table 3.4-2 below from the Coast Daylight SDP presents annual ridership forecasts for 2020 and 2040. Table 3.4-2 2020 and 2040 Annual forecasts for Coast Daylight Service Options  Forecast Year 2020 Forecast Year 2040 Baseline Build Baseline Build  Annual ridership Coast Daylight    Markets North of San Luis Obispo 0 87,000 0 217,000 Markets Through San Luis Obispo 0 37,000 0 57,000 Total 0 124,000 0 274,000 Coast Starlight Markets North of San Luis Obispo 74,000 73,000 103,000 107,000 Markets Through San Luis Obispo 28,000 32,000 37,000 43,000 Total 102,000 105,000 140,000 150,000 Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b The SDP forecasts increased ridership with the advent of new service, which would result in an overall decrease in automobile VMT. As shown in Table 3.4-2, the SDP projects that Coast Daylight service would generate about 124,000 annual person trips by 2020. This averages to about 300 person trips per day. The SDP roughly quantifies the increase in rail ridership into a projected reduction of about 11,000 daily VMT for the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region as a whole. The projected expansion of Coast Daylight service by the year 2040 would further reduce VMT in the Central Coast/Monterey Bay region by an additional 15,000 daily miles (26,000 daily miles total). It is expected that a portion of these passengers would be using the rail service in place of vehicle, bus, or air travel, thus reducing transportationrelated energy consumption. These VMT reductions comprise relatively small amounts of total regional VMT and are, thus, expected to translate to small reductions in energy consumption. Table 3.4-3 presents energy use associated with various types of passenger travel from 2011. Table 3.4-3 Passenger Travel and Energy Use, 2011  Vehicle Miles (millions) Passenger Miles (millions) Load factor (persons/ vehicle Energy Intensities Energy Use (trillion Btu) (Btu per vehicle mile) (Btu per passenger mile) Cars 1,561,400 2,420,325 1.55 5,214 3,364 8,140.0 Transit Buses 2,425 21,574 8.9 37,718 4,240 91.5 Air (certified route) 5,542 566,622 102.2 269,681 2,638 1,494.7 Intercity Rail (Amtrak) 296 6,670 22.5 49,080 2,214 15.5 Source: USDOE, 2013. As shown in Table 3.4-3, travel by rail is the most energy efficient mode of longdistance, intercity transportation. Intercity rail, such as Amtrak, consumes about 1,000 to 2,000 BTUs per passenger mile less than bus or automobile. This would result in substantial BTU savings per passenger mile, which over the life of the project would result in notable energy savings relative to the No Build Alternative. Travel by airplane is also more energy efficient on a mile-by-mile basis when compared to automobiles and buses; however, air service is not a viable mode of transportation between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Moreover, intrastate and other “short-hop” flights are generally considered less efficient on a fuel-per-mile basis, owing to substantial fuel requirements associated with take-off. It should be noted that the rail would be more energy efficient only when sufficient number of passengers use the train. An empty train would not reduce energy consumption. The addition of the Coast Daylight service would have the potential to reduce automobile and bus VMT and energy consumption, but it would also increase rail VMT and associated energy consumption. The displacement of automobile VMT to increased ridership on the railway would result in reduced transportation-related energy consumption. However, rail trips would occur regardless of whether a person would choose to travel by car or by rail. Thus, there would only be a decrease in energy consumption if the traveler chooses to travel by rail instead of automobile. Physical Improvements Track Upgrades Construction-Period Energy Usage Construction of the track retrofits and upgrades would require manufacturing of steel to replace all lumber ties that are currently in place along the alignment. Manufacturing the steel and other materials for these track upgrades would increase indirect energy use. Moderate energy consumption would also result from the use of powered construction equipment and travel of workers to work sites. Diesel powered trucks and/or locomotives would be needed to bring equipment and supplies to active construction areas. Additional temporary energy consumption would result from idling or slowed locomotives due to construction related interruptions to the existing railway. Operational Energy Usage Upgraded tracks would result in greater efficiencies by reducing friction and vibrations. Furthermore, proposed steel rail ties are recognized to require less maintenance, thereby resulting in reduced energy consumption from maintenance vehicles and equipment. Signal Upgrades/New Powered Switches Construction-Period Energy Usage Construction of the signal upgrades and new powered switches would result in minimal indirect energy consumption. Manufacturing the materials needed and delivering them to the construction site would require energy use; however, the quantity needed is dependent on the number of signals that would be  replaced/upgraded, which is currently unknown. Some energy consumption would occur associated with worker travel to and from the construction sites, but extensive use of heavy machinery to install these components improvements is not anticipated. Operational Energy Usage The signal upgrades and new powered switches would improve operational service and reliability. Under the current Track Warrant Control (TWC) portions of the alignment, train operators must wait for permission from UPRR dispatchers before moving from block to block, slowing train speeds and resulting in periods of idling. CTC manages this centrally via remotely controlled signals and switches, reducing the amount of time trains spend idling, ultimately increasing the efficiency of the railway infrastructure.9 These upgrades would likely improve the safety, efficiency, and reliability of service, which could result in greater ridership due to improved service, as well as allow for denser rail use (more trains on the railroad due to greater traffic control and efficiency). This would result in more energy consumption with more trains using the rail, but operations would run more efficiently and, thus, consumption would be offset by increased ridership (less individual VMT) and less time spend idling on the rail. 9 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, p. 9-4 Curve/Track Realignments Construction-Period Energy Usage Construction of the curve and track realignments would result in increased indirect energy consumption from materials manufacturing. Operation of potential construction equipment, construction worker travel, as well as delays and detours during construction of the track realignments, would also lead to additional energy consumption. Some of this increased energy consumption would be offset by improved service efficiency and subsequent increased ridership and related reduction in VMT. Given that the curve realignment designs are schematic, specific energy reduction resulting from improved service cannot be quantified. Operational Energy Usage Operational energy use may increase from improved train speeds along the Corridor resulting from track straightening. If one or more curve realignments ultimately reduce the length of the railway, this would offset some of the increased energy  consumption related to higher speeds. Furthermore, increased train speeds would serve to improve train service, resulting in increased ridership and reduced consumption from personal automobiles. Sidings/Siding Extensions and New Second Mainline Construction-Period Energy Usage Construction of new sidings, siding extensions, and the new second mainline would increase indirect energy consumption from new materials manufacturing. Operation of required construction equipment and construction worker travel would also lead to additional energy consumption. Some of this increased energy consumption would be offset by improved service efficiency and subsequent increased ridership and related reduction in VMT. Operational Energy Usage Operational efficiency would increase with new and improved siding extensions and the new second mainline. There would be fewer passenger train delays as the new sidings would accommodate longer freight trains. Increased freight train delays could occur, resulting in increased freight rail energy consumption due to idling. However, overall less train idling could potentially occur due to more optimal locations of siding and increased train speeds. Operation of the new second mainline, along with improved signaling, would increase train speeds and result in increased locomotive efficiencies (in mpg), and could potentially reduce overall operational energy consumption. Personal automobile VMT and associated energy consumption would likely be reduced by improving the passenger rail service, and result in increased rail ridership. New Stations Construction-Period Energy Usage Construction of the new passenger stations in Soledad and King City would increase indirect energy consumption resulting from manufacturing, operation of required construction equipment, and construction worker travel. However, the stations themselves would consist of a platform and minimal amenities, thus requiring nominal construction materials. Some of this increased energy consumption would be offset by increased ridership and related reduction in automobile VMT. Operational Energy Usage Operation of the new passenger stations would consume some energy, mostly to operate ticket stations, restrooms, and other general daily building energy needs. Both stations are anticipated to be simple, thus energy requirements will likely be low. Additional train stations would introduce new stops along the alignment, and could be expected to use more energy to accelerate and decelerate in these locations. Increased accessibly to the new stations would likely increase ridership, and would offset some of the added energy consumption by reducing personal vehicle VMT. 3.4.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the location-specific physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative incorporates revised draft plans for the City of King passenger station, includes a modified footprint for the King City siding extension, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative explicitly includes the aforementioned 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects related to energy for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded features are located. The discussion below assesses energy effects relative to such modified or excluded features. Construction-Period Energy Usage In the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative. The Preferred Alternative’s key changes include modifications requested by the City of King to a siding extension and station area, 27 miles of “island” CTC (signal upgrades), and the removal of four curve realignments through the same general area. The Preferred Alternative would increase the length of the siding extension in the City of King from 10,000 feet to 14,800 feet. As a result, this would require more energy to construct than under the Build Alternative. However, given the reduced footprint of the new City of King passenger station and exclusion of four curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would result in lower energy use compared to the Build Alternative. Installation of island CTC would not be expected to require heavy-duty, energy intensive machinery for installation. Accordingly, construction-period energy expenditures under the Preferred Alternative would be similar to or lower than under the Build Alternative. Operational Energy Consumption In the Preferred Alternative, Coast Daylight service would operate in the same capacity as in the Build Alternative and would, thus, result in similar energy requirements as the Build Alternative with additional service. No new or worsened operational energy expenditures would be expected with the Preferred Alternative. 3.4.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures would be developed and implemented as specific improvements are implemented to reduce potential energy related impacts. Such strategies may include the following: The measures listed below are applicable to the action alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. MIN-ENG-1. Develop and implement a construction energy conservation plan. MIN-ENG-2. Explore the opportunity to use newer, more energy efficient construction equipment and materials. MIN-ENG-3. Consider, as feasible, acquisition of energy-efficient rolling stock to provide new passenger service. MIN-ENG-4. Implement a program to encourage construction workers to carpool or use public transportation to get to and from active work sites. MIN-ENG-5. As feasible, minimize grade changes in steep terrain areas to reduce the use of diesel fuel. MIN-ENG-6. Encourage the development of intermodal transit connections to reduce automobile VMT associated with the railway. 3.4.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS As specific components of the Build Alternative project are further designed, a more refined analysis of operation and construction energy usage would be conducted. Evaluation and identification of appropriate mitigation measures will be conducted during project-level review where the impacts to energy usage would be substantial appropriate.                 Page intentionally left blank 3.5 LAND USE AND PLANNING, COMMUNITIES AND NEIGHBORHOODS, PROPERTY AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE This section evaluates potential land use and community effects related to the proposed No Build and action alternatives and includes an assessment of potential Justice effects impacts to low income and minority populations. This section describes updates and modifications made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. Of all comments received, six comments (A-3.23 through A-3.28) reference the land use/environmental justice section of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Draft Program EIS/EIR over-reported certain permanent impacts associated with new sidings and siding extensions. Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP) data was used for analyzing impacts to agricultural resources. FMMP data does not account for roads, highways, or railroads. Permanent impacts to FMMP categories were thus over-reported due to overlap between existing railroad ROW (e.g., permanent siding and track/signal upgrade footprints) and FMMP mapping data (known as polygons). Therefore, this Final Program EIS/EIR correctly reports permanent impacts resulting from the project components as zero since farmland does not exist within the railroad ROW. 3.5.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.5.1.1 Federal United States Army National Guard An approximately 7.5 mile long portion of the existing Coast Corridor railroad travels through Camp Roberts, a US Army training facility. Within Camp Roberts, the Army leases the railroad right of way to UPRR. Easements through this and other Army National Guard properties are regulated under 10 USC 2668.1 1 Gardner, Orlando. Realty Officer. Army Corps of Engineers. March 13, 2013 - phone communication. Los Padres National Forest About 2 miles of the existing Coast Corridor railroad traverses the Los Padres National Forest near the Cuesta Grade north of the City of San Luis Obispo. The existing railroad travels through privately held land within the boundaries of the National Forest. The Los Padres National Forest, like other national forests, includes a mix of public and privately held properties within its boundaries. Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act The Uniform Act was enacted by Congress to ensure that owners of real property that is acquired for federal and federally-assisted projects and persons displaced as a direct result of such projects are treated fairly, consistently, and equitably.2 In the event any of the proposed improvements use federal assistance towards property acquisition, adherence to the Uniform Act is required. 2 42 U.S.C. 4601 et seq. To comply with the Uniform Act and its implementing regulations, all property owners and any persons displaced by a federally funded project must be informed in writing of their status and eligibility for any payments or assistance. Such payments and assistance may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: . Just compensation for property acquired, whether in fee, easement, or other form of property rights acquisition. Just compensation will be established by an approved appraisal of fair market value or other processes defined in the Uniform Act and the regulations. . An opportunity for the property owner to accompany the appraiser during inspection of the property. . Eligible closing costs and other expenses related to the transfer of property. . Assistance in finding and relocating to replacement property. . Eligible expenses for moving personal property to a replacement site. . Replacement housing payments and related expenses for displaced residential owners and tenants. . Business reestablishment payments to small business and other defined eligible entities. . Written noticed informing property owners and displaced persons of their rights and eligibility for assistance. . A notice that no one will be required to move from the acquired property from which they are being displaced for a minimum of 90 days. Executive Order No. 12898 Executive Order No. 12898 requires all federal agencies to identify and address, as appropriate, any disproportionately high adverse human health and environmental effects of their programs, policies, and activities, on minority populations and lowincome populations in the United States.3 3 Executive Order No. 12898, 1994 4 DOT Order 5610.2, Appendix Definitions, sub.[g] In summary, the Order directs Federal agencies to conform to existing laws such that their actions: . Do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, or national origin; . Identify and address disproportionately high and adverse health or environmental effects of their actions on minority and low-income populations; . Provide opportunities for community input in the NEPA process, including input on potential effects and mitigation measures. US DOT Order 5610.2(a) (2012) on environmental justice has defined “disproportionately high and adverse effect on minority and low-income populations” to mean an adverse effect that is predominately borne by a minority population and/or a low-income population, or will be suffered by the minority population and/or low-income population and is appreciably more severe or greater in magnitude than the adverse effect that will be suffered by the non-minority population and/or non-low-income population.4 According to CEQ, agencies are required to make diligent efforts to involve the public throughout the NEPA process and the participation of low-income, minority, and tribal populations are necessary. Therefore, adequate outreach to these communities may require adaptive or innovative approaches to overcome potential linguistic, cultural, economic barriers that would affect their participation.  Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 Under Title VI, each Federal agency is required to ensure that no person, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, is excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance. 3.5.1.2 State California Department of Fish and Wildlife The existing railroad is immediately adjacent to the Big Sandy Wildlife Area, a nature reserve along the Salinas River under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW). CDFW has no local area land use plan for Big Sandy Wildlife Area.5 Title 14, Section 550 of the California Code of Regulations grants the Regional Manager the authority to regulate public use of designated State wildlife areas. The southern portion of Big Sandy Wildlife Area is coterminous with a section of the Camp Roberts Military Reservation. 5 Personal Communication with Bob Stafford on March 8, 2013. 6 County of Monterey, 2007, Circulation Element 3.5.1.3 Local Local agencies with land use jurisdiction in the study area are the counties of Monterey and San Luis Obispo, and the cities of Salinas, Soledad, King, Paso Robles, and Atascadero. The existing rail alignment also traverses the incorporated City of Gonzales, but no new facilities outside the railroad ROW are proposed there. Monterey County General Plan The Monterey County General Plan Land Use and Circulation Elements establish policies to guide the maintenance and expansion of rail service in the county. The plan protects the potential for future rail transportation and supporting facilities in major industrial and commercial centers. The plan includes a general framework to encourage growth within or near incorporated cities and designated community areas where existing services are available. Transit-oriented development around existing and future transportation infrastructure is also encouraged.6 City of Salinas General Plan The Circulation Element of the City of Salinas General Plan directs the city to work with Amtrak to provide commuter rail service to the Silicon Valley and other major destinations. The plan also includes specific policies to support maintenance and expanded use of the City’s Intermodal Transportation Center, the local Coast Corridor stop. The plan contains broad policies and programs to support an integrated transportation network and supportive land use. City of Soledad The City of Soledad General Plan includes a goal to establish a train station in the downtown area. The General Plan includes additional goals and policies to promote residential and commercial development in close proximity to the station to make transit use a convenient and viable alternative transportation mode. The General Plan’s goal for a station was furthered through the City’s adoption of a Downtown Specific Plan, which calls for the development of an Intermodal Transit Station around where the existing railroad travels through Soledad. The Specific Plan includes a schematic diagram for the station area, including passenger platforms, parking, and ticket kiosks. Prior to adopting the Specific Plan, the City certified an accompanying EIR that examined program-level effects of the proposed station as part of a larger program of land use and transportation changes in the downtown area. City of King General Plan King City has adopted several documents that contain plans and policies supporting a downtown passenger rail station along the existing railroad tracks that traverse the city. The Historic Corridor Revitalization Plan includes plans for public investment and development in the area surrounding the proposed station. The rail stop is identified as an important part of the revitalization effort, serving commuters, tourists, and downtown businesses. Further, the First Street Corridor Master Plan includes conceptual station design plans. The plan shows a layout of platforms, parking, and intermodal connection points. As described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design [(MMTC) (2014)]. San Luis Obispo County General Plan The San Luis Obispo General Plan Circulation Element identifies the current rail station in San Luis Obispo as an important component of the regional transportation network. The plan calls for coordination between different modes of transportation to reinforce federal, state, regional, and local agency goals. City of El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles) General Plan The Paso Robles General Plan promotes regional, interstate, and intrastate rail service through a broad range of action items, including support of expanding Amtrak rail service, and improvements to existing railroad crossings.7 Paso Robles has also adopted policies and action items to retain the rural, open space, and agricultural areas surrounding the city. The city intends that its designation of a “Purple Belt” (wine grape belt) will preserve agriculture and open space and limit the conversion of lands from viticultural to urban uses.8 7 City of El Paso de Robles, 2011, Circulation Element 8 City of El Paso de Robles, 2003, Open Space Element 9 City of Atascadero, 2002, p. III-5 10 The Coast Corridor project does not propose any changes to the crossings in Atascadero. The project presumes leaving these crossing intact. This decision does not, however, preclude the City from proceeding with new grade separations in conjunction with Union Pacific. 11 City of San Luis Obispo, 2010, p. 1-43 12 City of San Luis, 2010, p. 1-29 City of Atascadero General Plan The City of Atascadero General Plan recommends improving passenger service on the Coast Starlight. The Plan also identifies opportunities to replace existing atgrade crossings with grade separation structures.9, 10 City of San Luis Obispo General Plan The General Plan for the City of San Luis Obispo includes plans to develop tourism services around the existing train station.11 The plan further stipulates that residential areas should be separated or screened from the railroad right-of-way.12 3.5.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION In this analysis, a land use impact is considered significant on the basis of compatibility with applicable local land use plans, policies, and regulations adopted for the purpose of avoiding or mitigating an environmental impact. Proposed components improvements are considered significant if determined to conflict with any applicable habitat conservation plan or natural community conservation plan. Additionally, impacts are evaluated for their potential to physically divide an established community.  The Draft Program EIS/EIR included siding and siding extension in its operational impact analysis. As discussed above in Section 3.5.1, operational impacts to agricultural and forest resources were over-reported in the Draft Program EIS/EIR, and included areas within existing ROW. Therefore, permanent impacts due to sidings and siding extensions have been revised to report as zero since no protected farmland is assumed to exist within the railroad ROW. Study Areas Land Use The land use study area includes the existing railroad ROW and surrounding “buffer areas” whose sizes are based on the type of proposed physical component improvement. The study area distances account for the amount of land that would potentially be directly and indirectly disturbed based on the anticipated severity of the construction associated with different types of improvements project components. . Curve Realignments: The study area was comprised of 100 feet on either side of proposed realignments for permanent impact areas and 200 feet on either side of the proposed alignment for temporary impact areas. . Siding Extensions and New Siding: The study area was comprised of the existing railroad ROW for permanent impact areas and 50 feet on either side of the proposed alignment for temporary impact areas. . Second Mainline: The study area was comprised of the existing railroad ROW for permanent impact areas and 100 feet on either side of the ROW for the proposed second mainline. . Stations: The proposed station impact area is the permanent station footprint within the community. Accordingly, these stations footprints are the same as the station footprints assessed within these local jurisdiction’s planning documents.13 13 The Draft Program EIS/EIR used the First Street Corridor Master Plan (2013) to assess potential City of King station impacts related to geology and soils. In response to comments provided by the City of King, the Preferred Alternative uses the conceptual station plans from the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design (2014). To assess potential property acquisition requirements, the study area is 100 feet on either side of the alignment centerlines. The study area is intended to represent such properties requiring partial or full acquisitions. The study area includes portions of several communities and neighborhoods, as discussed further in Subsection 3.5.2, Environmental Consequences. Environmental Justice For environmental justice impacts, the study area extends to 1 mile on either side of the centerline of proposed alignment changes and 1 mile from the two proposed new station areas. The breadth of the environmental justice study area provides a conservative estimate of the extent to which the Build Alternative action alternatives might result in disproportionately high or adverse effects on minority and/or low income populations. The analysis was conducted using existing U.S. Census 2010 tract and block group data compiled in a geographic information systems GIS format. Additionally, aerial photos, field observations, review of local general plans or regional plans, and informal consultation with local planning agencies on current and planned land uses all informed this analysis. Land Use Compatibility Land use compatibility was determined by comparing the proposed physical components improvements with existing land uses. Accordingly, each type of land use was assigned a compatibility rating of low, medium, or high based on the sensitivity of the existing land use within the proposed improvement study areas. For this program-level review, compatibility determinations were based on general plan land use designations.14 14 In some instances, local general plans do not designate the existing railroad right-of-way as a transportation use, but rather as whatever the adjacent land use may be. Accordingly, potential effects to various land use categories may be overstated. Table 3.5-1 summarizes the potential compatibility rating of the proposed physical components improvements with existing land use. A proposed improvement project component was considered highly compatible if it would be located in areas planned for transportation multi-modal centers or corridor development, redevelopment, economic revitalization, transit-oriented development, or highintensity employment uses. A proposed improvement project component would have medium compatibility if it would require the conversion of land intended for multi-family residential, schools, low-intensity industrial, and hospital uses. Compatibility would be considered low if an alternative a project component would be potentially inconsistent with local or regional planning documents. As the table indicates, some land use types can result in varying degrees of compatibility depending on context. Agriculture is one such use; it is also the predominant land use throughout the entirety of the corridor. High compatibility is assumed for components improvements traveling along agricultural lands, but low compatibility is assumed if a improvement component requires the conversion of existing agricultural lands to transportation use. As further discussed in Section 3.7, Agricultural and Forest Resources, farmland in both Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties is highly protected. Table 3.5-1 Compatibility of Land Use Types Low Compatibility Medium Compatibility High Compatibility Single-family residential, community parks, neighborhood park, habitat conservation area, elementary/middle school (widened or new right-of-way needed), agricultural (when widened or new right-of-way needed) Multifamily residential, high schools, low-intensity industrial, hospitals Business park/regional commercial, multifamily residential, existing or planned transit center, high intensity industrial park, service commercial, commercial recreation, college, transportation/utilities, high-intensity government facilities, airport or train station, agricultural (no new right-of-way needed) Source: Circlepoint, 2013 Property The analysis assessed existing land uses located adjacent to each proposed alignment. Potential property acquisitions were determined based on the potential acreage that would be needed for a given physical component improvement and whether the land use-type was particularly sensitive to change. Accordingly, Table 3.5-2 ranks potential property acquisitions as high, medium, or low based on land use-type. Potential impacts include partial or full acquisition of properties, displacement and relocation of existing uses, or demolition of properties. Table 3.5-2 Rankings of Potential Property Impacts  Urban/ Suburban Industrial Agricultural Open Space Build Alternative Requirements No additional right-of-way required Low Low Low Low Widening of existing rightof-way required High Medium High Medium  Urban/ Suburban Industrial Agricultural Open Space New corridor (new right-ofway required) High High High High Source: Circlepoint, 2013 To identify potential property acquisitions, land uses in the study area were characterized by type and cross-referenced against aerial maps to determine potential direct impact to structures. In Table 3.5-3 below, property acquisitions are assessed as a percentage of private property that would need to be acquired to complete each physical component improvement. This calculation considers the acreage of private land that would be required for construction as a percentage of the total acreage required for construction. Communities and Neighborhoods This section also considers potential impacts on communities and neighborhoods. A potential impact to communities and neighborhoods was identified if one of the proposed improvements project components would divide an established residential community where no division exists under current conditions, potentially causing a physical disruption to community cohesion. For the most part, physical components improvements to existing transportation corridors would not create substantial new community barriers. Environmental Justice Environmental justice impacts were determined by comparing the minority and lowincome populations of the study area to the demographics of the nearby cities and counties. U.S. Census data was reviewed to determine if such minority or lowincome populations existed within or near the study area using the following thresholds. Communities were considered to be minority or low income if they met at least one of the following criteria: . Whether at least 50 percent of the population in the study area may be minority or 25 percent of the population in the study area is low-income; . Whether the percentage of minority or low-income population in the study area may be at least 10 percent greater than the average generally in the county or community. After environmental justice communities were identified, the analysis determined whether the proposed physical components improvements would occur within or adjacent to an the existing transportation right-of-way railroad ROW or require a new alignment potentially encroaching into an environmental justice community.15 15 Census tract data are used here as a reasonable, best-available proxy for the analysis of impacts to low-income populations, since as of September 2013, block group level data is not available. Block group data for minority populations is available, and is used in this document. The assessment of potential impacts on minority and low-income populations took into consideration the size and type of ROW acquisition that would be necessary for the components improvements. For example, if the proposed alignment would be within an existing ROW, the potential for impacts would be lower than if the alignment would require a new ROW acquisition. Nearly all of the proposed components improvements evaluated under the Build Alternative action alternatives would be located within or adjacent to existing transportation corridors, largely (but not fully) reducing the potential for significant adverse impacts generally. This analysis considers the Build Alternative action alternatives on a corridor-wide basis. 3.5.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT A spectrum of different land uses line the corridor. Agricultural uses are predominant along the length of the corridor from Salinas to San Luis Obispo, but urban and suburban uses are present near city centers. Additional information about the location and character of these uses, as well as information about property ownership, communities and neighborhoods, and environmental justice are provided below. 3.5.3.1 Existing Land Uses Urban/Suburban Urban/suburban uses can include residential, commercial, and recreational uses and are generally concentrated near the cities of San Luis Obispo and Salinas. Smaller towns such as Gonzales, Soledad, King City, Paso Robles, and Atascadero also support urban uses along the corridor.  Agricultural Between developed areas, agricultural uses predominate. Agricultural areas are most common in the Salinas Valley and inland Central Coast region. Section 3.7, Agricultural and Forest Resources, includes information about the agricultural character of the study areas. Industrial/Public Facilities Industrial areas border several portions of the right-of-way, comprising large tracts near agricultural processing facilities, energy production plants and other facilities. In the study area, industrial uses are largely located on the outskirts of urban areas. The existing railroad traverses the San Ardo oil and gas field at which occurs drilling and processing of crude oil and raw gas products. Public facilities include Camp Roberts, an Army National Guard post located north of San Miguel, and state prisons in Soledad and near San Luis Obispo. Open Spaces/Rural Lands Open space areas are present in urban and non-urban contexts throughout the corridor. Big Sandy Wildlife Reserve and Los Padres National Forest are two of the largest open space areas adjacent to the corridor; both are located in Monterey County. Rural lands are also prevalent in non-urban portions of the project corridor. Rural lands can include any other non-developed land not in agricultural use. 3.5.3.2 Property The railroad ROW itself is owned by UPRR. The majority of study properties outside the ROW are privately owned. One exception is the McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignment, where the proposed realignment includes portions of Big Sandy Wildlife Area and Camp Roberts.16 Portions of other components improvements would also cross public roads in some locations. 16 Study area lands along the proposed second mainline in the Los Padres National Forest are privately held. 3.5.3.3 Communities and Neighborhoods The existing rail alignment traverses several existing communities. The study area includes the following incorporated cities: Salinas, Gonzales, Soledad, King City, Paso Robles, Atascadero, and San Luis Obispo. Several unincorporated communities are in the study areas, as well. These include: Chualar, San Lucas, San Ardo, Bradley, San Miguel, Templeton, and Santa Margarita. The railroad runs parallel to the freeway that skirts the downtown or central district of many of these communities. Communities where the railway does not intersect the downtown area include: Chualar, Gonzales, San Lucas, San Ardo, Bradley, San Miguel, Templeton, and Atascadero. In other communities, the railroad goes through or near the downtown area. These communities include: Salinas, Soledad, King City, Paso Robles, Santa Margarita and San Luis Obispo. There are also long stretches of the existing alignment where the railway passes by open space and low-density residential areas. These are not neighborhoods in the same sense as the communities identified above; however, communities may form around residential areas. 3.5.3.4 Environmental Justice Communities for which e Environmental justice communities considerations are relevant were identified throughout the corridor. As shown in Figure 3.5-1, lowincome environmental justice communities were identified throughout the corridor, particularly in urban areas in and outside of San Luis Obispo, near King City, and in and outside of Salinas. The majority of the study area within Monterey County includes minority environmental justice communities. In San Luis Obispo County, demographic data indicates a smaller number of minority environmental justice communities. Along the entirety of the project corridor, about 46 percent of study area census block groups have minority environmental justice communities. About 14 percent of census tracts within the study area have populations of people living below the poverty line and are, thus, low-income environmental justice communities. 3.5.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.5.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing passenger service, with some expansion of freight rail traffic. However, the No Build Alternative does not include expansion of existing physical components between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, with the exception of PTC upgrades. Such PTC signal upgrades would occur as part of the No Build Alternative. The PTC improvements would be located immediately adjacent to the railroad tracks, within the right-of-way, and would not disrupt existing land uses. Under the No Build Alternative, it is generally assumed, based on local planning documents, between today and 2040, there would be no substantial changes in allowable land uses or to communities in the study area. Moderate changes in land use could be expected in urban areas along the right-of-way as a result of growth in population, transportation improvement projects, and other economic changes in the Coast Corridor region. Additionally, some agricultural lands are anticipated to be converted to urban uses, particularly those in proximity to existing communities. However, most of the local cities have selectively focused future growth away from important agricultural lands. This is particularly true in Monterey County, which has adopted strong farmland protection policies, as well as in the Paso Robles viticultural region. However, the No Build Alternative would result in little perceptible land use change, and no substantial change or effect on land use, property ownership, communities, or environmental justice communities. 3.5.4.2 Build Alternative Land Use Construction-Period Effects Generally, construction of any of the proposed physical improvements Build Alternative components that would be placed within the existing railroad tracks or existing railroad ROW (e.g., rail and track upgrades, signal upgrades, and powered switches) would result in little or no conflict with adjacent or nearby land uses or property, as all such work would occur within or immediately adjacent to the existing railroad. Certain other proposed physical improvements Build Alternative components, such as curve realignments and new or extended sidings and the new second mainline may in some cases diverge substantially from the existing railroad ROW. Construction (and as described further below) of such improvements would likely require staging areas on adjacent lands that may be in non-transportation related uses. Such uses would be temporary, lasting for the duration of construction, after which any land use incompatibility would be alleviated. During construction, temporary land use impacts could include road closures and traffic detours, which could in turn disrupt access to public facilities, emergency vehicle access, and pose potential physical barriers to communities and business districts. However, these effects would be temporary in duration and upon completing construction, the affected areas could would be restored to  pre-construction conditions. Depending on the design of proposed components improvements, disruptions in local access or temporary relocation of public facilities could would occur, as discussed further in Section 3.1, Traffic and Travel. Operational Effects Land Use Compatibility and Property Table 3.5-3 summarizes land use compatibility effects by implementation of the Build Alternative components. Property acquisitions would be direct effects of the proposed action; land use compatibility evaluates for potential indirect effects. Certain Build Alternative components would be implemented within or immediately adjacent to the ROW (e.g., track and signal upgrades, powered switches, new sidings, and siding extensions), and would thus have high land use compatibility as they would complement the underlying transportation use. Land use compatibility is also considered high for the two proposed stations, as the receiving cities of Soledad and King City have each adopted land use plans indicating conceptual station area plans consistent with the Build Alternative. Both cities also support the proposed reinstitution of Coast Daylight service. The proposed second mainline also has a generally high compatibility, as it would be located immediately adjacent to the existing transportation corridor, likely within the existing railroad ROW. To the extent the second mainline requires land outside the ROW, compatibility may be lower in areas that would traverse within the boundaries of the Los Padres National Forest. Land use compatibility is generally considered low for components requiring lands outside of the ROW. However, as noted in Table 3.5-1, the compatibility determination depends on the type of land proposed for conversion. Industrial or transportation related properties would be considered compatible, whereas conversion of agricultural or residential lands would be considered highly incompatible. All curve realignments, as well as several sidings and extensions, would require acquisition of lands outside the existing railroad ROW and the conversion of such lands to railroad use. Acquisition of adjacent agricultural, residential, and open space lands would result in an incompatible land use. Particularly, the Harlem/Metz, Coburn, and MP 172 curve realignments would require acquisition of agricultural land adjacent to the Salinas River. As such, these curve realignments would have low land use compatibility. Communities and Neighborhoods Potential direct impacts to communities and neighborhoods could occur if a proposed physical improvement project component would divide an existing residential neighborhood where no division exists under existing conditions. With few exceptions, the proposed physical improvements within the Build Alternative components are within or immediately adjacent to the existing railroad ROW. The proposed train controls, track and rail upgrades, new sidings, and siding extensions, and power switches would all be placed within the existing railroad ROW and, accordingly, would not have any substantial potential to create a new division or substantially exacerbate any existing divisions. The proposed Build Alternative physical components improvements that would diverge from the existing railroad ROW (particularly curve realignments, new sidings, siding extensions, and the second mainline) are generally located in proposed for agricultural or open space areas or otherwise would be outside of intensely developed neighborhoods and existing communities. However, as noted in Table 3.5-3, some of the curve realignments would require land currently in residential use, which could lead to an adverse effect within affected communities. The Wellsona/Paso Robles and Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments in particular, would be are located in residential areas within San Luis Obispo County. As such, these curve realignments would likely require partial or full acquisition of some residential properties within established communities. However, the existing railroad already travels through these communities and, thus, would not create a new barrier that would separate neighborhoods. Environmental Justice Construction-Period Effects Figure 3.5-2 depicts the environmental justice communities in proximity to proposed components improvements. In general, the majority of environmental justice communities are located within Monterey County, particularly near proposed components improvements such as the Harlem/Metz curve realignment, New Chalone Creek siding, Coburn Curve realignment, and King City siding. Environmental justice communities near such proposed improvements project components would potentially experience some of the noted construction effects. It should be emphasized that the number, timing, and potential phasing of Build Alternative improvements components is highly uncertain. Notwithstanding, construction of any of the individual Build Alternative improvements components would produce noise levels higher than the ambient conditions, localized air quality effects, and changes to the visual character and quality of the surroundings. Depending on which elements of the Build Alternative are selected for further design and eventual construction, environmental justice effects could occur if the elements so selected were disproportionately located within identified environmental justice communities and elements discarded were outside such communities. Any further NEPA analysis that may be performed on selected improvements components will need to further examine this potential for environmental justice effects. At the programmatic, Tier 1 level, however, the Build Alternative components improvements as a whole are widely distributed throughout the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor and, accordingly, would not result in a concentration of construction related effects upon such communities. Operational Effects Similar to the discussion above for construction-related effects, there is considerable uncertainty as to which, if any, of the proposed improvements Build Alternative components would become operational. Any further NEPA analysis that may be performed will need to consider if the range of selected components improvements is disproportionately are within environmental justice communities and if such a selection would constitute an would result in disproportionate impacts to those communities environmental justice effect. It should also be noted that the aspects of the Build Alternative offer potential benefits that would be shared broadly. The potential benefit of increased and improved service would have a direct benefit to all communities, including environmental-justice qualifying communities through minor improvements to regional air quality and traffic. As shown in Section 3.2, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, the Build Alternative has modest potential to reduce air pollutants within the Central Coast region as a whole, which includes the environmental justice communities along the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Build Alternative would thus result in somewhat improved air quality effects for the area as a whole. The analysis below describes the potential operational effects of various elements of the Build Alternative components. The factors described would be important to carry forward in any future project-level NEPA review that may occur. Existing Alignment: All ten segments of the existing alignment between Salinas and San Luis Obispo are located within one or more environmental justice communities. Once implemented, upgrades to existing tracks along the alignment would allow for trains to safely travel at faster speeds, which may result in moderate and intermittent increases in noise levels along the much of existing right-of-way. The greatest increase in operational noise would occur along segments #1, #2, #4, and #6 of the existing alignment. New Sidings and Siding Extensions: Six out of seven proposed sidings/siding extensions would occur within minority environmental justice communities. However, half of these sidings near environmental justice communities would involve the extension of an existing siding (as opposed to construction of a new siding), and would therefore be expected to have a less substantial impact on the surrounding community. Localized air quality effects could occur in areas of new and/or extended sidings. In both such locations, trains may dwell for extended periods, resulting in pollution concentrations in specific areas. As a result, there is the potential for proposed siding improvements to have an impact on environmental justice communities, particularly if sidings were to increase idling, noise, and/or pollutant emissions in environmental justice communities. New Stations: New stations proposed for Soledad and King City would both be constructed within a minority environmental justice community. The King City station area is within a low-income environmental justice community as well. If new stations are developed and Coast Daylight service created, new trains would travel relatively slowly through these communities. Stations introduce the potential that trains could dwell for extended periods in the respective communities, thereby introducing the possibility of localized air quality impacts. However, new stations would provide additional travel options for both Soledad and King City and could result in beneficial economic effects. If one or both stations receive seek federal funding for construction, potential effects to environmental justice communities would be assessed in future project-level environmental documentation, as described in subsection 3.5.5, Mitigation Strategies and Subsequent Analysis. Curve Realignments: Seven out of eight proposed curve realignments would occur within minority or low-income environmental justice communities, as identified in Table 3.5-3. Particularly high numbers of environmental justice communities are present near the Harlem/Metz curve realignment. Many of these proposed curve realignments involve multiple segments of rail proposed for realignment; some of these segments are not located near environmental justice communities. Notwithstanding, there is potential for the proposed curve realignments to have an impact on environmental justice communities because curve realignments would require land acquisition/conversion of lands to a transportation use. Curve realignments could potentially add noise and visual implications by realigning the tracks closer to residents. As shown in Section 3.3, Noise and Vibration, potential noise effects are most likely to occur at the proposed Wellsona/Paso Robles, Templeton/Henry, and Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments. The area surrounding the Wellsona/Paso Robles and Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments includes environmental justice communities. Areas near the Templeton/Henry curve realignment do not include environmental justice communities. Visual changes along the corridor are discussed in detail in Section 3.6, Aesthetic and Visual Resources. Since the proposed components improvements are primarily located along an existing railroad ROW, no fundamental changes are expected to occur in the visual character of the study area. However, curve realignments would likely occur outside the right-of-way if they are to substantially reduce the degree of existing track curvature. Second Main Track: There are no environmental justice qualifying communities located near the proposed second main track. Therefore, neither construction nor operation of the second main track is expected to result in an impact to environmental justice communities. Table 3.5-3 Build Alternative: Potential Impacts to Land Use, Property, and Environmental Justice Build Alternative Components Land Use Compatibility Percent of Private Land Potentially Necessary for Acquisition Includes Minority Environmental Justice Communities? Includes Low-Income Environmental Justice Communities? Salinas Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 31 block groups Yes, 5 tracts Spence Siding Extension Agricultural: Low Industrial: Low 100% Yes, 4 block groups None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 15 block groups Yes, 2 tracts Gonzales Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Soledad Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Soledad New Passenger Station Commercial: High Public Facilities: High 100% Yes, 6 block groups None Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments Agricultural: Low Industrial: Low 100% Yes, 3 block groups None Chalone Creek New Siding Agricultural: Low Industrial: Low 100% Yes, 2 block groups None Build Alternative Components Land Use Compatibility Percent of Private Land Potentially Necessary for Acquisition Includes Minority Environmental Justice Communities? Includes Low-Income Environmental Justice Communities? Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 4 block groups None Coburn Curve Realignments Agricultural: Low 100% Yes, 2 block groups No King City Siding Extension Agricultural: Low Commercial: Low Industrial: Low Residential: Low 100% Yes, 8 block groups Yes, 1 tract King City New Passenger Station Commercial: High 100% Yes, 8 block groups Yes, 1 tract King City Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 Agricultural: High N/A Yes, 5 block groups Yes, 1 tract MP 165 Curve Realignment Agricultural: Low 100% Yes, 2 block groups No San Lucas New Siding Agricultural: Low Industrial: Low 100% Yes, 3 block groups No Build Alternative Components Land Use Compatibility Percent of Private Land Potentially Necessary for Acquisition Includes Minority Environmental Justice Communities? Includes Low-Income Environmental Justice Communities? Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 3 block groups No MP 172 Track Realignment Agricultural: Low 100% Yes, 1 block group No San Ardo Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments Agricultural: Low 100% Yes, 1 block group No Bradley Siding Extension Agricultural: Low 100% Yes, 1 block group No Bradley Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A NA Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 2 block groups No Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 2 block groups No McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments Agricultural: Low Public facilities: Low 53.75% Yes, 2 block groups No McKay East Powered Switches Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Wellsona New Siding Residential: Low 100% Yes, 1 block group No Build Alternative Components Land Use Compatibility Percent of Private Land Potentially Necessary for Acquisition Includes Minority Environmental Justice Communities? Includes Low-Income Environmental Justice Communities? Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 3 block groups No Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments Agricultural: Low 100% Yes, 1 block group No Templeton Siding Extension Within ROW: High 98.96% No No Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments Recreation: Low 100% No No Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 1 block group Yes, 1 tract Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment Agricultural: Low Residential: Low 99.92% Yes, 1 block group Yes, 1 tract Santa Margarita Powered Switch Within ROW: High N/A N/A N/A Cuesta Second Main Track Within ROW: High 100% No No Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 Within ROW: High N/A Yes, 1 block group Yes, 6 tracts Source: ICF, 2013  3.5.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the City of King siding extension and the City of King station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects on land use and planning for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess land use and planning effects relative to such modified or excluded components. Land Use Construction-Period Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative. However, because the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County, land use impacts during construction would likely be reduced compared to the Build Alternative. The footprint of the King City siding extension in the Preferred Alternative has been modified to extend exclusively to the north of the existing siding. Although the siding extensions would be constructed within railroad ROW, construction of such components could require temporary use of land outside of the ROW for staging and other construction activities. The vast majority of these lands are in agricultural use; other nearby land uses include roads and utility uses. Based on currently available conceptual design, construction period impacts would be most likely to occur in agricultural or utility areas. Construction of the 27 miles of island CTC would occur within and adjacent to the existing railway between sections 6 through 9. CTC equipment itself would be placed at periodic intervals within the railroad ROW. No heavy construction equipment and equipment staging would be required to implement CTC; therefore, no substantial construction-period effects would be likely to occur. Overall, construction impacts to land use would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than for the Build Alternative. Operational Effects In the Preferred Alternative, Coast Daylight service would operate in the same capacity as in the Build Alternative and would thus result in similar land use effects as the Build Alternative. Given the exclusion of four proposed curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require fewer permanent property and land acquisitions than the Build Alternative. The King City siding extension and island CTC would be located within the existing railroad ROW and thus would have no substantial effects to land use. The station would be built within a commercial area in the City of King, and would be highly compatible with the surrounding land uses. Overall, operational land use impacts would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than the Build Alternative. Environmental Justice Construction-Period Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative. In general, the majority of environmental justice communities are located within Monterey County, particularly near the Harlem/Metz curve realignment, New Chalone Creek siding, Coburn Curve realignment, and the King City siding extension. As shown in Table 3.5-4, the modified footprint of the King City siding extension in the Preferred Alternative has the potential to affect five minority environmental justice block groups, three fewer than in the Build Alternative. The number of low income environmental justice communities is the same between the Preferred Alternative and the No Build Alternative Additionally, there are environmental justice communities located near three of the four curve realignments proposed in the Build Alternative within San Luis Obispo County. These curve realignments have been excluded from the Preferred Alternative and the potential for impacts in these areas would likely be reduced. As previously discussed, implementation of island CTC would not require any heavy machinery, thus associated impacts to environmental justice communities would likely be low. Accordingly, construction-period impacts to environmental justice communities would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than the Build Alternative.  Operational Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, Coast Daylight service would operate in the same capacity as in the Build Alternative and would, thus, result in similar environmental justice effects as the Build Alternative. The Preferred Alternative excludes the four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County; therefore, operational noise, air quality, visual quality, etc. effects to environmental justice communities in these locations would be reduced compared to the Build Alternative. Additionally, passenger train operations would be expanded on the existing rail alignment in this area, thus serving nearby communities. Furthermore, fewer minority environmental justice communities are located near the revised King City siding extension; thus operational impacts to such communities would be reduced in this location (see Table 3.5-4). The number of low income environmental justice communities is the same between the Preferred Alternative and the No Build Alternative. Lastly, the island CTC would be located within railroad ROW, and once operational, would not be expected to have any substantial impacts to nearby communities. Accordingly, operational environmental justice impacts would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than the Build Alternative. 3.5.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES 3.5.5.1 Land Use Compatibility and Property The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. Potential mitigation strategies to alleviate or minimize impacts to land use associated with the Build Alternative would include, but not be limited to, the following:  A-LU-1. As only schematic plans have been developed to date, the level of detailed design that would normally precede construction would avoid or minimize the potential for land use displacement and property acquisition, whether temporary and/or permanent, residential or non-residential. A-LU-2. Design strategies could would be implemented to avoid or minimize the temporary or permanent acquisition of properties to the extent feasible. MM-LU-3. In addition, to the extent displacement of any residence or business occurs, relocation assistance procedures in accordance with the Federal Uniform Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 would be implemented. Table 3.5-4 Preferred Alternative: Potential Impacts to Land Use, Property, and Environmental Justice Build Alternative Components Land Use Compatibility Percent of Private Land Potentially Necessary for Acquisition Includes Minority Environmental Justice Communities? Includes Low-Income Environmental Justice Communities? King City Siding Extension Agricultural: Low 91% Yes, 5block groups Yes, 1 tract King City New Passenger Station Commercial: High 53% Yes, 8 block groups Yes, 1 tract McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Source: ICF, 2013  3.5.5.2 Communities and Neighborhoods Although this document found few community/neighborhood effects resulting from the Build Preferred Alternative, some of the specific elements of the Preferred Alternative proposed improvements components of the action alternatives may result in property acquisitions that could adversely affect communities and neighborhoods along the existing railroad. While one at-grade crossing would be created as part of the Preferred Alternative curve realignment at MP 172, the crossing is not located within a populated neighborhood that would reduce community interactions from existing conditions. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component would occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. MIN-LU-4. Efforts could would be made during design to minimize any barriers to community and neighborhood interaction. MIN-LU-5. Consultation with local governments and planning agencies throughout the design effort could would be conducted in order to maintain or enhance neighborhood integrity. MIN-LU-6. If the MP 172 curve realignment is constructed and includes a new atgrade crossing at Cattlemen Road, potential strategies to reduce community effects could would include additional grade separation of rail lines and streets, new pedestrian crossings, new cross-connection points, improved visual quality of project facilities, and traffic management plans that maintain access during and after construction. MIN-LU-7. Temporary construction-period related impacts on neighborhoods and communities could would be addressed through site-specific measures. Potential strategies to alleviate or minimize impact to community during construction may include, but would not be limited to, the following: . Provide opportunities for community involvement early in future environmental studies; . Facilitate design workshops within affected neighborhoods to learn from the community which circulation elements (automobile, bicycle, pedestrian) in the impacted area are most critical so that those elements can be preserved; . Develop design standards for facilities, landscape, and public art associated with the project that reflect the character of adjacent affected neighborhoods; . Ensure that key connections (pedestrian/bicycle and vehicular crossings) across the rail corridor are maintained where necessary to maintain neighborhood integrity; . Complete a construction logistics analysis to determine approximate durations, impacts and localized mitigation measures to reduce disruption to communities, activities, traffic and circulation; . Develop traffic management plans that reduce barriers during construction; . Where feasible, maintain connectivity during construction; . Implement measures to maintain high level of visual quality in the neighborhood. Such measures can include visual buffers, trees and other landscaping, architectural design and public artwork; and . Implement procurement specifications and incentives for construction contractors designed to reduce the duration and disruption of construction. Potential requirements include restrictions on construction vehicle traffic and routes, haul routes, hours of permitted construction activity, and advance public notification of all closures or expected travel delays. 3.5.5.3 Environmental Justice The measures listed below are applicable to the action alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component would occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. Potential strategies to avoid or minimize impacts to land use associated with the Preferred Alternative could include, but not be limited to, the following: . A-LU-8. In selecting components of the action alternatives Build Alternative to carry forward for design and potential construction and operation, examine whether the selected components improvements are disproportionately located within environmental justice communities. Environmental justice effects would could potentially be avoided if the components improvements carried forward are not disproportionately located within environmental justice communities. . MIN-LU-9. EO 12898 requires federal agencies to ensure effective public participation and access to information. Compliance with EO 12898 involves outreach to the potentially affected minority and/or low-income population to  identify issues of importance that may not otherwise be considered. Outreach to affected communities would be conducted during the decision-making process and identification of any necessary mitigation measures. . MIN-LU-10. DOT Order 5610.2 requires DOT agencies to establish opportunities for meaningful public involvement by members of minority populations during activities including identification of potential mitigation measures. Minority and low-income populations would be provided with access to information about health and environmental impacts, measures to avoid, minimize and/or to mitigate any disproportionately high and adverse effects and offsetting benefits and opportunities to enhance affected communities, neighborhoods, or individuals during an outreach program conducted as part of the decisionmaking process. . MIN-LU-11. As indicated in the Environmental Consequences section above, many of the proposed curve realignments associated with the action alternatives involve multiple segments, some near and some distant from environmental justice communities. A potential avoidance/minimization strategy would be to omit portions of multiple segment curve realignments that include environmental justice communities or where such impacts could would be deemed to be disproportionately concentrated. . MIN-LU-12. Special attention would be given to any permanent impact categories that are commonly of concern for this type of project and to those that previously have been identified as being of concern. These include: . Air quality . Noise and vibration . Public health . Visual resources/aesthetics . Parklands . Relocation 3.5.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Prior to implementing any proposed improvements components of the action alternatives components of the Build Alternative, site specific evaluation should would be conducted of the potential for land use compatibility and the need for property acquisition, including the potential for displacement of homes or businesses or substantial conflict with locally adopted land use policies. Any homes or businesses with the potential for displacement could would be studied through a relocation impact analysis. If project-level environmental review under NEPA proceeds, anticipated effects to identified environmental justice communities would be assessed with best-available information to help determine whether impacts are disproportionate on minority or low-income communities. Additional environmental assessment and design development to determine alignment options during future studies will ensure a more precise evaluation of site-specific impacts and mitigation effectiveness.   3.6 AESTHETICS AND VISUAL RESOURCES Visual resources include both natural and man-made features of the landscape. Intrinsic visual qualities and composition of a landscape together define the visual character of an area. This section describes the existing visual setting of the study area and assesses potential changes to the visual environment as a result of the No Build and Build Alternatives action alternatives. This section describes updates and modifications made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments regarding Build Alternative components discussed in the aesthetics and visual resources section (see comments A-3.5, A-3.29, A-3.30, A-3.31, A-3.34, and A-3.35). None of the comments required changes to the Program EIS/EIR text but several are pertinent to the analysis of the Preferred Alternative (see Section 3.6.4.3 below). 3.6.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS There are no federal or state laws that specifically define or protect visual resources; however, several federal, state and local regulations provide protection for scenic views and other visual resources. Most local jurisdictions have provisions for design review of all commercial, industrial, or public buildings, facilities or other major infrastructure. 3.6.1.1 State State Scenic Highway Program The Caltrans Scenic Highway Program is intended to protect and enhance the natural scenic beauty of California’s highways and adjacent corridors, through special conservation treatment. The program protects against encroachment of incompatible land uses, mitigates and minimizes development activities along the corridor, prohibits billboards, regulates grading activity, etc.1 1 Caltrans, 2012 3.6.1.2 Local Monterey County General Plan The County has adopted, through its General Plan goals and policies, to retain and enhance the visual character, either directly or indirectly. Development and construction must use design guidelines to ensure the development is compatible with visual values of the area.2 2 County of Monterey, 2007 3 City of Salinas, 2002 4 City of Salinas, 2006. General Plan 5 City of Soledad, 2012 City of Salinas General Plan The City of Salinas has a number of natural and historical resources that contribute to the visual character of the city. The city is mostly built-up with distinctive architectural styles, surrounded by agricultural edges that distinguish the aesthetic quality of the area. Salinas has historically been an agricultural community, thus maintaining visual open space and the rural aesthetic character of the community is an important value. Additionally, the city has defined several view corridors along US 101.3 The city has adopted goals and policies to protect and preserve the community’s image and identity.4 City of Soledad General Plan Points within the city have scenic views of the Salinas valley and the Sierra de Salinas Range. The General Plan has adopted goals and policies to protect both natural and manmade scenic resources. New development must comply with the city design standards to ensure best practices are used and are compatible with character of the city. The City of Soledad set forth goals to revitalize its downtown in its 2012 Downtown Specific Plan. The Specific Plan identifies a proposed passenger rail station site (consistent with that included here as part of the Build Alternative) and also encourages increased infill development, enhanced streetscapes and lighting, and improved sidewalks.5 The Soledad Downtown Specific Plan also includes conceptual plans for a proposed passenger rail station, discussed in more detail below. City of King (King City) General Plan King City adopted goals and policies to help ensure new development is compatible with the City’s visual character and surrounding environment.6 The King City First Street Corridor Master Plan includes conceptual plans for a proposed passenger rail station (this station is included as an element of the action alternatives Build Alternative). Additionally, as described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design [(MMTC) (2014)]. 6 City of King, 1998, Conservation, Open Space, and Safety Elements 7 County of San Luis Obispo, 2010, Conservation and Open Space Element 8 City of El Paso de Robles, 2003, Open Space Element San Luis Obispo County General Plan San Luis Obispo County has open space areas, scenic corridors, and urban landscapes that contribute to its visual character. The County General Plan has designated several scenic resources along the US 101 corridor (identified below). These resources are subject to scenic protection standards indicated in the San Luis Obispo County General Plan. Projects proposed in rural areas and/or designated scenic corridors are subject to design guidelines and standards.7 City of El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles) General Plan Paso Robles has adopted policies and action items intended to retain the rural, open space, and agricultural areas surrounding the city. The city intends that its designation of a “Purple Belt” (wine grape belt) will preserve agriculture and open space and limit the conversion of lands from viticultural to urban uses.8 3.6.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION The visual resources analysis focuses on the existing visual conditions of the railroad corridor and how it would change under each alternative. The analysis focuses on how existing visually dominant features would change and to what extent. Four generalized visual environments characterize the existing visual conditions for the railroad corridor: 1) Agricultural, 2) Urban/Suburban, 3) Industrial/Institutional, and 4) Open Space/Undeveloped. These landscape types are described in Subsection 3.6.3, Affected Environment below and summarize the existing visual baseline against which the potential effects of proposed improvements components will be evaluated. The components of the Build Alternative improvements action alternatives have varying levels of potential visual impacts depending upon on the type of physical improvement and proposed location. For this evaluation, potential visual impacts are grouped accordingly: . High visual impact: The project improvement components would be dominant in the existing landscape and represent a significant change (degradation) of visual character and quality. . Medium visual impact: The proposed improvement project components would be readily discernible but does not dominate the existing landscape and have a moderately adverse effect on existing visual character and quality. . Low visual impact: The proposed improvement project components would be generally consistent with and/or blends with the visual attributes of the existing landscape; little or no degradation of visual character and quality results. . No visual impact: No proposed improvement project components would occur within a particular area or the physical improvement would not be readily discernible by the general public. 3.6.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT The visual setting of the study area encompasses a spectrum of landscape types, as the rail corridor travels through many physiographic and ecological regions. The range in landscape type depends on the landform and land cover of the study area. Landform describes the shape of the landscape (e.g., valleys, plains, mountains) and land cover describes what overlays the landform (e.g., grassland, residential, agricultural). The study area consists of the existing railroad between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Immediately adjacent to the existing railroad, four landscape types predominate 1) Agricultural, 2) Urban/Suburban, 3) Industrial/Institutional, and 4) Open Space/Undeveloped. These landscape types, as described in more detail below, provide the baseline to evaluate the level of visual change that might occur with the alternatives. 3.6.3.1 Landscape Types Agricultural As shown in Figure 3.6-1, an agricultural landscape is often flat, but in this region can also include rolling hills with parallel straight lines of crops and developed monoculture that stretch to form the near horizon. The continuous texture ranges from various shades of green, where crops are growing for harvest, and brown where crops were recently planted and much of the soil is exposed. In viticultural areas, yellow and red colors can predominate in the autumn. Fences, farm equipment, rural dirt roads, electrical distribution lines, barns, and crop processing buildings are common features in an agricultural area and contribute to the visual character. Agricultural areas are very common in the Salinas Valley and inland Central Coast region. Urban/Suburban Urban/suburban areas have a man-made land cover of residential and commercial buildings, parking lots, and landscaping along streets and sidewalks, as shown in Figure 3.6-2. Buildings vary in size and shape. Residential areas are often surrounded by walls or fences. Electrical transmission and distribution lines, roadways, street lighting and signs are typical visual features in an urban/suburban area and contribute to the visual character. The railroad corridor travels through several urbanized areas that range in density and intensity and visual dominance of the immediate landscape. Industrial/Institutional Industrial/institutional areas are generally characterized by developed land cover that can appear similar to urban/suburban areas, with warehouses and buildings varying in size and shape that dominate the vista in comparison to its surrounding environment, as shown in Figure 3.6-3. Industrial areas typically include utility lines, equipment, machinery, freight tracks, and factories that contribute to the visual character. Notably, the existing railroad corridor traverses the San Ardo oil and gas field, which includes diverse man-made textures of drilling equipment as well as infrastructure buildings to process and transport crude oil and raw gas products. The railway corridor travels through several institutional areas as well with similar types of landscape patterns and elements. Institutional areas include Camp Roberts, an Army National Guard post located north of San Miguel, and state prisons in Soledad and near San Luis Obispo. Open Space/Undeveloped Open space and undeveloped areas have natural land cover with very limited manmade visual intrusions and high intactness, as shown in Figure 3.6-4. Throughout the inland central coast region, open space and undeveloped areas include gently rolling hills varying in shades of green and neutral colors. Views to distant mountain  ranges are generally unimpeded except by intermittent and infrequent stands of large trees. The Salinas River, the Los Padres National Forest, and the Big Sandy Wildlife Area are key visual resources of this type located along the existing rail corridor. 3.6.3.2 Identified Scenic Resources Varied topography, agricultural areas, and downtown developments comprise the visual character of Monterey County. The County also contains 95 miles of officially designated State Scenic Highways. Moving traffic is the most substantial source of light and glare. Monterey County identifies sensitive visual areas and scenic corridors in its General Plan EIR.9 Scenic visual resources include views of several mountain ranges, including the Santa Lucias, the Gabilan (which includes the Pinnacles of the eponymous National Park), and others lining the Salinas and Carmel Valleys. The General Plan does not identify any sensitive visual areas or scenic corridors located within the immediate study area, but some distant views of the identified mountain ranges are visible from the railway corridor. 9 County of Monterey, 2006, figure 4.14-1 10 County of San Luis Obispo, 2010, Visual Resources Element San Luis Obispo County also identifies protected scenic resources in its General Plan. The existing railroad corridor passes through the Los Padres National Forest near Cuesta Grade; in this area, tree cover is dense and the landscape has substantial topography. The General Plan identifies several scenic corridors located in San Luis Obispo County, but none of these are located within the immediate study area. One such corridor is Highway 1, which is a designated State Scenic Highway and National Scenic Byway from San Luis Obispo to the Monterey County line. Along this 57-mile stretch of Highway 1 are four major scenic sections: Morros, Estero Bay, Harmony Valley, and the Big Sur Gateway.10 The railway parallels Highway 1 as it travels the south slope of Cuesta Grade and into the City of San Luis Obispo; however, none of the previously mentioned major scenic sections are within the study area. Salinas and Soledad have designated scenic corridors and views within each city’s jurisdiction, but none are located within the immediate study area. King City has designated riparian areas along the Salinas River and San Lorenzo Creek as scenic resources and has also adopted goals to improve the visual quality of several roads in the city, including First Street, relatively near the proposed passenger station site. Identified scenic Resources for Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties are depicted on Figure 3.6-5 and 3.6-6. 3.6.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.6.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service with no physical components improvements. As a result, the No Build Alternative would result in no substantial visual impacts because the existing landscape character of the study area would not be changed substantially. Implementation of PTC improvements could require installation of antennas and signaling equipment within or immediately adjacent to the railroad ROW, but no specific equipment for the Coast Corridor has been selected. 3.6.4.2 Build Alternative This section analyzes potential visual impacts of the Build Alternative The analysis compares the Build Alternative and its components compared to the existing visual setting. Construction-Period Effects In general, construction impacts include the visual presence of construction equipment, light and glare impacts from any nighttime construction work, and newly disturbed natural land cover that would recover to its original undisturbed form. Such effects would be somewhat more pronounced in high population areas or areas seen by substantial numbers of passing motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, and rail passengers. It is reasonable to assume that construction outside of the railroad ROW would have a more noticeable visual effect because these improvements Build Alternative components (e.g., curve realignments and new passenger stations) would involve more earth-moving and excavation activities on land that has not necessarily been in a railroad transportation use. Physical components improvements within the railroad ROW (e.g., signal upgrades, powered switches, and sidings) would occur on land already used by the railroad; therefore, these physical components improvements would be more harmonious with the existing land cover. Operational Effects Visual Effects of Proposed Physical Components Improvements under the Build Alternative Potential visual impacts of each of the proposed physical improvements Build Alternative components are described in segments below. The Build Alternative proposes reinstitution of the Coast Daylight passenger rail service along the existing active rail corridor. The Build Alternative would expand service initially by 2 passenger trains per day, increasing to 4 trains per day by 2040. While additional trains traveling on the tracks would be apparent, the visual presence of additional trains would be intermittent, with trains generally passing from view in one minute or less. Therefore, reinstitution of the Coast Daylight passenger rail service would have a low visual effect. Implementation of CTC improvements would require installation of railway signaling poles of approximately 10-12 feet in height at periodic intervals along one or more sections of the existing railroad. The portions of the existing railroad currently under CTC already feature such signal poles. Exact locations of new signal poles have yet to be defined, but would be within the existing ROW and would be visually consistent with existing elements and features of the railroad. Additionally, the installation of new powered switches and rail upgrades would all occur in the immediate track bed and would not exceed the height of the existing track. Accordingly, such features would be difficult to discern against the existing visual landscape and thus would be highly unlikely to result in any significant visual impact. Consequently, visual effects from track/signal upgrades and powered switches would not substantial and are not discussed further. Salinas Track upgrades and new powered switches are proposed to the existing railroad tracks within urban/suburban landscape types within the City of Salinas. Adjacent areas include residential, commercial, and industrial buildings. Proposed Physical components improvements in this area would be largely imperceptible to viewer groups in the greater urbanized context as they would be implemented directly into the tracks. These components improvements would not be out of context or substantially change the overall visual character of the area; therefore, the visual impact would be low. Salinas to Chualar The new Spence siding is proposed within agricultural landscape types of this segment. A new siding entails construction of an additional track immediately alongside the existing railroad, generally within the existing railroad ROW. Adding a segment of additional track along the existing railroad would not pose a substantial visual contrast with the existing visual environment and the visual impacts would be low. Chualar to Soledad The landscape type within this segment is predominantly agricultural, with some urban/suburban areas near the City of Gonzales and Soledad. There are no proposed physical components improvements proposed between Chualar and Soledad beyond rail upgrades that would be embedded into existing railroad tracks and corridor-wide signaling improvements. Such features These components would be difficult to discern against the existing visual landscape and the visual impacts would be low. Soledad Passenger Station A new passenger rail station is proposed for the City of Soledad. Soledad has an urban/suburban landscape type, surrounded by agricultural areas. Soledad’s Downtown Specific Plan, includes a potential layout view of station along Front Street. The development plans for this station are conceptual in nature, but propose a ticket building, an overhead pedestrian overpass on eastern side of the tracks, and a parking area on the western side of the tracks. According to the Downtown Soledad Specific Plan EIR, the proposed railroad parcels are undeveloped and a new one/two story structure may potentially block the view of potentially historic structures and existing development on Front Street for viewers traveling on US 101. The addition of a new passenger station would generally blend into the existing urbanized visual character of Soledad and would not disrupt views of the mountains to the east. The Downtown Soledad Specific Plan EIR concluded there would be moderate viewer sensitivity to a new station.11 While previously undeveloped parcels would be converted to accommodate new passenger station plans and may potentially alter the existing visual character, the proposed station footprint would be generally consistent with the existing urbanized visual character. Therefore, there would be a medium visual impact for a new passenger station in Soledad. 11 City of Soledad, 2012, pp. 4.1-7-4.1-14 Soledad to King City The Harlem/Metz curve realignments and the Coburn curve realignments are proposed in this segment predominantly in agricultural and open space/undeveloped landscapes. These curve realignments would cut through agricultural land up to about 600 feet beyond the existing railroad ROW. The curve realignments would disrupt and permanently alter existing agricultural land cover where the new train tracks would be located. However, relatively few sensitive viewers are located near the physical component proposed improvement areas, since the areas are predominantly rural, and the curve realignments would introduce railroad elements that already exist in the nearby viewshed. The proposed curve realignments would become part of the landscape and contrast would lessen over time. Notwithstanding, these curve realignments would directly convert existing land and have a readily discernible effect on the visual landscape. As a result, the visual impact would be medium to high. The new siding at Chalone Creek and the King City siding extension are also proposed in this segment. Each would add or extend a siding railroad track within the railroad ROW, parallel to the existing alignment. The visual impact would be low because the new track would be consistent with the existing visual setting. The King City siding travels through an urban area that is more populated, but would also have a low visual impact because extending the track along the existing corridor would not visually contrast with the existing viewshed. King City Passenger Station A new passenger rail station is proposed in King City. King City has an urban/ suburban landscape type, surrounded by agricultural areas and ringed by hills. King City’s First Street Corridor Master Plan includes a schematic diagram of the proposed passenger station along the existing tracks that parallel First Street. The city envisions a station platform about 12 feet wide and 800 feet long, along with a small parking lot.12 12 City of King, 2013, p. 10. Given the nature and the visual setting of the proposed site, the proposed station would not adversely affect scenic resources or corridors. Furthermore, the proposed stations would not visually contrast with the urban, developed visual setting. The proposed station would in fact be consistent with the existing urbanized visual character of King City. Therefore, there would be a low medium visual impact for the proposed station. King City to San Ardo Curve realignments are proposed at MP 165 and MP 172 in agricultural and open space/undeveloped landscape types. The proposed MP 165 curve realignment location would be east and at a higher elevation than the existing train tracks as the Coast Corridor travels against a hillside to the east. The new tracks would traverse an agricultural area and require conversion of existing land cover where the new train tracks would be located. Because of the natural topography and placement of  new tracks, the resultant railroad would be somewhat more visible. Therefore, the proposed MP 165 curve realignment would have a readily discernible effect on the visual landscape and a medium visual impact. Agricultural landscape types are apparent to the west of where the curve realignment is proposed at MP 172. The existing railroad corridor is located on the east side of the adjacent frontage road. The proposed realignment would move the train tracks to the east side of the frontage road, potentially creating a new at-grade crossing in this location. An at-grade crossing in a rural area may would entail signs and signaling for safety purposes. While proposed curve realignments would not sharply contrast with the existing visual character once construction is complete, implementation of curve realignments would directly convert existing land cover and have a readily discernible effect on the visual landscape. As a result, the visual impact would be medium. The proposed new San Lucas siding would extend through agricultural landscape types until entering the unincorporated community of San Lucas. The San Lucas community is comprised of one and two story residential buildings and industrial areas. A second track would have a low visual impact because adding a track along the existing corridor would not present a significant visual contrast with the existing viewshed. San Ardo to Bradley There are no proposed components improvements within the San Ardo oil and gas fields except corridor-wide rail upgrades and signaling improvements within the railroad ROW. As discussed, such features These components would be difficult to discern against the existing industrial/institutional landscape; therefore, would be highly unlikely to result in any significant visual impact there would be no visual impact. The Getty/Bradley curve realignments are located just south of the San Ardo area with few nearby viewers. The landscape type for this portion of the segment is open space/undeveloped. Implementation of curve realignments would directly convert existing land cover and have a readily discernible effect on the visual landscape. As a result, the visual impact would be medium. The Bradley siding extension is also proposed in this segment. The landscape type is also open space/undeveloped. Further south, the Bradley siding passes through Bradley, an unincorporated city in Monterey County. Bradley is a small residential community that is adjacent to the Coast Corridor. An extended siding track would have a low visual impact because it would be harmonious with the existing corridor and would not pose a strong visual contrast with the existing viewshed. Bradley to San Miguel South of Bradley, the Coast Corridor passes the Big Sandy Wildlife Area and Camp Roberts. The Big Sandy Wildlife Area is an open space/undeveloped landscape type characterized by open grasslands and stream habitat. The Camp Roberts landscape is marked by out-of-use, decaying military barracks buildings and signage. The McKay/Wellsona curve realignment is proposed in this segment with Big Sandy Wildlife Area on the East and Camp Roberts on the west. This proposed realignment would traverse the Big Sandy Wildlife Area, in doing so, extending the and extend the visual reach of the railroad from an industrial area adjacent to US 101 to a designated open space area - whose very openness is an important element of its existing visual character. If this curve realignment is selected for construction and design practices cannot avoid or minimize its footprint within the Big Sandy Wildlife Area, the resulting adverse visual effects could be high. San Miguel to Paso Robles Within San Miguel, the predominant landscape type is urban/suburban with residential areas, buildings, paved roadways, and development. San Miguel is comprised of one and two story residential buildings and industrial areas. South of San Miguel, the landscape type is mostly open space/undeveloped and agricultural, with occasional homes scattered on both sides of the railroad corridor. The Coast Corridor is east of US 101 within this segment. A leg of the proposed McKay/Wellsona and all portions of the Wellsona/Paso Robles curve realignments are proposed in this segment. Each would cut through agricultural land outside the railroad ROW. Implementation of curve realignments would directly convert existing land cover and have a readily discernible effect on the visual landscape. As a result, the visual impact would be medium. The proposed Wellsona siding would add a new siding track, adjacent to the existing track and within the ROW. A second track would have a low visual impact because adding a track along the existing corridor would not visually contrast with the existing viewshed. Paso Robles to Santa Margarita South of Paso Robles, the landscape type is predominantly urban/suburban with residential areas surrounding both sides of the Coast Corridor alignment, with both rural and agricultural farming areas scattered nearby as well. Several physical components improvements are proposed within this segment.  The proposed Templeton siding would add a second track, adjacent to the existing track and within the railroad ROW. A second track would have a low visual impact because adding a track along the existing corridor would not visually contrast with the existing viewshed. The proposed Templeton/Henry curve realignment and the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments would occur outside the railroad ROW. The proposed curve realignments would permanently alter existing land cover and require tree removal in areas where new tracks would be located. The Templeton/Henry curve realignment would be noticeable to the local road and nearby residential neighborhoods west of the rail alignment. The portions of the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment near Salinas Road and Asuncion Road, if constructed, would potentially cut through residential and farming properties approximately 100-150 feet from the existing railroad ROW, likely entailing the removal of several existing buildings. New tracks would be placed closer to nearby residents and viewer groups, which would sharply lower the visual character and quality of the landscape for these residents. The proposed Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments would be dominant in the existing landscape and would permanently convert existing land cover. As a result, the visual impact could be high. Santa Margarita to San Luis Obispo The landscape type between Santa Margarita and San Luis Obispo is primarily open space/undeveloped. Dense vegetation and trees surround the Coast Corridor on both sides in some areas and the topography of the landscape becomes more pronounced as the railroad and US 101 pass through a portion of the Los Padres National Forest. A second mainline is proposed within this segment, the second mainline which would be constructed within the existing railroad ROW. The size and reach of the Los Padres National Forest make it an important visual resource within San Luis Obispo County and the larger Central Coast region. Views of the existing rail corridor from US 101 are somewhat limited through this area due to intervening trees between the highway and the railroad. Furthermore, the hilly topography through this area also limits visibility of the railroad from passing vehicles. Dense trees somewhat limit views of the freeway and the railroad from adjacent portions of the National Forest itself. In summary Therefore, a second track would have a low to moderate visual impact because adding a track along the existing corridor would not strongly contrast with the existing visual setting. 3.6.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, visual effects for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess visual effects relative to such modified or excluded components. Soledad to King City (King City siding extension) In the Preferred Alternative, the section between Soledad and King City would retain all Build Alternative components without modification, with the exception of the King City siding extension relocation. The relocated siding extension would start at the north end of the existing siding (MP 159.19) and extend north to MP 156.38 immediately adjacent to the existing railroad and within the railroad ROW. The visual environment for the area of relocation is heavily influenced by agricultural uses. Crops observed in the area include primarily low-growing vegetable crops. Few buildings or structures are in the visual proximity, so fewer viewer groups would be affected by the relocated siding extension than the Build Alternative, which would have extended the siding to the developed area south of the City of King. Therefore, the visual impact of the relocated siding extension would be low because extending the track along the existing rail corridor would not result in a new strong visual contrast with the existing viewshed. City of King Passenger Station The Preferred Alternative incorporates revised draft plans for the City of King passenger station. These revised draft plans place the station in the same urbanized visual environment as the Build Alternative. The station would be located within the First Street Corridor area, which is mostly surrounded by industrial buildings and adjacent to existing railroad tracks. As a result, man-made features dominate the visual character in this area. Accordingly, the station would not visually contrast with the surrounding urbanized visual character and would not interfere with any scenic corridor or other scenic resource. Therefore, the visual impact of the proposed King City station would be low. San Miguel to Paso Robles and Santa Margarita (Curve realignments and Island CTC) In the approximately 32 miles of railroad between San Miguel and Santa Margarita, the Preferred Alternative would retain all of the corridor-wide components of the Build Alternative, the same extensions of existing sidings at Wellsona and Templeton as in the Build Alternative, and the same powered switches as the Build Alternative. However, the Preferred Alternative would exclude four curve realignments included with the Build Alternative (McKay/Wellsona, Wellsona/Paso Robles, Templeton/Henry, and Henry/Santa Margarita). Moreover, the Preferred Alternative would include the installation of a 27 mile “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita. As noted for the Build Alternative, the four curve realignments would have resulted in medium to high visual impacts as the realigned tracks would have become new dominant features in the area, reducing localized visual character and quality. Since the Preferred Alternative does not include the curve realignments, visual conditions in the four areas proposed for curve realignments would not change substantially from existing conditions, except for visual effects associated with the installation of “island” CTC from McKay (MP 202) to Santa Margarita (MP 229). As described for the Build Alternative, CTC requires the installation of railway signaling poles of about 10-12 feet in height at periodic intervals. Portions of the Coast Corridor have CTC features in place, as illustrated in Figure 3.6-7 from MP 233 in Southern Santa Margarita. As noted for the Build Alternative, the exact locations of new signal poles have yet to be defined, but would be within the existing railroad ROW and would be visually consistent with existing elements and features of the railroad. Accordingly, CTC features would not contrast strongly with the existing visual landscape and as such, would not result in any substantial adverse visual impact.  Table 3.6-1 Potential Visual Impacts Project Components Landscape Type Visual Impacts No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Salinas Powered Switch Urban/Suburban N/A None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 Urban/Suburban; Agricultural Low Low Low Spence Siding Extension Agricultural N/A Low Low Project Components Landscape Type Visual Impacts No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 Agricultural Low Low Low Gonzales Powered Switch Urban/Suburban N/A None None Soledad Powered Switch Urban/Suburban N/A None None Soledad New Passenger Station Urban/Suburban N/A Medium Medium Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Medium Medium Chalone Creek New Siding Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Low Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 Agricultural; Urban/Suburban Low Low Low Coburn Curve Realignments Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Medium Medium King City Siding Extension Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Low Low King City New Passenger Station Urban/Suburban N/A Low Medium Low King City Powered Switch Urban/Suburban N/A None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 Agricultural Low Low Low MP 165 Curve Realignment Agricultural N/A Medium Medium San Lucas New Siding Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Low Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped; Industrial/Institution al Low Low Low MP 172 Track Realignment Agricultural; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Medium Medium Project Components Landscape Type Visual Impacts No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative San Ardo Powered Switch N/A N/A None None Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Medium Medium Bradley Siding Extension Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Low Low Bradley Powered Switch Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 Industrial/ Institutional; Open Space/ Undeveloped Low Low Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 Industrial/ Institutional; Open Space/ Undeveloped; Urban/Suburban Low Low Low McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments Industrial/ Institutional; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A High NA - Not Included McKay East Powered Switches Industrial/ Institutional; Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A None None Wellsona New Siding Urban/Suburban N/A Low Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 Urban/Suburban Low Low Low Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments Urban/Suburban N/A Medium NA - Not Included Templeton Siding Urban/Suburban N/A Low Low Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments Urban/Suburban N/A Medium NA - Not Included Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 Urban/Suburban Low Low Low Project Components Landscape Type Visual Impacts No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment Urban/Suburban; Agricultural; Open Space N/A High NA - Not Included Santa Margarita Powered Switch Urban/Suburban N/A None None Cuesta Second Main Track Open Space/ Undeveloped N/A Low to Medium Low to Medium Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 Open Space/ Undeveloped Low Low Low Source: Circlepoint, 2013 3.6.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES Mitigation strategies could include design features and techniques to integrate new rail improvements into the existing landscapes. During project-level review, design measures should be reviewed with local jurisdictions, resource agencies, and the public to determine site-specific effectiveness and acceptability. The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures would also be identified during that review. MIN-VIS-1. In locations where construction would take place overnight, appropriate light and glare screening measure would be used at construction staging areas, including the use of downward cast lighting. MIN-VIS-2. Where physical components improvements pass through or along the edge of residential or heavily traveled roadways, landscape treatments such as trees and shrubs, would be installed and continuously maintained along the edge of the railroad ROW to provide partial screening of visual changes. MIN-VIS-3. While new sidings/siding extensions can have low visual impacts as noted above, use of sidings for long-term “parking” of train cars can have visual consequences. Mitigation strategies would include limits on the use of sidings for longer-term train car storage, with potential priority to areas of greater visual sensitivity. MIN-VIS-4. Night lighting at stations would be the minimum required for operations and safety. All lights would be hooded and directed to the area where the lighting is required to be on all the time, sensors and timers would be specified. MM-VIS-5. Natural land cover removed or disturbed to implement physical components improvements would be replaced, as feasible. These mitigation strategies would help reduce the level of visual impact of the proposed physical improvements. Future evaluation prior to implementing an improvement would determine specific mitigation suitable for each proposed improvement and specific location. 3.6.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Future project-level environmental review will be necessary if any of the Build or Preferred Alternative components improvements are to be carried forward. The visual analysis will specifically evaluate the visual character and quality of the study area and assess potential effects to existing conditions based on proposed project components. At that time, a detailed assessment of construction and operationrelated activities will occur. The amount of introduced man-made development features and encroachment will be the criteria to determine the overall changes to visual quality. The evaluation will focus on changes to the integrity and continuity of the physical environment, as well as the viewer responses to physical changes.  3.7 AGRICULTURAL AND FOREST RESOURCES This section describes agricultural and forest lands in the study area, and estimates the potential for the No Build and action alternatives to result in the conversion of such lands into non-agricultural and forest uses. This section describes updates and changes made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments regarding project elements that have been incorporated into the Preferred Alternative (see comments A-3.36 through A-3.38). Section 3.7.4.3 below provides analysis of the Preferred Alternative. None of the City of King’s comments resulted in text revisions to the Program EIS/EIR. 3.7.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.7.1.1 Federal Farmland Protection Policy Act The Farmland Protection Policy Act (FFPA) was implemented to minimize the extent to which federal activities contribute to the unnecessary and irreversible conversion of farmland to non-agricultural use. Federal agencies are required under the FPPA1 and its regulations,2 to coordinate with the National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) prior to taking or approving any federal action that may irreversibly convert farmland to nonagricultural use. 1 FPPA, 7 USC § 4201 et seq. 2 7 CFR Part 658 3 7 USC 4202(b) In accordance with the NRCS and per section 1541(b) of the FPPA,3 federal agencies are required to examine potential direct and indirect effects to farmland of a proposed action and its alternatives before approving any activity that would convert farmland to non-agricultural use. To the extent practicable, policies and plans must be made compatible with state, local, and private policies and programs that have been established to protect farmland.4 4 7 CFR Section 658.1 Protected farmland is usually divided into three classifications: prime farmland, unique farmland, and farmland of statewide or local importance. Classification standards may differ across state lines; each state may set its own criteria for classification in each category. The following types of land are exempted from the FPPA and its associated procedures: . Soil types determined not suitable for crops, such as rocky terrain or sand dunes (although some such federally-owned lands may be eligible for a grazing agreement from the Bureau of Land Management); . Sites where the right-of-way for a project is located entirely within a delineated urban area and the project requires no prime or unique farmland, nor any farmland of statewide or local importance; and . Farmland that has already been converted to industrial, residential, commercial or is used for recreational activity. United States Forest Service (USFS) The existing railroad right of way travels through a portion of the Los Padres National Forest north of the Cuesta Grade. The right-of-way is on land within the boundary of the National Forest, but the land is not owned by the USFS. The Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act (RPA) as amended by the National Forest Management Act (NFMA), establishes a process for developing, amending, and revising land management plans for National Forests. 3.7.1.2 State Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program The California Department of Conservation maintains the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program FMMP, a statewide inventory of California’s agricultural resources. The FMMP produces maps and statistical data that rate land according to soil quality and irrigation status. The FMMP also tracks changes in the use and designation of agricultural lands. The FMMP classifies farmland according to categories established by the USDA, but based on California criteria: prime farmland, farmland of statewide importance, unique farmland, and farmland of local importance.5 5 Cities and counties within the study area may identify additional categories of farmland, but these are not indexed within the FMMP. Prime farmland refers to land with the best combination of physical and chemical properties to sustain long-term production of agricultural crops. This land has the soil quality, growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields. Land with this designation must have been used for production of irrigated crops at some point during the four years prior to the mapping date. Land must meet a set of criteria set by the NRCS. Farmland of statewide importance is similar to prime farmland but exhibits minor shortcomings, such as steeper slopes or less ability to store moisture in the soil. Farmland of statewide importance also must have been used for production of irrigated crops at some time during the four years prior to the mapping date. Unique farmland is composed of lesser quality soil than prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance. Unique farmland is used for the production of the state’s leading agricultural crops. This land is usually irrigated but may include nonirrigated orchards or vineyards found in some climatic zones of California. Unique farmland must have been used for production of crops at some time during the four years prior to the mapping date. Farmland of local importance is defined by each county government. Monterey County has chosen not to implement such a definition, so there is no farmland of local importance in Monterey County. In San Luis Obispo County, lands that meet all of the characteristics of prime or statewide importance, with the exception of irrigation, are simultaneously designated as farmland of local importance. The FMMP also maintains a database of lands suitable for grazing. California Government Code §65570(b)(3) defines grazing land as "...land on which the existing vegetation, whether grown naturally or through management, is suitable for grazing or browsing of livestock." Whereas the designations of prime, unique, and locally/statewide important farmland are contingent upon the active or recent use of lands in agricultural activities, lands identified by FMMP as suitable for grazing need not be actively grazed. Grazing land is not specifically protected at the state level; however, local governments can choose to protect such lands in their land use planning documents. Both Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties include grazing lands in their definitions of agricultural lands; however, they are not afforded the same protection as Important Farmlands, described above. Williamson Act The California Land Conservation Act of 1965, also known as the Williamson Act, established a tax incentive for the voluntary enrollment of agricultural and open space lands in contracts between local government and landowners.6 The agreement ensures the land will be maintained for agriculture and open space and other compatible uses, as defined by state law and local ordinances. In areas where agricultural lands interface with growing suburban or urban development, Williamson Act contracts are a means of ensuring the long term financial viability of agricultural uses. Without a Williamson Act contract, the taxable basis of agricultural lands on the urban fringe can increase to such an extent that agricultural operations become economically infeasible for the landowner. 6 California Government Code Sections 51200 to 51295 7 Government Code §51280 et seq. 8 GC § 51290-51295 Williamson Act contracts remain valid for a period of ten years. By default, the contract is renewed each year for the next ten years, unless the landowner or local government files to initiate nonrenewal. After ten years, the contract terminates with the filing of a notice of nonrenewal. Under limited circumstances and conditions, Williamson Act contracts may also be terminated upon petition of the landowner.7 Termination proceedings require the approval of the local government legislative body, such as the City Council or County Board of Supervisors. The State of California has an additional regulation to guide the public acquisition of and/or location of public improvements on lands under Williamson Act contracts.8 These policies discourage the use of such lands for public improvements and require due consideration before any such lands can be acquired for any public purpose. It should be noted that cancellation or non-renewal of a Williamson Act contract (or portion thereof) is not considered a physical environmental impact under either CEQA or NEPA. Rather, the use of land under Williamson Act contracts for implementation of proposed project improvements would pose a potential conflict with State of California policy. California Government Code § 51290-51295 discourages the conversion of land under an agricultural preserve to non-agricultural public use. 3.7.1.3 Local Monterey County General Plan The Agricultural Element of the Monterey County General Plan contains policies to enhance and support long-term productivity and commercial viability of the County’s agricultural industry. It provides guidance for the treatment of agricultural land to ensure that land use policies do not inappropriately limit or constrain “routine and ongoing agricultural activities.” The plan also includes measures designed to strength the County’s Right-to-Farm Ordinance, which is designed to protect farmers from the pressure of urban development. The Monterey County Agricultural and Historical Land Conservancy manages more than 15,000 acres in the County, acquiring agricultural easements by gift or through direct purchase from landowners. San Luis Obispo County General Plan The Agriculture element of the San Luis Obispo County General Plan provides a description of the main types and uses of agricultural land in the county, as well as a set of policies, goals, and objectives for each land-type. The element comprises numerous protective policies for supporting production and maintaining diverse and abundant agricultural lands in San Luis Obispo County. 3.7.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION For the purposes of this analysis, an adverse impact to farmland or forestland resources would occur if an action alternative would directly or indirectly: . Convert to nonagricultural use any prime farmland, farmland of statewide importance, or unique farmland, as shown on the maps prepared pursuant to the FMMP of the California Resources Agency. . Sever farmland by the placement of barriers that impede farmland access which could result in the creation of non-economic remnant parcels and/or conversion of farmland to a nonagricultural use. . Result in the loss of forest land or conversion of forest land to non-forest use. . Convert to nonagricultural use any land under a Williamson Act Contract. This analysis used GIS to compute acreage of various protected farmland classifications involved with the physical components proposed improvements. To determine the quantity of protected farmland in the Corridor, California Department of Conservation’s FMMP was used. United States Forest Service Land Ownership was also used to determine acreages of National Forest lands within the Corridor. The study area for both agricultural and forest resources includes all permanent and temporary footprints for each proposed realignment, siding, track/signal, and second mainline upgrade. Permanent and temporary impact footprints were defined in GIS as discussed below. The acreage of lands that would be affected under a Williamson Act Contract was not calculated for this program-level analysis. Williamson Act Contracts change over time and should be evaluated in detail when, and if any, elements of the Build Alternative components of the action alternatives are carried forward for further design and potential construction. Construction-Period Effects Construction of the physical components improvements contemplated under the Build and Preferred Alternatives would involve the use of temporary construction areas to park construction equipment, store supplies, and otherwise serve as construction staging areas. If any such areas are located on farmland or forest land resources, the use of such lands for construction staging could temporarily alter the land use to a nonagricultural use. These areas would eventually be returned/restored to pre-construction conditions. Given that detailed engineering designs are not available at this time, the construction period impacts associated with new sidings and siding extensions was assumed to include a 50 foot buffer on either side of the existing ROW. Construction-period impacts associated with the second mainline include a footprint of 100 feet on either side of the existing ROW, and for curve realignments the temporary impact footprint includes 200 feet on either side of the existing ROW. These buffers are intended to capture indirect effects of any potential construction. As further described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, the City of King provided extensive written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, advising that the City had updated its draft plans for the City of King siding extension and passenger station. Since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR and as noted in the City’s comments, the City of King engaged a railroad engineer (RailPros) to consider modifications to rail facilities in the area. The RailPros study considered extending the siding from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length on the east side of the mainline track. Because of the availability of detailed design plans for the City of King siding extension, potential  construction-period impacts on agricultural resources were analyzed exclusively on the east side of the alignment within the 50 foot buffer to more accurately represent the effects of siding extension construction work. Operational Effects Permanent impacts to farmland or forest resources would occur with the conversion of these resources to non-agricultural uses, such as conversion to a new station, rail realignment, siding, track/signal upgrade, or second mainline. Given that detailed engineering design is not available at this time, Potential permanent impacts associated with curve realignments are assumed to occur in an area up to 100 feet beyond the potential new realigned rail centerline. The Draft Program EIS/EIR included siding and siding extension impacts in its operational impact analysis. Operational impacts to agricultural and forest resources were over reported due to overlap between existing railroad ROW and FMMP polygons. Therefore, permanent impacts due sidings and siding extensions are now reported as zero since no protected farmland is assumed to exist within the railroad ROW. 3.7.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT The existing Coast Corridor railroad between Salinas and San Luis Obispo traverses extensive areas of land in agricultural use. Agriculture and viticulture are economically important industries in both Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Agriculture is the largest land use by acreage in Monterey County. The northern end of the study area between Salinas and King City is bordered on both sides by agricultural lands. Major crops include salad greens, broccoli, artichokes, spinach, and strawberries.9 The agricultural lands in this region are classified as predominately Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, and Unique Farmland. 9 City of Salinas, 2002, Section 5.9 South of King City agricultural uses transition to vineyards and grazing land, including areas of the Santa Lucia Mountains to the west and the Cholame Hills and Diablo range to the east. Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, and Unique Farmland are also present in this region to San Ardo. Grazing land dominates from San Ardo south to the San Luis Obispo County line. San Luis Obispo County also has rich agriculture and extensive viticulture. The top value crops in 2011 included strawberries, wine grapes, cattle and calves, and broccoli.10 Agricultural uses along the study area are mixed and concentrated around Paso Robles. They include Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland, Grazing Land, Farmland of Local Importance, and Farmland of Local Potential. Agricultural lands in this area run adjacent to US 101 and the railroad for approximately 20 miles. Wine grapes dominate the agricultural landscape both in greater Paso Robles and adjacent areas. Other crops, such as barley, oats, wheat, apples, walnuts, pistachios, and almonds are also cultivated in the area.11 10 County of San Luis Obispo Department of Agriculture Weights and Measures, 2011 11 City of El Paso de Robles, 2003, Open Space Element 12 City of Atascadero, 2002 13 USDA, 2005 South of Paso Robles, agricultural uses decline in their abundance and density particularly through suburban communities like Atascadero. Some grazing lands dot the landscape. South-facing slopes surrounding Atascadero are home to chaparral vegetation, willows, sycamores, bay laurel, and cottonwoods.12 South of Atascadero the existing Coast Corridor railroad traverses approximately a 2 mile portion of the Los Padres National Forest near the Cuesta Grade area of San Luis Obispo County. This portion of the National Forest is comprised largely of oak woodlands and is the only densely forested area through which the 130 mile rail line travels between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Los Padres National Forest Strategic Plan indicates that the mountains and the US 101 corridor in this region are particularly suited for special uses, including the existing railroad line and adjacent agricultural/ranching uses.13 Exiting Los Padres National Forest, the railroad the railroad negotiates the sharp hillside with a few sharp turns until entering the city of San Luis Obispo. Figures 3.7-1 and 3.7-2 depict farmlands within the study area. 3.7.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.7.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing freight and passenger rail operations along existing physical components between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical component improvement expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of PTC. No specific plans have been identified, but anticipated PTC improvements outside train-based equipment would most likely take the form of communications apparatus (e.g., antennas, signal upgrades). Such components improvements are anticipated to be placed within the existing railroad ROW and, therefore, would be assumed to have minimal or no effect upon agricultural uses adjacent to the railroad ROW. Between today and 2040, agricultural lands in the project corridor could be converted to other uses as a result of proposed population growth, transportation improvement projects, and other economic changes in the Coast Corridor region. The Monterey County General Plan EIR projects that buildout of the General Plan could result in the conversion to non-agricultural uses of almost 5,500 acres of Important Farmland and about 6,800 acres of land under Williamson Act contracts.14 Some farmland conversion is also anticipated in San Luis Obispo County, but very little Prime Farmland conversion is expected in either county, owing to strong farmland protection measures each county has adopted. 14 County of Monterey, 2006, p. 4.2-1 3.7.4.2 Build Alternative Construction-Period Effects During construction, lands adjacent to areas of physical components proposed improvements could be used for construction access. Consequently, some disruption of agricultural uses could occur. Such disruption would be most likely to occur due to grading and other ground disturbing activities that could result in increased dust levels, which could in turn hinder successful farming activities. Construction may also require temporary staging areas outside the railroad ROW, including on lands in agricultural use. Table 3.7-1 below shows potential temporary impacts to farmland resulting from the Build Alternative improvements components. Table 3.7-1 Build Alternative: Construction-Period Effects of Project Improvements Components to Farmlands (in acres) Build Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land Salinas Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0 0 0 0 0 Spence Siding Extension 5 2 14 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0 0 0 0 0 Gonzales Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Soledad Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Soledad New Passenger Station 0 0 0 0 0 Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 96 9 14 0 40 Chalone Creek New Siding 7 0 4 0 10 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0 0 0 0 0 Coburn Curve Realignments 67 11 10 0 21 King City Siding Extension 6 0 0 0 3 King City New Passenger Station 0 0 0 0 0 King City Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Build Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 0 0 0 MP 165 Curve Realignment 23 5 0 0 15 San Lucas New Siding 1 0 0 0 18 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0 0 0 0 0 MP 172 Track Realignment 79 3 0 0 14 San Ardo Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 0 0 0 0 73 Bradley Siding Extension 0 0 0.5 0 29 Bradley Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 0 0 0 0 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 0 0 0 69 24 McKay East Powered Switches 0 0 0 0 0 Wellsona New Siding 3 0 0.5 5 6 Build Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 0 0 0 0 0 Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 4 0 7 8 0 Templeton Siding 0 0 0 12 5 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 0 0 0 0 0 Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 0 0 0 95 8 Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Cuesta Second Main Track 0 0 0 5 20 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 0 0 0 0 0 Totals 290 31 51 194 286 Source: ICF, 2013.  The only forest lands in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor occur near the Cuesta Grade area immediately north of the City of San Luis Obispo. The only proposed physical component improvement in this area is the second mainline, which is proposed from southern Santa Margarita towards the Cuesta Grade. Review of aerial mapping indicates that the area of the proposed second mainline is along private inholdings within the boundaries of the Los Padres National Forest. These inholdings are in a variety of uses, including public utilities (the Santa Margarita Booster Station), and the railroad ROW. The railroad passes through a forested area here as it climbs the Cuesta Grade. The precise location of the second mainline has not yet been determined but the conservative buffer area assumed herein indicates the potential for construction of the second mainline to potentially require tree removal/clearance of forest lands.15 15 Construction-period impacts associated with the second mainline include a footprint of 100 feet on either side of the existing railroad right-of-way. Operational Effects Operational effects would result from the conversion of farmland to some other use in perpetuity. In this case, it would result from the footprint of the proposed physical components improvements requiring the acquisition of farmland. Many of the components envisioned under the Build Alternative would be constructed within existing railroad ROW, such as rail/track upgrades, signal upgrades, powered switches, and new sidings and siding extensions. Therefore, no land outside the existing railroad ROW would be permanently converted. Some permanent impacts associated with new sidings and siding extensions were overreported in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. FMMP data was used for analyzing potential impacts to agricultural resources. FMMP data does not account for roads, highways, or railroads. Potential Permanent impacts to FMMP categories were over-reported due to overlap between existing railroad ROW (e.g., permanent siding and track/signal upgrade footprints) and FMMP data sets (polygons). Therefore, permanent impacts associated with new sidings and siding extensions are now reported as zero since no protected farmland is assumed to exist within the railroad ROW. Similarly, no permanent impacts to agricultural or forest resources are expected to occur from the proposed new passenger stations, as both station sites are within the urbanized downtown areas of Soledad and King City. For those components requiring land outside of the existing railroad ROW, such as curve realignments, new sidings and the second mainline, Table 3.7-2 below quantifies potential permanent impacts to farmland. Table 3.7-2 Build Alternative: Operational Effects of Project Improvements Components to Farmlands (in acres) Build Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land Salinas Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0 0 0 0 0 Spence Siding Extension 4 0 0.5 0 13 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0 0 0 0 0 Gonzales Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Soledad Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Soledad New Passenger Station 0 0 0 0 0 Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 28 2 4 0 6 Chalone Creek New Siding 2 0 0 3 0 0 8 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0 0 0 0 0 Coburn Curve Realignments 22 1 4 0 1 King City Siding Extension 4 0 0 0 0 2 0 King City New Passenger Station 0 0 0 0 0 King City Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Build Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 0 0 0 MP 165 Curve Realignment 7 1 0 0 2 San Lucas New Siding 0 0 0 0 18 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0 0 0 0 0 MP 172 Track Realignment 20 1 0 0 4 San Ardo Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 0 0 0 0 18 Bradley Siding Extension 0 0 0.1 0 0 50 0 Bradley Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 0 0 0 0 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 0 0 0 20 5 McKay East Powered Switches 0 0 0 0 0 Wellsona New Siding 3 0 0 0.1 0 4 0 6 0 Build Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 0 0 0 0 0 Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 1 0 2 2 0 Templeton Siding 0 0 0 13 0 4 0 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 0 0 0 0 0 Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 0 0 0 12 1 Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0 0 0 0 0 Cuesta Second Main Track 0 0 0 3 11 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 0 0 0 0 0 Total 91 78 6 26 10 57 37 136 48 Note: Permanent impacts were over reported for new sidings and siding extensions due to overlap between existing railroad ROW and FMMP polygons. Therefore, permanent impacts due to these proposed upgrades have been revised to zero since it is highly unlikely that farmland exists within the railroad ROW. Source: ICF, 2013. As noted above, construction of the second mainline could require clearance of forest lands north of the Cuesta Grade. Effects to forest lands would be concentrated at the construction phase, which could require tree removal to construct the second mainline particularly if the final alignment is identified for an area beyond the existing railroad ROW. Indirect operational effects to forest land could occur through rail operations being extended further into forested areas depending on the final alignment of the second mainline. 3.7.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects on agricultural and forest resources for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess agricultural and forest resource effects as a result of modified or excluded components. Construction-Period Effects Construction of any of the physical components under the Preferred Alternative would have similar potential as the Build Alternative to impact agricultural and forest resources, but these effects would be temporary. Some of the physical components are more substantial than others (such as track realignments, siding extensions, and the second mainline). The proposed station would be located within an urbanized portion of the City of King. Construction activities and staging areas would occur near the proposed station footprint, and would not result in any substantial impacts to agricultural or forest resources. Island CTC would be implemented within existing railroad ROW. Construction of the CTC would not require any heavy machinery or construction activity, and thus would not be expected to adversely impact agricultural or forest resources. The Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County; therefore, construction-period impacts to agricultural and forest resources would be reduced in these locations. As shown in Table 3.7-3, the City of King siding extension could potentially affect 17 acres of Prime farmland during construction. In the aggregate, construction-period impacts to Prime farmland of the Build and Preferred Alternatives are very similar. Additionally, the avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies identified below would eliminate or reduce these potential temporary impacts.  Operational Effects As previously discussed, potential operational and permanent impacts would occur for those components requiring land outside of the existing railroad ROW, such as curve realignments and the second mainline. The Preferred Alternative excluded the four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County; therefore, effects to agricultural and forest resources in these locations would be reduced. The revised City of King siding extension and the island CTC would not have any operational effects to agricultural or forest resources as they would be located within existing railroad ROW. Additionally, the revised City of King passenger station would be located on urban/commercial land and would therefore not have any direct or indirect effects on agricultural or forest resources. Thus, the Preferred Alternative would have reduced operational effects compared to the Build Alternative. Table 3.7-3 Preferred Alternative: Construction-Period Effects of Project Components to Farmlands (in acres) Preferred Alternative Components Prime Farmland Unique Farmland Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland of Local Potential and/or Importance Grazing Land King City Siding Extension 17 0 0 0 0.5 King City New Passenger Station 0 0 0 0 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment None. This improvement is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Source: ICF, 2013 3.7.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES As previously stated, this analysis used a conservative approach to identifying potential impacts by defining a generous “buffer area” in determining whether the Build Alternative has the potential to result in impacts to for agricultural or forest land resources. Specific impact areas will be calculated as some or all proposed physical improvements project components are carried forward for further design. Avoiding or minimizing use of farmland or forestland can be achieved through careful design selection of Build Alternatives improvements project components. If such use cannot be avoided, some farmland conversion cannot be mitigated to a less-than-significant level under CEQA. Generally, the conversion of Prime Farmland to a non-agricultural use is considered to be a significant and unavoidable impact. Mitigation measures (such as placing other lands in conservation easements) can lessen but not fully avoid significant impacts. This is based on the principle that there is a finite amount of Prime Farmland; it is not possible to create or otherwise replace Prime Farmland when some such land it is permanently converted to a nonagricultural use. The following strategies have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts and will be further refined during the project-level environmental analysis. A-AG-1. Careful design practices, such as constructing the second mainline to be completely within existing railroad ROW, would avoid potential impacts to agricultural and forest resources along the Corridor, as feasible. Other Build Preferred Alternative improvements components would be designed to avoid or minimize farmland effects through similar design approaches. MM-AG-1. All Farmland impacts would be at least partially offset through purchase of conservation easements that would permanently maintain lands in agricultural use. These conservation easements would be acquired over agricultural lands of equal quality to those affected. With regard to Williamson Act contracts, specific conflicts with Williamson Act contracts would need to be identified prior to implementation of any Preferred Alternative component project elements under the Build Alternative. MIN-AG-2. When there is a need to acquire and convert land enrolled in a Williamson Act contract, the Department of Conservation would be notified and requirements of Government Code Section 51290-51295 and 51296.6 would be met. To the extent the second mainline would require either temporary or permanent use of land outside the existing railroad ROW that traverses the Los Padres National Forest, the Forest Service would be consulted to identify appropriate and feasible means to avoid, minimize, or compensate for any forest land impacts. MM-AG-3. To the extent forest land use could not be fully avoided, potentially feasible mitigation measures include land swaps, fee mitigation, or other similar measures that would compensate for loss of forest lands. The incorporation of mitigation measures would minimize effects related to construction and operation of the physical improvements comprising the Preferred Alternative, but even with mitigation, the Preferred Alternative could result in the permanent conversion of farmland to rail corridor uses. Mitigation strategies would be further refined at project-level analysis. 3.7.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Prior to implementation of any elements of the Build Preferred Alternative, additional analysis will be needed completed to determine precise impacts of agricultural and forest resources. As discussed in Subsection 3.7.3, Affected Environment, the existing right-of-way as well as a 100 foot wide corridor (for curve realignments) was used to evaluate permanent impacts, while up to 500 foot buffers were used to evaluate construction-period impacts. Conflicts with Williamson Act contracts will also be evaluated in detail prior to implementing any elements of the Build Preferred Alternative. This page intentionally left blank.  3.8 PUBLIC UTILITIES AND SERVICES This section describes existing potential impacts to public utilities and services associated with the No Build and action alternatives preferred in comparison with the No Build and Build Alternatives. Utilities evaluated in this section include electricity and gas, water, wastewater and telecommunications. Emergency services evaluated in this section include police, fire, and emergency response. This section describes updates and changes made in response to comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all substantive comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments regarding Build Alternative components discussed in the Public Utilities and Services section (see comments A.3-2 and A-3.43). Comment A.3-2 resulted in clarifying text revisions to the Affected Environment discussion of the Program EIS/EIR. These changes are shown in strikethrough and underline format. 3.8.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.8.1.1 Federal Federal Communications Commission The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulates interstate and international communications by radio, television, wire, satellite, and cable in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories. The FCC is an independent U.S. government agency overseen by Congress, and is the primary authority for communications law, regulation, and technological innovation. The FCC’s rules and regulations are located in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).1 1 Federal Communications Commission, 2014 Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) A number of pipelines transmitting petroleum products cross the study area. The Office of Pipeline Safety of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), an agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation, is charged with regulating pipeline safety under 49 CFR § 190.1. Pipeline owners and operators are required to meet particular standards of qualification to operate pipelines, uphold established safety standards, and participate in public safety programs that “notify an operator of proposed demolition, excavation, tunneling, or construction near or affecting a pipeline,” identify pipelines that may be affected by such activities, and identify any hazard that may affect a pipeline. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) was established in 1977 to determine whether wholesale electricity prices were reasonable, and proceeded to deregulate the electricity market. Currently, this independent federal agency regulates the interstate transmission of natural gas, oil, and electricity. Additionally, FERC regulates the wholesale electricity rates, oil pipelines, hydroelectric infrastructure, and the natural gas industry. FERC also authorizes the installation or abandonment of natural gas infrastructure, and surveys electric transmission project applications, as well as overseeing environmental affairs related to the natural gas or hydroelectric industries.2 2 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 2014 3 California Office of the State Fire Marshal, 2013. 3.8.1.2 State California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) primarily regulates the provision of privately owned utilities in California. These utilities include privately owned telecommunications, electric, natural gas, water, railroad, rail transit, and passenger transportation companies. The CPUC does not regulate projects that would cross utility lines, these are typically controlled by the utility company themselves; however, the CPUC does regulate the creation of new at-grade rail crossings. Office of the State Fire Marshal, Pipeline Safety Division (The Division) The Division regulates intrastate hazardous liquid pipelines pursuant to the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1981. The Division investigates all spills, ruptures, fires, and pipeline incidents and currently regulates the safety of approximately 4,500 miles of intrastate hazardous liquid transportation pipelines.3 3.8.1.3 Local Monterey County General Plan The Monterey County General Plan Public Services Element includes policies related to providing adequate public services and facilities (APSF). Ensuring that APSF are available to support new development, and that they are provided concurrently with new development is required, new development is required to connect to existing water service providers whenever possible, and all projects are required to be designed to minimize runoff and absorb rainfall using a variety of mitigation techniques. There are also policies ensuring that new development is guaranteed a long-term sustainable water supply, adequate wastewater treatment, and requiring developers to construct or contribute their fair share to the funding of new or expanded water and/or wastewater treatment facilities if needed to serve their development. City of Salinas General Plan The City’s General Plan provides policies regarding providing effective and responsive fire and police protection, and emergency response system. A safe and adequate supply of water is encouraged, as well as creating a safer community through the use of design techniques for new development. There are also policies aimed at protecting the community from hazards related to ground transportation, such as rail, truck, and roadway systems. City of Soledad General Plan The City’s General Plan provides policies requiring adequate public services during new development, fair share contributions from developers for additional public services such as fire and police protection, water-conserving design and equipment in new construction and landscaping, and new development compliance with the Monterey County Integrated Waste Management Plan. City of King (King City) General Plan The City’s General Plan includes policies requiring new development to assure that adequate services and facilities are, or will be, available within a reasonable time, to provide coordinated, ongoing planning for public service facilities, and requiring that all new development proposals be referred to the Police and Fire Departments for law-enforcement and safety evaluation. There are also policies assuring adequate water service, supply, wastewater service, and drainage throughout the city, and requiring the extension of new power transmission lines to be placed underground. San Luis Obispo County General Plan The San Luis Obispo County General Plan provides policies encouraging new development to be carefully located, especially when development involves fuel in higher fire risk areas. Policies also require that adequate facilities, equipment and personnel are available to meet the demands of fire fighting in San Luis Obispo County. The amount, location, and rate of growth allowed by the Land Use Element is restricted by the sustainable capacity of resources, public services, and facilities and the General Plan requires additional public resources, services, and facilities to be provided preemptively to avoid over burdening existing resources. 3.8.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION Utilities To better understand the potential for proposed physical components improvements to result in impacts to utilities, the analysis in this section is built upon a review of available data for all known utilities (pipelines, transmission lines, and related facilities) within or adjacent to the project corridor. The purpose of this review is to determine if any of the proposed physical components improvements would cross or pass in close proximity to existing utilities. To the extent potential conflicts have been identified, this document proposes appropriate strategies to avoid or minimize the effects of such conflicts. A secondary potential impact is whether would occur if any of the proposed components improvements could would result in expanded utility demand that could not be met without the construction of new facilities. Public Services Potential public services impacts could occur if there is an identified need to expand or build new facilities for police, fire, or emergency services, or if construction of any proposed physical components improvements could potentially result in the temporary disruption of such these services because of detours or other temporary barriers.  3.8.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Public Utilities The utility service providers in the study area are summarized below. Natural Gas Facilities Natural gas facilities and pipelines are provided by Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) and Southern California Gas Company (SCG). The service area covered by PG&E includes northern and central California. SCG provides service to most of southern California. There are currently about 3.4 miles (18,000 linear feet) of pipeline immediately adjacent to the 130 mile rail corridor.4 4 ICF, 2013 5 ICF, 2013  Electrical Transmission Lines Electrical transmission lines in the area are provided by PG&E. PG&Es service area spans much of California, from Shasta Lake area to just south of Lompoc. About 1.1 miles (roughly 5,700 linear feet) of electrical transmission lines are in place immediately adjacent to the existing rail 130 mile rail corridor.5 Telecommunications Telecommunication, through optical fiber, is the backbone for broadband communications. Fiber-optic communication has many advantages over traditional copper-wire and wireless communications; it is non-corrosive, immune to weather and electrical noise, is made from renewable sources, it has more bandwidth, and offers the best return on investment for networks. Fiber-optic transmission lines are in place along the rail corridor, traveling directly alongside the existing rail. alignment for approximately 30 miles from Paso Robles to San Luis Obispo.6 Railroad tracks are generally considered good paths for telecommunications cable because they offer unobstructed, linear routes. Solid Waste Between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, solid waste disposal is provided by multiple service providers. The Salinas Valley Solid Waste Authority (SVSWA) serves the eastern inland portions of Monterey County, including Salinas, Soledad, and King City. The SVSWA operates two landfills; the Johnson Canyon Sanitary Landfill in Gonzales, and the Jolon Road Sanitary Landfill in King City. They each have available capacity to receive solid waste, with 5.9 million cubic yards and 826,500 cubic yards remaining capacities, respectively. The SVSWA also has plans to expand all of its landfills, as well as site a new landfill.7 7 Monterey County, 2006, pp. 4.11-27-4.11-28 8 City of El Paso de Robles, 2010, Table 5-11 and http://www.prcity.com/GOVERNMENT/departments/publicworks/trash-recycling/index.asp 9 County of San Luis Obispo, 2009, pp. 3-1-3-2. 10 City of Salinas, 2002, pp. 5.13-36-5.13-37 The City of Paso Robles owns a landfill and franchises for solid waste collection within the city limits. Paso Robles Waste Disposal is the sole franchise collection company, and Pacific Waste Services operates the city-owned landfill. As of July 2009, the landfill had over 3 million tons of remaining capacity to receive solid waste.8 Solid waste in San Luis Obispo is managed by San Luis Garbage, and is received by the Cold Canyon landfill just outside of the city. The landfill currently accepts up to 1,200 tons per day of disposal material, and is currently waiting for approval to expand the facility, which would increase disposal capacity and extend the life of the landfill by 25 years, to year 2040.9 Wastewater Wastewater services are provided by several utilities along the Corridor. The new and existing train stations are the only facilities that would require wastewater services within the vicinity of the alignment. Further analysis will primarily focus on the utilities in the jurisdictions with proposed or existing stations. . Salinas: Salinas is served by the Monterey County Regional Water Pollution Control Agency (MRWPCA) which provides wastewater conveyance, treatment, disposal, and recycling services. The MRWPCA plant is rated at 29.6 million gallons per day (mgd) and currently flows are 21 mgd resulting in capacity to treat additional wastewater flows. MRWPCA uses connection fees to fund future expansions, and while specific improvement projects have not been identified to meet future needs generated by development, they do not anticipate problems in funding future expansions when they become necessary.10  . Soledad: Soledad operates one wastewater treatment plant with a treatment capacity of 5.5 mgd; however, the current capacity is effectively limited to 4.3 mgd due to disposal capacity limitations. The city currently processes approximately 1.5 mgd, just over 35 percent of the plant’s effective capacity.11 The treated water meets Title 22 Recycled Water Standards. The wastewater treatment plant serves the city and the Salinas Valley State Prison. The plant was upgraded in 2010 to meet the tertiary treatment requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board Order WRR R3-2008-0042.12 . King City: The King City Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) is located along the Salinas River northwest of the city. The facility provides collection, treatment, and disposal of both domestic and industrial wastes. Flow capacity at the facility is approximately 1.2 mgd, and daily flows are estimated to be 0.87 mgd. The city adopted a Wastewater Facilities Plan (WFP) in 2004 which includes improvements that are expected to increase the treatment capacity of the facility. The city has commenced the first phase of improvements to implement the adopted WFP, which will effectively increase the treatment capacity to 1.53 mgd. A second phase of improvements is scheduled for design, bringing capacity to 1.92 mgd.13 . Paso Robles: The City of Paso Robles operates its own Wastewater Treatment Plant WWTP located along the Salinas River at the north end of town. The existing treatment process fails to meet Federal and State water quality regulations, and the city is occasionally fined for violations of its National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. The city is planning a major WWTP upgrade to address these problems and prepare for the future production of recycled water.14 . San Luis Obispo: San Luis Obispo provides its own wastewater treatment within the city and serves California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly) and the County of San Luis Obispo Airport. The WWTP provides for collection and treatment for residential, commercial, and industrial users. Over the past nine 11 City of Soledad, 2012, p. 3-17 12 City of Soledad, 2012, pp. 4.6-6-4.6-7 13 City of King 2011, pp. 4-3-4-4 14 City of Paso Robles, Wastewater Division website. http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/publicworks/wastewater/. Accessed 8/22/13  years, dry-weather flow to the Water Reclamation Facility (WRF) has ranged from 4.08 mgd to 5.12 mgd, and is designed to accommodate an average dryweather flow of 5.2 mgd. Improvements are planned that will provide capacity for up to 5.8 mgd to accommodate General Plan buildout.15 15 City of San Luis Obispo, 2010, p. 8-24 16 City of Salinas, 2002, pp. 5.13-27/29 17 City of Salinas, 2002, pp. 5.13-27/29 Water A variety of service providers deliver water within the vicinity of the Corridor. Given that the existing and proposed new train stations are the only components of the physical improvements that would require any permanent water supply, and that construction –related period water use would be temporary and likely trucked in on an as-needed basis, further discussion will focus on providers that would supply the proposed stations. . Salinas: Both California Water Service Corporation (Cal Water) and Alco Water Service (Alco) provide water to the City of Salinas. Alco serves the east and southeast portions of the city, totaling approximately one third of the city. The majority of the urbanized area is served by Cal Water. . Alco’s services are regulated by the CPUC and currently meet the level of service standards set forth in General Order 103, as well as State of California Department of Health Services, and Federal Environmental Protection Agency standards and requirements. Water is provided for irrigation, industrial, and commercial purposes through nine wells and one storage tank. Total well capacity is approximately 13,560 million gallons per year (mgy), and pump capacity is about 7,525 mgy. Alco also uses approximately 1,550 million gallons of groundwater per year. Additional storage facilities and wells were planned and discussed in the Salinas General Plan (2002) that would approximately double groundwater source capacity.16 . Cal Water is a private investor-owned utility, also regulated by the CPUC, providing service to approximately 100,000 residents. All of the water is groundwater sourced through 27 privately-owned deep wells, producing approximately 4,700 mgy. Groundwater capacity in the city is rated at 16,900 gallons per minute. Both purveyors face complexities associated with seawater intrusion and high nitrate levels, and Cal Water is working closely with the MCWRA to address these issues. 17 . Soledad: Soledad provides its own municipal water, supplied solely from groundwater retrieved from the Salinas Valley Groundwater Basin. The city currently has four wells providing 5.9 mgd, or 4,100 gallons per minute (gpm) distributed mostly to residential and agricultural uses. Two additional wells are planned to be operational by 2016.18 The Urban Water Management Plan notes that there are currently no restrictions in place directing how much water the city can extract from the Basin, and the Basin is currently overtapped by approximately four percent per year. Conservation efforts and reduced agricultural water use are expected to remedy the imbalance.19 . King City: Cal Water serves King City with six wells, providing approximately 2.4 mgd of local ground water to more than 3,100 service connections.20 The Cal Water system has a maximum production capacity of 3 mgd and is currently adequate to meet the needs of the city. Water demand is expected to increase as the population grows in the city, drilling of additional wells as well as implementing conservation efforts are anticipated to help offset water demand and accommodate additional demand.21 . Paso Robles: The Paso Robles Water Division is responsible for providing the City with water. There are 19 wells serving approximately 9,200 residential, 800 commercial, and 400 irrigation customers within the city. Water is drawn from the Paso Robles Basin and the Salinas River Underflow, and over 50 percent of the city’s water is supplied by seven wells along the Salinas River Corridor. The city is also a participant in the Lake Nacimiento Water Project (NWP) and has secured a 4,000 AFY water entitlement. The design of a new surface-water treatment plant in under design and should be operational by 2015. The water from Lake Nacimiento will supplement water drawn from the Paso Robles Basin and help to ensure a long-term and reliable water supply for the city.22 . San Luis Obispo: The City of San Luis Obispo provides its own municipal water and draws water from five different sources – the Salinas Reservoir (Santa Margarita Lake), Whale Rock Reservoir, Nacimiento Reservoir, recycled water from the City’s WRF, and groundwater. 18 City of Soledad, 2012, p. 4.6-1 19 City of Soledad, 2012, p. 3-19 20 City of King, 2011, pg. 4-1 21 City of King, 1998, pp. S-19-S-20 22 City of Paso Robles, 2014b Public Services The cities of Salinas, Soledad, King City, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo each have their own police departments. Fire protection services are provided by several different organizations. Within Monterey County, Salinas, Soledad, and King City each have their own fire departments. The Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) operates fire stations in Paso Robles and San Luis Obispo. Paso Robles Emergency Services and the San Luis Obispo Fire Department also operate fire stations within each of their respective cities. Section 3.14, Growth Inducement, includes descriptions of existing public park and recreational facilities between Salinas and San Luis Obispo within 500 feet of the existing rail alignment and/or proposed rail improvements project components. 3.8.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.8.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical components improvements expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of PTC along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. Such a system PTC, when installed, will require electrical connections at signals but would otherwise not represent any substantial new draw on utility resources. The intention of PTC is to improve rail safety; o Once implemented, demand for rail-related emergency services (already at low levels) would be expected to decrease further. Construction activities under the No Build Alternative may create some electrical demand, but given that many construction sites use generators and thus do not require connection to the electrical power grid or require natural gas, it can be assumed that demands for such these resources will would be negligible. It is common practice to coordinate with utility representatives during construction in the vicinity of critical infrastructure, such as high-voltage overhead/underground transmission lines, high-pressure gas pipelines, or aqueduct canals. 3.8.4.2 Build Alternative For the purposes of this analysis, the existing conditions are treated as representative of the No Build Alternative, and the analysis summarizes the relative differences between the existing conditions and the Build Alternative. Utility Conflicts Utility conflicts are expected to be low in areas where rail improvements project components would occur within the existing railroad ROW because utilities have already been sited to minimize conflicts with the rail corridor. Curve realignments and the second mainline, since they have the greatest likelihood of departing from the railroad ROW, have the greatest potential for conflicts with both above- and below-ground utilities. Table 3.8-1 below illustrates the extent of potential temporary and permanent conflicts with transmission lines and pipelines associated with implementation of the Build Alternative components. Natural Gas Pipelines Construction and operation of the Build Alternative could result in potential proximity impacts to natural gas pipelines. New sidings and siding extensions, as well as the second main track, have the potential to intersect and conflict with existing pipelines adjacent to the railway railroad ROW. Construction-Period Effects Approximately 1 mile (4,629 linear feet (lf)) of pipeline could experience temporary potential proximity impacts during construction activities. The Cuesta second main track would be responsible for the majority of this potential impact. Constructionrelated period impacts to natural gas pipelines could result in service disruptions and possibly damage to the pipeline from construction vehicle ingress/egress and construction equipment. Operational Effects Implementation of the Build Alternative could conflict with approximately 2.5 miles (13,376 lf) of natural gas pipelines. The Spence Siding extension accounts for a significant amount the potential proximity impacts to pipelines, affecting approximately 1.9 miles (10,002 linear feet lf) of natural gas pipelines if constructed. Elements Components of the Build Alternative are expected to cross existing natural gas pipelines on a total of 6 occasions throughout the alignment, 3 of which would occur along the King City Siding extension improvement. This could cause damage to the pipeline, and potentially cause some degree of service disruption. Potentially impacted pipelines can either be protected in place so no damage during construction or subsequent operations would occur, or it can would be relocated if protecting in place would not be feasible, nor is relocating the improvement causing the conflict. Prior to implementing specific improvements detailed plans will be developed and allow more specific determination as to the location, duration, and severity of proximity impacts to natural gas pipelines. Electrical Transmission Lines Existing electrical transmission lines could be intersected during construction and operation of the Build Alternative. Construction-Period Effects During construction, temporary proximity impacts could occur to about 0.9 miles (4,806 lf) of electrical transmission lines. The King City Siding extension would account for the majority of potential proximity impacts, intersecting with approximately 0.8 miles (4,244 lf) of electrical transmission lines during construction activities. Resulting impacts would be minor, or result in temporary service disruptions and some degree of damage to the transmission line. Operational Effects Implementation of elements of the Build Alternative components could would conflict with less than 0.25 miles (906 lf) of existing transmission lines. The King City Siding extension could conflict with up to 0.1 miles (372 lf) of electrical transmission lines once operational. Elements Components of the Build Alternative are expected to cross transmission lines in 3 locations along the alignment. Similar to natural gas pipelines, transmission lines can either be protected in place so no damage during construction or subsequent operations would occur, or it can be the lines can be relocated if neither protecting them in place, nor relocating the improvement causing the intersection would be feasible. Prior to implementing specific improvements detailed plans will be developed and allow more specific determination as to the location, duration, and severity of proximity impacts to electrical transmission lines. Water Transmission Lines: Construction and Operational Effects The NWP regional raw water transmission facility delivers water from Lake Nacimiento to communities in San Luis Obispo County via a 45 mile water pipeline ranging between 12 and 36 inches in diameter.23 This pipeline roughly tracks the 23 Atascadero Mutual Water Company, 2014 existing railroad alignment from north of Paso Robles south to San Luis Obispo. The following elements components of the Build Alternative are proposed to occur in this area: Wellsona New Siding, Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments, Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments, Templeton New Siding, Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment, Santa Margarita Powered Switch, and the Second Main Track. Construction and operation of the aforementioned improvements project components could result in potential proximity impacts to the water transmission line. Telecommunications: Construction and Operational Effects Fiber-optic transmission lines are in place along the Corridor, traveling directly alongside most of the existing alignment in both Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. from Paso Robles to San Luis Obispo. The following elements of the Build Alternative are proposed to occur in this section of the alignment: Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments, Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment, Santa Margarita Powered Switch, and the Second Main Track. Potential proximity Impacts to telecommunication transmission lines could occur during construction and operation of elements of the Build Alternative components because of their proximity to the existing alignment and proposed improvements. Utility Usage Construction-Period Effects Many of the elements of the Build Alternative components would be developed with heavy equipment, including diesel powered trucks and other machinery. Construction activities would require minimal direct usage of local utilities, like including electricity and water. Often construction activities provide for any required electricity using onsite generators, eliminating the need to connect to the electrical power grid. Some water would likely be required during construction as part of standard construction best practices to help control dust and other emissions. The quantity of water needed is anticipated to be relatively low, given the low levels of minimal earthwork, grading, and other dust creating activities that would take place. Additionally, given the likely low quantity of water needed during construction activities, water would be trucked in on an as-needed basis. Operational Effects Operation of certain features of the Build Alternative components would require some electricity, specifically new powered switches, signal upgrades, and new stations. New stations would also require some water use and wastewater service for restroom facilities. Other features, such as sidings, curve realignments, etc. would have little or no perceptible use of public electric and gas utilities. The general impacts associated with the Station elements components of the Build Alternative have been assessed in the planning documents of the two receiving cities - Soledad and King City. The stations would be located in developed city centers, so requiring minimal or no utility extension would be needed. A variety of service providers deliver water within the vicinity of the Corridor as described above in Section 3.8.2, Affected Environment. Given that the existing and proposed train stations are the only components of the physical improvements that would require any permanent water supply, new demand for water resources would not be significant. No potential proximity impacts to utilities were identified related to for the station areas. Signal upgrades would require some electricity to operate. New signal towers may be required to operate CTC. Where CTC equipment would be located adjacent to utilities, direct connections could would be made; this would prove difficult through more remote areas along the Corridor. Public Services Construction-Period Effects The vast majority of proposed improvements project components would be constructed within the existing railroad ROW or in new ROW proposed to be created (particularly curve realignments), typically avoiding existing roads. Therefore, the potential for roads to be blocked or diverted by construction periodrelated temporary emergency service and/or public facility disruptions would be low. Where construction work or construction vehicles would make extensive use of existing roads, a situation likely limited to the construction of components improvements across such roads, temporary access disruptions could be expected similar to other types of roadway improvement work. Operational Effects It is unlikely that implementation of the Build Alternative would require any significant increase in public services or facilities because the proposed physical improvements components would not encourage substantial population growth. Individual rail components improvements, such as curve realignments, the second mainline, and other trackway improvements, have no foreseeable connection or linkage to increased demand for public services. New or expanded station areas could would incrementally contribute to increased demand for certain public services (police response, emergency services, etc.). However, the anticipated increase in station area activity would be modest, even in the two communities where new stations are planned. Neither of the environmental documents for the Soledad or King City station area nor downtown plans indicate any significant effect to public services as a result of plan implementation. Anticipated increases in passenger activity at the Salinas and San Luis Obispo stations are would not be at such high levels that substantial public services impacts could would occur. 3.8.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, impacts to Public Utilities and Services for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. King City Siding Extension and Passenger Station The Preferred Alternative reflects the City of King’s revised draft station area plans, which retain the general downtown location assumed for the Build Alternative. However, in response to comments, the Preferred Alternative is more specific with respect to the parcels envisioned by the City for its future passenger station. The King City siding extension considered as part of the Build Alternative would potentially result in permanent and temporary impacts to nearby/adjacent transmission lines based on an assumed potential impact area that encompassed the entire railroad alignment plus buffers on either side. Electric transmission lines generally parallel the outside of the existing railroad alignment. The modified siding extension included as part of the Preferred Alternative is longer than what was evaluated for the Build Alternative. The revised siding extension would continue to potentially result in permanent and temporary effects to nearby/adjacent transmission lines, but owing to its longer length, the revised siding would potentially affect more linear feet (see Table 3.8-1 below). Assuming that the siding extension can be constructed entirely within the railroad ROW, some or all of the proximity effects to transmission lines would be avoided. No potential pipeline conflicts would occur for the revised King City siding extension. The analysis of the Preferred Alternative confirms that the revised proposal for the King City station would have no impacts to transmission lines or pipelines. While operation of the Build Alternative would require some water, wastewater, and electricity, the impact would not be significant because that the existing and proposed stations would be the only components that would require any permanent supply. The same conclusion is true for the Preferred Alternative because the Preferred Alternative only slightly modifies the location of the proposed station, and the types of anticipated uses are the same as for the Build Alternative. Therefore, resulting impacts would be similar and neither adverse nor significant. Curve Realignments and Island CTC As described above, the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County and included in the Build Alternative would have no potential conflicts with electric transmission lines or pipelines. Therefore, excluding these four curve realignments from the Preferred Alternative would result in the same conclusion of no potential impacts to these utilities. However, the Templeton/Henry, Wellsona/Paso Robles, and Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignments would potentially result in impacts to water transmission lines and telecommunication lines. Because the Preferred Alternative excludes these four curve realignments, it would avoid these potential impacts to water and telecommunication facilities. Under the Build Alternative, the potential for utility conflicts was generally considered to be low where rail components would occur within the existing railroad ROW because utilities have already been sited to minimize conflicts with the rail corridor. Although implementation of island CTC would consist of constructing new signals within the railroad ROW, potential conflicts could result. Table 3.8-1 Potential Utility Impacts - No Build, Build, and Preferred Alternatives  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Salinas Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Spence Siding Extension N/A 0 0 0 10,002 0 0 0 10,002 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Gonzales Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Soledad Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Soledad New Passenger Station N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Chalone Creek New Siding N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Coburn Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 King City Siding Extension N/A 4,244 372 0 0 14,192 372 0 0 King City New Passenger Station N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 King City Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 MP 165 Curve Realignment N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 San Lucas New Siding N/A 109 133 0 0 109 133 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 MP 172 Track Realignment N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 San Ardo Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Bradley Siding Extension N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Bradley Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 McKay East Powered Switches N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Wellsona New Siding N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Templeton Siding N/A 237 309 1,166 0 237 309 1,166 0 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Santa Margarita Powered Switch N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Cuesta Second Main Track N/A 215 91 3,463 3,374 215 91 3,463 3,374 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet) Potential Transmission Line Impacts (linear feet) Potential Pipeline Impacts (linear feet)  Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Totals 0 0 0 0 4,806 906 4,629 13,376 14,754 906 4,629 13,376 Source: ICF, 2015 3.8.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES Where appropriate, mitigation strategies should consider relocating, reconstructing, or restoring affected utilities in close coordination with the utility owner. During utility relocation planning several design strategies should be considered, including consolidating numerous utilities into one single conduit corridor. The following strategies have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potential utility conflicts. The following measures are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and were identified to minimize, avoid or mitigation potential impacts from the proposed components. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. A-PS-1. Adapt rail components improvements to accommodate existing utility facilities and transmission lines. A-PS-2. During project-level planning and design, refer to each utility owner/provider to best avoid potential impacts on existing and planned utilities through adjustments to design features. MIN-PS-3. Where avoidance is infeasible, utility transmission lines and facilities would be relocated or protected in place throughout all phases of construction and operation, and in compliance with the involved utility owners/providers. MIN-PS-4. Implement solar powered CTC in remote areas where utility connections would be difficult. 3.8.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Subsequent analysis will include more detailed information on the following public services and utilities: . The specific locations of and potential impacts to public facilities and emergency services (such as schools, parks, fire and police stations, hospitals, and medical clinics). . Fiber optic lines. . Telecommunication lines. . Storm drains. . Wastewater and water pump stations. . Wastewater conveyance lines. . Water supply lines. . Other utilities and/or pipelines likely to be crossed or conflict with the various alignment options, including liquid petroleum, crude oil, renewable energy facilities, etc. Future project-level analysis will consider all utilities and public service providers once the physical improvements are finalized based on the project components.              Page intentionally left blank  3.9 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTES The section identifies known hazardous material sites within the study area and analyzes any hazard-related impacts that could occur as a result of the No Build and action alternatives. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments regarding the City of King siding extension discussed in the Build Alternative, and one related to potential building demolition impacts (see comments A-3.44 through A-3.47). The discussion of the Preferred Alternative below addresses all of the comments provided. None of the comments result in the need for any revisions to the hazardous materials and wastes analysis. EPA also provided one comment (A-7.4) on the transportation of hazardous materials. The specific recommendation letters cited by the commenter are targeted at rail carriers of oil products or other hazardous materials; they do not include any specific recommendations regarding the physical components of the rail system. Nothing in the recommendations provided in the comment suggests any need for any change to any of the components of the No Build, Build, or Preferred Alternatives. 3.9.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS The regulatory requirements discussion outlines the federal and state policies that are relevant to hazardous materials. 3.9.1.1 Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) RCRA governs the disposal of solid and hazardous waste. Congress passed RCRA in 1976 as an amendment to the Solid Waste Disposal Act of 1965. RCRA was intended to address the growing volume of municipal and industrial waste and set national goals for protecting human health and the environment from the potential hazards of waste disposal. RCRA sets forth measures to conserve energy and natural resources. RCRA Subtitle C establishes a hazardous waste program intended to regulate such wastes from their creation to their disposal – a framework sometimes called “cradle to grave.” RCRA Subtitle I sets forth an underground storage tank  (UST) program to regulate such storage of hazardous substances, including petroleum products. EPA has primary responsibility for implementing RCRA, but some states, including California and Nevada, have received authorization to implement RCRA and issue permits. Comprehensive Environmental Response and Liability Act (CERCLA) CERCLA, also known as Superfund, was enacted in December 1980 and amended in 1986. CERCLA provides a basis for taxing chemical and petroleum manufacturers and provides federal authority to respond directly to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances that may endanger public health or the environment. CERCLA sets forth requirements concerning closed and/or abandoned hazardous waste sites, determines liability of the persons responsible for releases of hazardous waste at these sites, and administers a trust fund using collected taxes to provide for cleanup when no responsible party can be identified. Occupational Safety and Health Standards Title 29 under the Code of Federal Regulations focuses on worker health and safety as it relates to worker exposure to hazards. The Occupational, Safety, and Health Administration (OSHA), born out of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, is the primary agency responsible for setting and enforcing standards to assure safe and healthful working conditions for working men and women and provide training, outreach, education, and assistance. 3.9.1.2 State California Health and Safety Code Hazardous waste management in California is regulated under the authority of the California Health and Safety Code. The Health and Safety Code ensures employment of proper technology and management practices, safe handling, treatment, recycling, and destruction of hazardous waste. The California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) carries out many related programs and measures to protect the public health and environment from potential threats of hazardous substances and wastes. The California State Fire Marshal (CSFM) participates in the Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA), which consolidates and coordinates activities and programs related to hazardous wastes generators and treatments, storage tanks, hazardous material releases, and hazardous material management plans required  by chapter 6.11 of the California Health and Safety Code. The CSFM provides regulatory oversight, CUPA certifications, evaluations of the approved CUPAs, and training and education.1 1 California Office of the State Fire Marshal, 2013 According to Title 22 §66261.20 of the California Code of Regulations (CCR), waste is considered hazardous if it includes one of the following four characteristics; 1) ignitability, 2) corrosivity, 3) reactivity, and 4) toxicity. CCR Title 22, Division 4.5 contains environmental health standards for the management of hazardous waste. Title 22 requires hazardous waste is managed according to applicable regulations with regard to handling, transport, exposure requirements, and disposal requirements under a uniform hazardous waste manifest, with the specific procedures identified in Title 8 of the California Code of Regulations. 3.9.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION Construction of one or more of the elements of the Build Alternative action alternatives would have varying potential to result in environmental effects to hazardous materials and wastes. The study area for hazardous materials and waste is defined as the existing railroad ROW, the temporary and permanent footprints for each of the physical components improvements. Temporary impact areas are locations that would be needed during construction and would be restored to their original conditions post construction (i.e., staging areas, ingress/egress). Permanent impact areas include all components and associated facilities and affected resources that would not be restored back to their original conditions (e.g., new track locations, stations, etc.). Analysis for this program-level document Program EIS/EIR consisted of consulting various databases to identify potentially hazardous sites that overlap with the temporary and permanent impact footprints of all potential improvements. The hazardous materials analysis included a qualitative comparison of potential impacts on humans and the natural environment based on possible exposure to hazardous materials near the study area during construction and/or operation of proposed improvements project components.  The following databases were consulted: . Envirofact Database – EPA: this database searches toxic chemical releases, water discharge permit compliance, hazardous waste handling processes, Superfund status, and air emission estimates for particular geographic locations.2 . Envirostor Cleanup/Hazardous Waste Databases – DTSC: EnviroStor's site database contains a list of contaminated sites, as well as lists of facilities that process or transfer toxic waste. It also contains permit type, cleanup status, and location. . Solid Waste Information System (SWIS) Database - California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery: The SWIS database contains information on solid waste facilities, operations, and disposal sites throughout the State of California. The types of facilities found in this database include landfills, transfer stations, material recovery facilities, composting sites, transformation facilities, waste tire sites, and closed disposal sites.3 . Underground Storage Tanks (UST) - State Water Resources Control Board: An UST is defined by law as "any one or combination of tanks, including pipes connected thereto, that is used for the storage of hazardous substances and that is substantially or totally beneath the surface of the ground."4 2 US EPA, 2014a 3 CalRecycle, 2013 4 California EPA, 2013 3.9.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Hazardous materials can pose a potential threat to human health or the environment if improperly stored, transferred, or disposed. Remediation of any hazardous material sites located within the study area can dramatically increase the capital cost of a project, thus understanding potentially hazardous sites early in the design process can influence future planning efforts. Hazardous materials can be released through airborne fumes, vapors, or dust. Negative implications of hazardous materials include risks to soil or groundwater quality. In general, concentrations of hazardous materials that are higher than regulatory standards necessitate specific requirements for handling, primarily during excavation and other earth moving activities. This program-level document Program EIS/EIR identifies potentially hazardous sites that are known near the existing Coast Corridor alignment and in proposed component improvement areas. According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, agricultural producers are common users of hazardous materials in the county along with commercial, industrial, and institutional industries. 5 According to the San Luis Obispo County General Plan Safety Element, many hazardous materials are shipped through the county on US 101, UPRR, and other state highways; therefore, past vehicle spills or accidental releases of unknown contaminants are possible risks.6 Additionally, mobile sources, including trucks, trains, and farm equipment are significant sources of diesel emissions. As a result, exhaust from engines on major transportation corridors includes high concentrations of particulate matter that is deposited nearby.7 According to Caltrans, aerially deposited lead is often deposited along and near highways from past leaded fuel vehicle emissions.8 5 County of Monterey, 2006, p. 4.13-1 6 County of San Luis Obispo, 1999a, p. 24 7 County of Monterey, 2006, p. 4.1-6 8 Caltrans, 2014 9 County of San Luis Obispo, 1999b, pp. 101-107 Furthermore, industrial, agricultural, and commercial establishments also release hazardous materials into the environment, especially where pesticides are commonly used.9 Several historic hazardous sites and hazardous sites were identified within the study area. Historic sites generally refer to a hazardous site that has had past enforcement actions to remediate the area. Three historic-status sites were identified near the proposed Soledad Station. Hazardous sites were also identified near the proposed King City siding, and in several portions of the existing alignment. Hazardous historic sites were identified within section #1 and section #8 of the existing alignment. These sites have had enforcement actions in place to remediate or contain identified contamination. The study area does not contain any Superfund sites or landfills. 3.9.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.9.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between without any physical components improvements south of Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical component improvement expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of PTC along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. PTC equipment would likely be installed within the existing railroad ROW or would modify existing signaling equipment, and train operations would continue as it currently does. Both Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties have identified all major transportation corridors (including railroads) as containing deposited particulate matter and lead. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that areas immediately surrounding the railroad ROW could contain concentrations of aerially deposited lead from former lead-based fuels, as well as pesticides and herbicides to control growth near railway and roadway infrastructure. As a result, hazardous materials are likely to be present under the No Build Alternative. Installation of PTC would require excavation in the railroad ROW and may result in hazardous materials related effects. If required by law, separate environmental review of these projects as they are implemented would establish as appropriate any additional mitigation necessary beyond adherence to all applicable federal and state regulations regarding the handling and disposal of hazardous materials. 3.9.4.2 Build Alternative Corridor-Wide Hazardous Materials and Wastes Overall, there is potential risk to uncover hazardous materials near roadways and agricultural areas within the entire Coast Corridor study area, owing to aerially deposited lead and particulate matter deposited from vehicles as well as pesticide use. Most of the study area roughly traces US 101 and/or borders agricultural landuse types; therefore, it is reasonable to assume that there would be a potential high risk associated with physical components improvements across the corridor. Generally, all of the Build Alternative components improvements would result in varying levels of ground disturbance during construction through excavation and other construction activities. As a result, construction activities may likely encounter contaminated soil containing pesticide or herbicide residue, aerially deposited lead, or other soil or groundwater contaminants. If physical components improvements require the demolition of existing facilities or structures, construction activities may likely encounter asbestos or lead-based paint materials. In turn, construction activities could potentially expose construction workers and surrounding residents to hazardous materials if the materials are not properly managed and remediated. Subsequent environmental analysis would determine the level of risk and appropriate management and remediation efforts associated with each Build Alternative improvement. Site-Specific Hazardous Materials and Wastes Table 3.9-1 below summarizes the findings from records and database searches of both active- and closed-status hazardous sites along the study area. Active-status refers to recorded hazardous sites that are currently open and awaiting remediation or enforcement efforts. Closed-status refers to recorded hazardous sites that have already undergone remediation or enforcement efforts, and are considered “historic.” Potential hazardous risk ratings were not assigned to active sites within the study area. Database searches provide a broad-level understanding of hazardous sites near physical components improvements for planning purposes, but do not provide adequate detail to determine the severity of each site in relation to the proposed work involved or the cleanup schedule. Therefore, potential cleanup intensity could vary from site to site. The database searches found several hazardous sites within the permanent and temporary impact areas of the physical components improvements; however, no superfund sites or solid waste landfills were identified in the study area. Existing Alignment Upgrades A hazardous site on the criteria and hazardous air pollutant inventory is located within existing alignment section #1. Proposed upgrades Components in this area include replacement of rail ties, tracks, and potentially also ballasts. These components and areas may be covered in pesticide/herbicide residues (a potential corridor-wide hazard) and may be considered hazardous waste requiring special handling and disposal.  Passenger Stations Three historic hazardous sites were identified near the proposed Soledad Station. These sites were classified as leaking USTs, but are no longer active because of past remediation efforts. Siding Extensions The database searches identified three hazardous sites within the temporary impact areas associated with for the proposed King City siding extension. Two sites are facilities under the Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure (SPCC) rule, which includes requirements for oil spill prevention, preparedness, and response to prevent oil discharges to navigable waters and adjoining shorelines.10 Another site is a cleanup program site that is still active in status. Given that the hazardous site is located within a temporary impact area, impacts would only occur over the duration of construction activities. There is the potential for the siding extension to be designed to avoid these areas, but if such areas are included, further mitigation may be required to minimize hazards to workers and people in the area. 10 US EPA, 2014b Curve Realignments, New Powered Switches, and New Sidings No hazardous sites were identified near any of the proposed curve realignments, new powered switches, or new sidings. However, construction of selected components elements of the Build Alternative may require the removal of buildings, structures, soils, and/or paving materials to accommodate new construction. In particular, one portion of the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment could require acquisition of agricultural and residential properties and demolition of existing buildings on site. Demolition activities may encounter lead-based paint and asbestos-containing building materials. These materials would have to be removed prior to demolition and transported to a certified disposal facility. Construction activities may also encounter contaminated soils and/or groundwater, aerially-deposited lead or particulate matter, or other previously identified hazardous materials that must be removed, disposed of, and remediated. Table 3.9-1 Hazardous Sites and Materials in the Coast Corridor Build Alternative Components Recorded “Active- Status” Hazardous Sites Recorded “Closed- Status” Hazardous Sites Likelihood of Encountering Corridor-Wide Hazardous Materials     Salinas Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 1 0 Moderate Spence Siding Extension 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0 0 Moderate Gonzales Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Soledad Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Soledad New Passenger Station 0 3 Moderate Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 0 0 Moderate Chalone Creek New Siding 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0 0 Moderate Coburn Curve Realignments 0 0 Moderate King City Siding Extension 3 0 Moderate King City New Passenger Station 0 0 Moderate King City Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 Moderate MP 165 Curve Realignment 0 0 Moderate Build Alternative Components Recorded “Active- Status” Hazardous Sites Recorded “Closed- Status” Hazardous Sites Likelihood of Encountering Corridor-Wide Hazardous Materials San Lucas New Siding 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0 0 Moderate MP 172 Track Realignment 0 0 Moderate San Ardo Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 0 0 Moderate Bradley Siding Extension 0 0 Moderate Bradley Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 0 0 Moderate McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 0 0 Moderate McKay East Powered Switches 0 0 Moderate Wellsona New Siding 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 0 1 Moderate Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments 0 0 Moderate Templeton Siding 0 0 Moderate Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 0 0 Moderate Build Alternative Components Recorded “Active- Status” Hazardous Sites Recorded “Closed- Status” Hazardous Sites Likelihood of Encountering Corridor-Wide Hazardous Materials Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 0 0 Moderate Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0 0 Moderate Cuesta Second Main Track 0 0 Moderate Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 0 0 Moderate Source: ICF, 2013 Note: The risk of encountering corridor-wide hazardous materials and wastes (including aerially-deposited lead and pesticide/herbicide residues) are not identified on a site-specific basis, as they do not derive from a single point source in a particular location. 3.9.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects of hazardous materials and wastes for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess hazardous materials and wastes effects from the modified or excluded components. Site-Specific Hazardous Materials and Wastes City of King Passenger Station Under the Preferred Alternative, the City of King passenger station has been revised from the footprint that was assessed under the Build Alternative and now would occupy a smaller footprint in the same general area as in the Build Alternative. No hazardous materials sites have been recorded in the footprint of the City of King passenger station proposed under the Build Alternative, and the likelihood of encountering corridor-wide hazardous materials is moderate. Given that the revised City of King passenger station under the Preferred Alternative would occupy a smaller footprint in the same area as that proposed under the Build Alternative, the Preferred Alternative would have no new substantial hazardous materials and waste impacts compared to the Build Alternative. Siding Extensions Under the Preferred Alternative, the proposed City of King siding extension has been revised from what was assumed under the Build Alternative and now is proposed to extend exclusively on the north side of the existing siding. There are three hazardous sites within the temporary impact areas for the City of King siding extension. The location of the revised siding extension does not include any recorded hazardous waste sites. Therefore, the revised City of King siding extension location under the Preferred Alternative would reduce potential impacts on hazardous materials and wastes compared to the Build Alternative. Curve Realignments The Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. One of the excluded curve realignments (Henry/Santa Margarita) would have required the demolition of existing buildings, resulting in hazards from leadbased paint and asbestos-containing materials. Because of this exclusion, the Preferred Alternative would have reduced impacts from lead based paint and asbestos containing material compared to the Build Alternative. Island CTC In the Preferred Alternative, 27 miles of island CTC would be installed between McKay and Santa Margarita (existing railway sections 6 through 9). Only one hazardous materials site was recorded in this segment of the corridor near existing alignment section 8 and has since been closed. Additionally, CTC would be installed at various locations within the existing railroad ROW and would not require extensive excavations. Implementation of the avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies below would help ensure that the minimal excavation required to install CTC would not result in any substantial adverse effects. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would have no new substantial hazardous materials and waste impacts compared to the Build Alternative, and would result in reduced impacts.  3.9.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The Build Alternative will be designed to minimize impacts related to hazardous materials and wastes along the Corridor. The following strategies The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. MIN-HAZ-1. As one or more components of the Preferred Alternative are selected for further design and potential development, Detailed investigation of soils for contamination as part of an environmental site assessment (ESA), and if appropriate a Phase II ESA, for each component prior to implementation would be conducted. Where conditions warrant a Phase II ESA, such ESAs shall include the following: . A work plan that includes the numbers and locations of proposed soil borings/monitoring wells, sampling intervals, drilling and sampling methods, analytical methods, sampling rationale, site geohydrology, field screening methods, quality control/quality assurance, and reporting methods. . A site-specific Health and Safety Plan (HSP) signed by a Certified Industrial Hygienist. . Necessary permits for encroachment, boring completion, and well installation. . A traffic safety plan. . Sampling program (fieldwork) in accordance with the work plan and HSP. Fieldwork shall be completed under the supervision of a geologist registered in the State of California, as appropriate. . Hazardous materials testing through a certified laboratory. . Documentation to include field procedures, boring logs/well diagrams, tables of analytical results, cross-sections, an evaluation of the levels and extent of contaminants found, and conclusions and recommendation regarding the environmental condition of the site and the need for further assessment. Recommendations may include additional assessment or handling of the contaminants found though the contaminated soil contingency plan. If the  contaminated soil contingency plan is inadequate for the contamination found, a remedial action plan shall be developed. Contaminated groundwater shall generally be handled though the NPDES/dewatering process. . Disposal process including transport by a state-certified hazardous material hauler to a state-certified disposal /recycling facility licensed to accept/treat the identified waste. Where contaminated groundwater is encountered, the project sponsor shall obtain a NPDES permit prior to the issuance of a permit to construct. The NPDES permit shall specify site-specific testing and monitoring requirements and discharge limitations. Additionally, available agency files for moderate and high risk properties should be reviewed prior to demolition, grading, or construction. If the file review indicates a low likelihood of contaminants being present beneath or adjacent to a project feature (rail alignment, station, etc.), additional assessment/mitigation may not be recommended and the property could be reclassified as low risk. MIN-HAZ-2. Surveys for lead-based paint and asbestos containing materials would be required prior to demolition of any buildings or structures. MIN-HAZ-3. A Site Management Program/Contingency Plan would be required prior to construction to address known or potential hazardous material issues such as contaminated soil or groundwater, health and safety plan for construction workers and the public, and procedures to protect workers and the public if buried contaminants are encountered. MIN-HAZ-4. Construction contractors would dispose of all hazardous or solid wastes and debris encountered or generated during construction and demolition activities in accordance with all applicable Federal regulations. MM-HAZ-5. A Hazardous Materials Management Plan for all facilities that use, store, or dispose of hazardous materials should would be prepared. Facilities emitting toxic air emissions shall submit inventories and plans to the appropriate air quality management district and be subject to permitting and monitoring regulations of the district. All necessary local, state and federal permits for the installation and operation of any above or below ground chemical or fuel storage tanks prior to installing such tanks would be obtained.  3.9.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Prior to implementing specific elements of the Build Preferred Alternative, component-specific hazardous materials evaluations should would be conducted. These evaluations will be used to determine if additional mitigations strategies from those discussed above in Subsection 3.9.5 are applicable.                 Page intentionally left blank 3.10 CULTURAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES Cultural resources include prehistoric archaeological sites, historic archaeological sites, traditional cultural properties, and historic structures. Paleontological resources refer to resources in the fossil record, such as prehistoric remains and other evidence of past life. This section discusses the applicable federal and state laws and regulations that protect cultural and paleontological resources, including Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and California Public Resources Code Sections 5024.1 and 21084.1, and assesses the potential effects of the No Build and Build Alternative action alternatives on these resources. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments on Build Alternative components discussed in the cultural and paleontological resources section (see comments A-3.20, A-3.48 through A-3.51). None of the City of King’s comments resulted in text revisions to the cultural and paleontological background information or analysis of the Build Alternative, but several of the comments are pertinent to the analysis of the Preferred Alternative (see Section 3.10.4.3 below). 3.10.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.10.1.1 Federal National Historic Preservation Act The National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.) established a national program to preserve the country’s historical and cultural resources. Section 106 of the NHPA requires federal agencies to consider the effects of their undertakings on historic properties and provide the President’s Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) opportunity to.1 Guidelines for implementing the Section 106 process are provided in 36 CFR Part 800. Per 36 CFR 800.4, significant 1 Undertaking is defined as “a project, activity, or program funded in whole or in part under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of a Federal agency, including those carried out by or on behalf of a Federal agency; those carried out with Federal financial assistance; and those requiring a Federal permit, license or approval.” 36 CFR 800.16 (y). cultural resources are those that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The NRHP eligibility criteria (36 CFR 60.4) state that the quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects of state and local importance that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, association, and that meet one or more of the following criteria: a) The resource is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history. b) The resource is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past. c) The resource embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; represents the work of a master; possesses high artistic values; or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. c) The resource has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history. Impacts to NRHP-eligible resources are considered adverse when “an undertaking may alter directly or indirectly, any of the characteristics of a historic property that qualify the property for inclusion in the NRHP in a manner that would diminish the integrity of the property’s location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, or association” (36 CFR 800.5[1]). Examples of adverse effects include physical destruction or damage to all or part of the property; alteration that is not consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s standards for the treatment of historic properties; removal of the property from its historic location; change in the type of use or of the physical characteristics of the setting; introduction of visual, atmospheric, or audible elements that diminish the integrity of the property’s significant features; and neglect resulting in deterioration (36 CFR 800.5[2]). Historic properties include prehistoric archaeological sites. Archaeological sites are usually adversely affected only by physical destruction or damage, whereas all of the examples above can apply to historic buildings and structures. Federal Antiquities Act of 1906 (16 USC 431 et seq) This act established national monuments and reservation of lands including historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects of historic or scientific interest on federal lands. 16 USC 433 The Antiquities Act prohibits appropriation, excavation, injury, or destruction of any historic or prehistoric ruin or monument, or any object of antiquity on federal land. 3.10.1.2 State California Register of Historic Resources The California Register program encourages public recognition and protection of cultural and historic resources. Under CEQA, significant cultural resources are called historical resources whether they are of historic or prehistoric age. Generally, a resource should be considered by a lead agency to be historically significant if the resource has integrity and meets one of the following criteria for CRHR listing (CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5 [a][3]). . The resource is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of California’s history and cultural heritage and/or with the lives of persons important in California’s past. . The resource embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of construction; represents the work of an important creative individual; or possesses high artistic values. . The resource has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. CRHR is similar to the NRHP in that any resource determined eligible for the NRHP is also automatically eligible for the CRHR. However, the treatment of historical resources under CEQA and in the CRHR is more inclusive in that resources listed in local historical registers may be included. Projects that would impact CRHR-listed and –eligible resources and resources listed in local historical registers may result in a significant effect on the environment if the project would cause a substantial adverse change in the significance of a historical resource (PRC Section 21084.1). Substantial adverse change in the significance of a historical resource refers to “physical demolition, destruction, relocation, or alteration of the resource or its immediate surroundings such that [its] significance…would be materially impaired (CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5[b][1]). Material impairment means demolition of the resource, or alteration of the physical characteristics that make the resource eligible for listing such that it would no longer be eligible for the CRHR or a local historical register (CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5[b][2]). California Environmental Quality Act California Environmental Quality Act CEQA (PRC Section 21000 et seq.) requires public agencies and private interests to identify the potential adverse impacts and/or environmental consequences of their proposed project(s) to any object or site that is historically or archaeologically significant or significant in the cultural or scientific annals of California (PRC Section 5020.1). Under CEQA, archaeological resources are presumed non-unique unless they meet the definition of “Unique archaeological resources” (PRC Section 21083.2[g]). Under CEQA, an impact on a non-unique archaeological resource is not considered a significant environmental impact. An EIR need not discuss non-unique archaeological resources. CEQA Guidelines CEQA Guidelines (Section 15064.5[a][3]) provides that a lead agency may find that “any object, building, structure, site, area, place, record, or manuscript” is historically significant or significant in the “cultural annals of California.” The section also provides that a resource may be considered historically significant if it has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory. Paleontological resources fall within this broad category and are included in the CEQA checklist under Cultural Resources. Assembly Bill (AB) 52 On September 15, 2014, the Governor of California approved Assembly Bill (AB) 52.2 The legislation specifies that a project with an effect that may cause a substantial adverse change in significance to a tribal cultural resource is a project that may have a significant effect on the environment. The bill also outlines the consultation process between the lead agency and the California Native American tribe that is traditionally and culturally affiliated with the geographic area of the proposed project. 2 California State Assembly, 2014. AB 52 is applicable to projects with a notice of preparation (NOP) date on or after July 1, 2015. While the NOP date for the Coast Corridor Program Draft EIS/EIR was August 17, 2012 (well before the AB 52 deadline) the document does consider Native American resources at a level of detail that is appropriate for a first tier, program-level review. As discussed in Section 3.10.6, Subsequent Analysis, if any of the proposed components are carried forward, further consultation with NAHC and Native American tribal groups, in compliance with AB 52, could be required during future project-level review to the extent that tribes inform relevant local lead agencies (SLOCOG, TAMC, and/or Caltrans DOR) of their interest in receiving notice of environmental projects pending with those agencies. 3.10.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION Study Area Defined The study area continues to include all permanent and temporary impact areas associated with the elements of the Build Alternative action alternatives, including all proposed stations, realignments, sidings, track/signal upgrades, and the new second mainline. FRA has determined that the programmatic decisions made here do not constitute an undertaking with potential to cause adverse effects to historic properties under Section 106. As a result, FRA did not complete the full Section 106 process but did take the appropriate steps to identify resources potentially eligible for protection under Section 106 and categorize the potential impacts to those resources at a programmatic level of detail. FRA will complete the Section 106 process at Tier 2 as necessary for any future FRA undertakings. An area of potential effect (APE) was not established, given the programmatic and contingent nature of the physical components proposed improvements in this environmental document. However, in FRA’s consultation with the California State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), FRA determined that permanent and temporary impact footprints were considered to be an appropriate area to assess potential direct and indirect impacts on cultural resources. The permanent and temporary impact footprints are defined as follows: . Permanent: areas where affected resources would not be restored back to their original conditions. . Temporary: areas that would be disturbed during construction and then returned to their original conditions post construction. Proposed permanent and temporary impact areas differ for each type of component improvement, as listed below. . Siding Extensions/New Sidings: . Permanent: Existing railroad right-of-way (typically 50 feet) . Temporary: 50 feet on either side of existing right-of-way . Curve Realignments: . Permanent: 100 foot wide corridor . Temporary: 200 feet on either side of 100 foot corridor for a total width of 500 feet . Second Mainline . Permanent: Existing railroad right-of-way . Temporary: 100 feet on either side of existing UP right-of-way . Stations . Soledad Station: 1.9 Acres – permanent impact area is based on conceptual station plans from the Soledad Downtown Specific Plan (2012). . King City Station: 3.4 Acres – permanent impact area is based on conceptual station plans from the King City First Street Corridor Master Plan (2013). The cultural analysis also evaluates the potential sensitivity of portions of the existing alignment where only signaling, track maintenance, and other corridor-wide components improvements would take place. Existing alignment sections #1 through #6 are within Monterey County and existing alignment sections #7 through #10 are within San Luis Obispo County. As further outlined in Chapter 3.0, Affected Environment, Environmental Consequences, and Mitigation Strategies, direct and indirect effects are assessed with regard to cultural resources. Direct effects would occur if archaeological or historic resources, such as building or structures, are altered or destroyed as a result of physical components potential improvements. Indirect effects would occur if visual, noise, or vibration effects from physical components potential improvements diminished the integrity of the cultural resource. As discussed, FRA and SLOCOG consulted with the SHPO in determining these parameters on June 27, 2013 and followed with a letter on September 9, 2013. Following consultation with FRA, SHPO found that the above parameters were “reasonable” for the purposes of this programmatic analysis. Cultural Resource Categories Various types of cultural resources exist within the study area and occur within all land use designations of Monterey County and San Luis Obispo County. Each type of cultural resource differs in sensitivity and importance. The different cultural resources categories are defined below. Archaeological Resources Archaeology is the study of prehistoric human activities and cultures. . Prehistoric Archaeological Sites: In California, prehistoric archaeological sites are places where one can find evidence of human activities prior to 1789 1769 AD, which is generally accepted as the earliest date of permanent European arrival and exploration leading to permanent settlement in what is now the State of California. Prehistoric sites typically contain human burial or subsistence remains and artifacts or tools made by people. Objects that may be found on a prehistoric archaeological site include tools, beads, ornaments, ceremonial items, rock art, and inedible remains of food sources. . Historic Archaeological Sites: Historic archaeological sites are places where evidence exists of human activities between 1789 1769 AD and 50 years ago. Many historic archaeological sites are places where houses formerly existed and contain ceramic, metal, glass refuse resulting from the transport, preparation and structural remnants, such as windowpane glass, lumber, and nails. Historical archaeological sites can also be nonresidential, resulting from ranching, farming, industrial, and other activities. . Traditional Cultural Properties: Traditional cultural properties are specific locations that are largely associated with the history of the community. These places are typically associated with the cultural practices or beliefs of a living community, such as locations where ceremonial activities were performed. Historic Resources Historic resources are associated with the recent past. . Historic Structures: Historic structures are facilities that served residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, transportation, and other purposes during historic periods (more than 50 years ago). Historic structures generally consist of houses, outbuildings, stores, offices, factories, barns, dams, bridges, roads, and other facilities. Paleontological Resources Paleontology is the study of plant and animal fossils. . Paleontological Resources: Paleontological resources are fossilized remains of plants and animals. Generally, paleontological resources are those that are more than 10,000 years old and are typically found below ground surface in sedimentary rock units. Record Search and Analysis Archaeological and Historical Resources Qualified archaeologists submitted prehistoric and historic properties record search requests to the California Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS) in July 2013. The Northwest Information Center (NWIC) conducted a records search for the portion of the study area located within Monterey County. Likewise, the Central California Information Center (CCIC) conducted a records search for the portion of the study area located within San Luis Obispo County. The NWIC and CCIC conducted records searches of all previously recorded sites and studies within a quarter mile of the study area. The search included current listings for the National  Register of Historic Places (NRHP), the California Register of Historical Resources (CRHR), Historical Resources Inventory (HRI), and historical maps. The records search identified the number of archaeological and historical sites within the study area along with their general location. The number of archaeological sites within the study area in the vicinity of each proposed element of the Build Alternative action alternatives was tabulated and used as an indicator of potential sensitivity; however given the programmatic nature of the environmental document, a finding of effect under Section 106 was not determined at this time. As discussed below (Subsection 4.4.5 3.10.6, Subsequent Analysis), if one or more elements of the Build Alternative are proposed to be of the physical components are carried out at a later time, an APE would be established and finding of effect made during subsequent environmental review. Likewise, determination of NRHP or CRHR eligibility of individual sites was not conducted for this evaluation. Sites evaluated here are considered “potentially eligible” resources. However, this analysis does disclose previous determinations of eligibility. As required under CEQA Guidelines § 15064.5, a list of potentially historic structures deemed locally eligible was assembled using maps and property lists from cities within the study area. Locally eligible resources do not require any further consideration under Section 106. However, those resources are assessed in this analysis for the purposes of adequate CEQA review. Resources identified in this reconnaissance include railroad bridges and other buildings and structures in the study area. The number of potential eligible historic properties within the study area for each proposed component improvement was tabulated and used as an indicator of potential sensitivity. FRA and SLOCOG, with contacted the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC), initiated in July 2013 to initiate a Sacred Lands File Search. The record search indicated the potential presence of Native American traditional cultural places in the project vicinity and also identified 25 Tribal representatives with a potential interest in the involved lands. FRA subsequently contacted the identified Native American Tribal governments through letter correspondence and subsequent follow-up telephone calls.3 3 Valenstein, David. Chief, Environment & Systems Planning Division. Federal Railroad Administration. September 2013 – letter communications.  Paleontological Resources Significant paleontological resources are fossils or assemblages of fossils that are unique, rare, unusual, or uncommon. According to Caltrans Standard Environmental Reference (SER), scientifically significant paleontological resources are identified sites or geologic deposits containing individual fossils or assemblages of fossils that are unique or unusual, diagnostically, or stratigraphically important, and add to the existing body of knowledge in specific areas, stratigraphically, taxonomically, or regionally. These resources can generally be anticipated based on the stratigraphic layer of the earth’s surface, as some layers are more prone to contain paleontological resources. As a result, this program-level analysis determines paleontological sensitivity based on the underlying geological unit. Likewise, paleontological sensitivity is predicated on the research potential of fossils suspected to occur in that unit. Caltrans uses the scale below to rate paleontological sensitivity. Since many of Caltrans’ transportation projects include improvements to corridors spanning many miles, this Program EIS/EIR uses the Caltrans scale as an appropriate means to assess the paleontological sensitivity of the Coast Corridor. . High Potential - Rock units which, based on previous studies, contain or are likely to contain significant vertebrate, significant invertebrate, or significant plant fossils. These units include, but are not limited to, sedimentary formations that contain significant nonrenewable paleontological resources anywhere within their geographical extent, and sedimentary rock units temporally or lithologically suitable for the preservation of fossils. These units may also include some volcanic and low-grade metamorphic rock units. Fossiliferous deposits with very limited geographic extent or an uncommon origin (e.g., tar pits and caves) are given special consideration and ranked as highly sensitive. High sensitivity includes the potential for containing: 1) abundant vertebrate fossils; 2) a few significant fossils (large or small vertebrate, invertebrate, or plant fossils) that may provide new and significant taxonomic, phylogenetic, ecologic, and/or stratigraphic data; 3) areas that may contain datable organic remains older than recent, including Neotoma (sp.) middens; or 4) areas that may contain unique new vertebrate deposits, traces, and/or trackways. . Low Potential - This category includes sedimentary rock units that: 1) are potentially fossiliferous, but have not yielded significant fossils in the past; 2) have not yet yielded fossils, but possess a potential for containing fossil remains; or 3) contain common and/or widespread invertebrate fossils if the taxonomy, phylogeny, and ecology of the species contained in the rock are well understood. Sedimentary rocks expected to contain vertebrate fossils are not placed in this category because vertebrates are generally rare and found in more localized stratum. No Potential - Rock units of intrusive igneous origin, most extrusive igneous rocks, and moderately to highly metamorphosed rocks are classified as having no potential for containing significant paleontological resources. The underlying geologic units along the existing Coast Corridor were evaluated based on the criteria above and a paleontological sensitivity rating was applied. The paleontological sensitivities are rated according to Table 3.10-1 below. Table 3.10-1 Geologic Unit and Paleontological Sensitivity Geologic Unit Geologic Age Paleontological Sensitivity Quaternary Alluvium and Marine Deposits (Q) Pliocene to Holocene Low Franciscan Complex (KJf) Jurassic to Cretaceous High Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene (QPc) Miocene to Pleistocene Low Miocene Marine Rocks (M) Oligocene to Pliocene Low Upper Cretaceous Marine Rocks (Ku) Late Cretaceous High Ultramafic Rocks (um) Middle to Late Jurassic High Mesozoic Volcanic Rocks (Mzv) Jurassic to Cretaceous High Tertiary Volcanic Flow Rocks (Tv) Tertiary Low Source: University of California Museum of Paleontology, 2013 3.10.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 3.10.3.1 Study Area Context and Resources Archaeological Resources According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, signs of first human life in Monterey County date back to 10,000 to 12,000 years ago. First inhabitants were nomadic hunters that followed game herds for subsistence. A cultural shift occurred around 8,000 to 7,500 B.C. when humans began forming settlements and spreading out to maximize resources. Between 2,500 and 1,600 years ago, another shift in settlement patterns occurred as a result of migration of different people from the north – emanating from a larger migration from the east. Villages became larger during this time period as a result of new foraging techniques. Over time, villages organized collection, processing, and distribution of resources and developed systems to collect and transport resources to population centers. Sea level rise and climate change spurred the population to move further inland for shelter and resources. Around 1500 A.D., the climate shifted into a colder period known as the “Little Ice Age”, changing collection behavior to more specialized and migratory. The indigenous people maintained this type of subsistence behavior until the Spanish explorers arrived. Monterey Bay became the focus of several Spanish expeditions, thus influencing the culture and history of the region. Monterey County played a role in the Mexican- American War and later the California Gold Rush, influencing economic growth and development in the area. Grain production quickly became Monterey County’s main economic activity and spurred the development of transportation to export grain products. In 1872, the Southern Pacific Railroad extended its railroad line south to encompass the agricultural areas in the Salinas Valley and allowed farmers to increase acreages available for cultivation. In turn, the lower Salinas Valley transformed into agricultural land, which shaped the economic structure that largely remains in place today. The Ohlone Native American Tribe encompassed much the inland valleys, relying on hunting and gathering. The Ohlone had permanent villages and seasonal camps, but their culture was dramatically changed by Spanish influence. The Monterey County General Plan EIR categorized areas of archaeological sensitivity. Areas that surround river courses and other large drainages are considered sensitive, since human occupation commonly occurred along water sources. Several burial sites have been uncovered on the terraces of the Salinas River, showing the importance of streams and rivers in human occupation. Prehistoric archaeological sites within the Coast Corridor study area, within Monterey County, include mostly lithic scatters. “Lithic scatter” describes the surface scatter of cultural artifacts and leftover debris after shaping raw stone into usable tools. Lithic scatters are commonly found on most archaeological sites. According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, areas between Salinas and San Lucas within the study area have generally low sensitivity for archaeological resource occurrence in Monterey County as shown on Figure 3.10-1. Areas south of San Lucas, adjacent to the Salinas River and US 101 have varying degrees of moderate to high sensitivity. Early settlements in San Luis Obispo County included both large villages and smaller camps. Artifacts found from early settlements include shell beads and exotic trade items, alluding to increased cultural expansion and complexity. Between 1,000 and 1,800 A.D., recovered evidence supports possibilities of larger populations settling near the coast to facilitate ocean access. Marine fishing and trading were the main economic pursuits. Typical villages included such features as sweathouses, sacred council areas, dance areas, and cemeteries. Land animals were hunted with bow and arrow as a main food source. Acorns were another valuable food source. Because acorns were easily stored, they are believed to have reduced the need for hunting and fishing, and thus played a role in increasing sedentism and social complexity. The Chumash, a Native American Tribe, occupied coastal and inland areas when the Mission Period began in 1769. The Chumash society was organized around lineages and distinct social stratification. Chumash technology highlights the exploitation of marine resources, as found from toolkits with fishhooks, angled bone hooks, nets, traps, harpoons, and other items. The Salinan Tribe inhabited the northern portion of the county and followed a hunting and gathering lifestyle as well, based on fishing. Eventually European contact with the Chumash and the Salinan people resulted in religious conversion and population increase. Spanish colonization also strongly influenced agricultural development in San Luis Obispo County. Prehistoric archaeological sites within the San Luis Obispo County portion of the Coast Corridor study area include mostly lithic scatters, stone artifacts, and burial sites. A temporary village and the remains of Estrada Adobe have also been recorded within the study area. Historic archaeological sites within the San Luis Obispo County portion of the Coast Corridor study area include the Mission San Miguel Arcangel. The Mission includes building remains, original wall paintings and decorations completed by Native Americans, and porcelain artifacts. The Mission is also listed as a California Historical Landmark. Additionally, the Rios-Caledonia Adobe is located near the Mission San Miguel Arcangel. This building reflects California's Mexican-era architecture and is listed as a NRHP and is a California Historical Landmark. Historical Resources More than 200 Federal, State, and County listed historic sites or eligible historic resources exist within Monterey County. Major regional county historic resources include Mission Nuestra Señora de la Soledad and the Old Mission School near Soledad, Richardson Adobe near Soledad, the Site of the Battle of Natividad near Salinas, the Boronda Adobe in Boronda, the Glass House in Pajaro, and Mission San Antonio de Padua near Jolon. Historic structures existing within the Coast Corridor’s Monterey County study area include portions of the Southern Pacific Railroad near King City, and the Bradley Road Bridge over the Salinas River, the latter previously determined eligible for the NRHP.4 Several structures associated with the Holly Sugar Beet railroad freight site and portions of US 101 were previously recorded and determined to not be eligible for NHRP listing. Several culverts were also previously recorded, but have not been evaluated as potential historic resources. The El Camino Real trail is also a historic resource that roughly traces parallel to US 101 and is located within portions of the study area. This trail is a historic roadway that connected a series of established Spanish and Mexican outposts. As a result, a series of missions were built in the footpath of this roadway.5 In Monterey County, the study area has about 5 potentially eligible historic residential, commercial, and industrial properties, as shown in Table 3.10-2. 4 The Bradley bridge is also a section 4(f) resource and is discussed in Chapter 4.0, Section 4(f)/6(f) Evaluation. 5 California Highways, 2014 Existing historic structures within the San Luis Obispo County portion of the study area include several historic-era railroad bridges as well Union Pacific UPRR and Southern Pacific Railroad bridges. A bridge/culvert on Cuesta Forest Road and the Highway 41 overpass of the South Pacific Railroad were recorded, but not evaluated for eligibility. Additionally, several locally eligible historic cottage residences and carpenter gothic residences are also present within the study area. Similar to Monterey County, the El Camino Real trail is also a historic resource that roughly traces parallel to US 101 and the study area in San Luis Obispo County. Table 3.10-2 shows lists potentially eligible historic residential, commercial, and industrial properties, as indicated by local standards, found within the Study Area. Paleontological Resources Paleontological resources in Monterey County are primarily from marine life forms that deposited from rising and falling sea levels. As a result, terrestrial fossils are less likely. Monterey County fossils are mainly microorganisms such as foraminifers or diatoms, assemblages of mollusks, and barnacles from the Cretaceous age (138 to 96 million years old) to the Pleistocene age (1.6 million to 11,000 years old). Out of 700 known fossil locations within Monterey County, 12 have been identified to have scientific value, with rare and unique characteristics. The most prevalent underlying geologic unit within the Coast Corridor study area and within Monterey County is Quaternary Alluvium and marine deposits, which is considered to have low paleontological resources sensitivity. Although the exact location of these sites is not disclosed to avoid potential degradation, the general locations in Monterey County are shown in the 2006 General Plan Update. The General Plan showed a negligible amount of such resources along the study area. Similarly to Monterey County, paleontological resources in San Luis Obispo County are primarily made up of invertebrate fossils in marine rocks. Coastal Franciscan formation, a geologic unit within the southern portions of the study area, includes trace fossils (preserved tracks or other signs of animal activity), mollusks, and marine reptiles. These are typically found where bedrock is exposed from erosion on the surface, such as along cliffs along the coast. Scattered vertebrate remains have been identified within the county in deposits from the Pleistocene era. The study area has low sensitivity for containing paleontological resources with the exception of a few areas with high paleontological sensitivity in the southernmost portions of the study area. These areas are discussed in more detail below. 3.10.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.10.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation continuation of existing freight and passenger service. The only proposed physical component improvement would be the implementation of PTC along the corridor, which would possibly include new and/or modified signaling and communications equipment. Installation of this equipment would most likely occur within the railroad ROW, which generally does not include any historic resources and is an unlikely location for unrecorded archaeological resources given the disturbed nature of these such areas. To the extent PTC installation may requires any federal action or approval, further consultation under Section 106 may be necessary. 3.10.4.2 Build Alternative Direct Impacts Construction of one or more of the proposed physical components improvements comprising the Build Alternative could potentially affect archaeological, historic, and paleontological resources. The severity of the impact to these resources depends on the condition of the resource and its location with respect to the proposed physical component improvement. For the purposes of this programmatic evaluation, Table 3.10-2 below summarizes the number of known archaeological sites, number of recorded historic structures, and paleontological sensitivity for the various areas comprising the study area. As previously noted in Subsection 3.10.2, Methods of Evaluation, this evaluation does not make any new determinations of eligibility of any potential archaeological or historic resource. Where such determinations were previously made, this analysis discloses available information. As one or more components of the Build Alternative move forward to further design and implementation, componentspecific evaluation for cultural resources effects will be required and conducted. Additional evaluation would will include further identification and analysis of resources present, their condition and eligibility, and the potential direct and indirect effects of proposed physical components improvements to adversely affect the resources’ eligibility status resource. Archaeological Resources In Monterey County, as indicated in Table 3.10-2, four archaeological sites were recorded, within existing alignment section #6, but the eligibility status has not been evaluated or determined. Cultural resources at these four archaeological sites entail are the mostly highly disturbed prehistoric lithic scatter along the Salinas River floodplain. Lithic scatters in these areas include pieces of eroded cryptocrystalline debitage,6 core tools, chert flakes, and one fragment of burned bone. Proposed improvements under The Build Alternative components in this area include upgrades to the existing tracks. Improvements to the existing alignment would occur within the railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. Therefore, the Build Alternative would be unlikely to affect recorded archaeological sites within section #6 of the existing alignment in Monterey County. 6 Cryptocrystalline is a type of silicate that likely contains lithic material and cultural debitage (debris from quarrying and tool making). Three archaeological sites were recorded within the Getty/Bradley curve realignment areas. but the eligibility status has not been evaluated or determined. These recorded sites are also prehistoric lithic scatters and chert flakes along the Salinas River. Proposed curve realignments would have a larger potential impact because the footprint of the required work would require conversion of land outside the existing railroad ROW. Therefore, construction of this curve realignment would have a high potential to disturb and/or uncover known/unknown archaeological sites. In San Luis Obispo County, archaeological sites were recorded in various locations within the existing alignment and in proposed physical improvement areas. There are a total of 12 archaeological sites located within existing alignments section #7, section #8, section #9, and section #10 in San Luis Obispo County. The cultural resources found at these sites include mostly lithic scatters and chipped stone debris, similar to archaeological sites recorded in Monterey County. An isolated burial site was recorded as well as a temporary village (recorded three times between 1971 and 1999). Both of these sites were recorded, but eligibility for the NRHP and CRHR was not determined. In section #10 of the existing alignment, two concrete foundations were recorded and evaluated in 2006, but deemed not eligible for the NRHP and CRHR. Most notably, the Mission San Miguel Arcangel is located within the study area in the northern portions of San Luis Obispo County and is considered a California Historical Landmark, but eligibility for the NRHP and CRHR was not determined. The Rios-Caledonia Adobe is located near the Mission San Miguel Arcangel and is listed as a on the NRHP and is also a California Historical Landmark. No physical components improvements outside of the railroad ROW would occur in these areas as it because the Build Alternative only entails systemwide components improvements related to including track tie and ballast upgrades. As a result, these archaeological resources would not likely be affected. However, any proposed physical component improvement has potential to uncover unknown cultural resources. Therefore, if any of the proposed improvements are carried forward, appropriate measures consistent with Section 106 may be required to avoid, minimize, or mitigate potential adverse effects to such resources. An archaeological site was recorded within the impact area of both the new Wellsona siding and the Templeton siding extension. The Wellsona siding site was recorded as a lithic scatter and the Templeton siding was recorded as bedrock mortar.7 These sites were recorded but their eligibility was not determined. Both of these proposed sidings improvements would occur within the existing railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. Therefore, the Build Alternative would not likely affect recorded archaeological sites within these sidings’ permanent and temporary impact areas. However, In addition, any proposed physical component improvement has potential to uncover unknown cultural resources., as discussed above. 7 Bedrock mortars are rock outcrops that were used for food grinding. Two archaeological sites were recorded, but not evaluated within the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment permanent/temporary impact area. Both of these sites include lithic scatters. Four sites were recorded within the proposed Templeton/Henry curve realignment permanent/temporary impact area. Only one of the four sites is in the permanent impact area for the Templeton/Henry curve realignment and includes the remains of the Estrada Adobe in Atascadero, which is monitored by the Atascadero Land Preservation Society (ALPS).8 In 1845, Governor Pio Pico gave Pedro Estrada 40,000 acres through a land grant, which is now modern day Atascadero. The Estrada Adobe was Pedro Estrada’s home and has local significance. 9 The other sites located within the temporary impact area entail include lithic scatters. Proposed curve realignments would require conversion of land outside the existing railroad ROW and have elevated potential to disturb known and/or uncover unknown archaeological sites. If one or both of these curve realignments are carried forward for construction, contingent on project design, subsequent analysis would include a formal evaluation of impacts. 8 Allen, 2013 9 Atascadero Chamber of Commerce, 2014 10 Mission San Miguel Arcangel, a National Historic Landmark and resource listed on the National Register since 1971, is outside the Coast Corridor study area. The existing railroad alignment is approximately 100 feet east of the Mission, across Mission Street. Through this portion of the Coast Corridor, corridor-wide track upgrades and are contemplated for the Build Alternative; the Preferred Alternative also incorporates island CTC. These upgrades would not have the potential to substantially alter the visual character of the railroad and in turn, negligible potential to indirectly affect the eligibility of the Mission as an historic architectural resource. Accordingly, the Mission was excluded from the architectural APE at this program level of analysis. Historical Resources There are several historic structures from the more recent built environment that exist within the existing Coast Corridor alignment and within the established temporary and permanent impact areas for the proposed physical components improvements. These historical sites include buildings, bridges, and other structures of local significance. Most notably is the Bradley Bridge over the Salinas River, which is the only historical resource within the entire Coast Corridor study area that was previously determined eligible for the NRHP.10 That said The Bradley Bridge is located within existing alignment section #6 and physical components improvements on the bridge would consist of overall track upgrades, which are proposed for the entirety of the Salinas to San Luis Obispo rail corridor. Proposed corridor-wide track upgrades include replacement of existing rail with continuous welded rail (CWR), track structure realignment, track resurfacing, tie replacement, replacing or upgrading ballasting, rehabilitation of existing sidings, and replacement of existing turnouts. These components improvements would be highly unlikely to alter the bridge’s eligibility insofar as the components improvements would be  consistent with the bridge’s use to serve an existing railroad. If track upgrades are selected for this portion of the corridor, an appropriate level of review will be needed to formally determine the potential for such improvements the Build Alternative components to affect the bridge’s previously established eligibility. Additionally, a portion of the Southern Pacific Railroad was identified as a potentially historic resource within Existing Alignment #3 of the Build Alternative, but was not evaluated. Physical components in this portion of the track would consist of overall track upgrades. These components would be unlikely to alter potential historical values or eligibility as the components would be consistent with the existing railroad use. There are nine potentially historic structures of local importance built between 1920 and 1940 located within the permanent/temporary impact area of the proposed Soledad Passenger Station and one structure within the permanent/temporary impact area of the proposed King City Passenger Station. Both Soledad and King City have developed conceptual plans for proposed station sites in their respective downtowns (see the Soledad Downtown Specific Plan (2012) and King City First Street Corridor Master Plan (2013)). As described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design ((MMTC) (2014). These updates are described and analyzed in Section 3.10.4.2 under the Preferred Alternative. The structure near the proposed King City Station is located on Pearl Street and does not appear to be within the Build Alternative’s station footprint or within the city’s historic corridor.11 All of the structures near the Soledad Station have commercial purposes on Front Street and are located across the street from the proposed station. They would not likely be affected or acquired by the new station. Cesar Chavez Park is located on Front Street, between Main Street and Soledad Street, potentially within the proposed station’s footprint. If the King City and/or Soledad stations are carried forward, subsequent project-level analysis of the proposed station footprint may be required to determine if the station features would affect any of the relevant historic properties. At that time, appropriate avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may be required to address potential adverse effects to such resources, as discussed in Subsection, 3.10.6, Subsequent Analysis. 11 City of King, 2011, p. 7 In Monterey County, there are 12 potentially historic structures of local importance from the more recent built environment that exist within the existing Coast Corridor alignment and within the established temporary and permanent impact areas for the proposed Harlem/Metz, MP 165, MP 172, and Getty/Bradley curve realignments. Curve realignments would require work outside the railroad ROW and would have more potential to disturb existing structures than other proposed physical components improvements limited to the railroad ROW. If any of the curve realignments are carried forward, detailed design work will be necessary to identify final footprint areas Such work would help to determine if the footprints overlap with one or more historic properties. As appropriate, subsequent project level analysis of the proposed Harlem/Metz, MP 165, MP 172, and Getty/Bradley curve realignments may be required to determine if one or more of them would affect any of the relevant historic properties. In San Luis Obispo County, several historic-era bridges and residences exist within the temporary and permanent impact areas of the existing Coast Corridor alignment sections #8, section #9, and section #10. Physical components improvements to the existing alignment would occur within the railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. Therefore, the Build Alternative would not affect recorded historical sites within the existing alignment in San Luis Obispo County. In the temporary impact area for the second mainline, two historic resources have been recorded without eligibility determinations: the UPRR Bridge and a bridge/culvert on Cuesta Forest Road. The proposed second mainline would occur within the existing railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. Therefore, the Build Alternative would not affect recorded historical sites within the impact areas. In San Luis Obispo County, there are 8 potentially historic structures of local importance from the more recent built environment that exist located within the existing Coast Corridor alignment and within the established temporary and permanent impact areas for the proposed Henry/Santa Margarita, Wellsona/Paso Robles, and McKay/Wellsona curve realignments. Although eligibility for the NRHP or CRHR has not been determined for these resources, the resources may be potentially historic owing to their age or their cultural importance on a local level. Curve realignments would require work outside the railroad ROW and have more potential to disturb existing structures than other proposed physical components improvements located within the railroad ROW. Subsequent project-level analysis of the proposed curve realignment footprints will be required to determine an impact to these historic buildings and parcels. If any of the curve realignments are carried forward, detailed design work will be necessary to identify final footprint areas. Design such work will help determine if the footprints overlap with one or more historic properties. As appropriate, subsequent review of the proposed Henry/Santa Margarita, Wellsona/Paso Robles, and McKay/Wellsona curve realignments may be required to determine if one or more of them would affect any of the potentially eligible historic properties. As further discussed in Section 3.10.3, future project-level environmental review would further assess these resources. Paleontological Resources In Monterey County and in San Luis Obispo County, most of the existing rail alignment and proposed improvements are is underlain with quaternary alluvium and marine deposits from the Holocene epoch. This geologic unit is considered to have low sensitivity to encounter paleontological resources because it is young in geologic age primarily made up of loose sand and silt material. The only portions of the study area with high paleontological sensitivity are located within the existing alignment #10 and the proposed second main track north of the Cuesta Grade. Work required to upgrade existing portions of the Coast Corridor would generally not require grading or excavations that would impact potential paleontological resources because upgrades would be embedded into the existing tracks. However, proposed curve realignments, siding extensions/new sidings, and the second mainline would require grading but primarily at surficial levels. Typically, projects have an increased potential to affect paleontological resources when they involve substantial excavation work and/or tunneling. As none of the proposed physical components improvements comprising the Build Alternative are anticipated to require significant substantial excavation or any tunneling, the potential for impacts to paleontological resources would be low. Indirect Impacts The range of potential improvements associated with the elements components of the Build Alternative could have potential indirect effects on cultural resources, particularly where proposed physical components improvements are located in proximity to historic resources. Indirect effects include those that could indirectly alter the context in which an existing historic resource is situated, potentially to such an extent that the resource’s eligibility for the NRHP is compromised. As a result of The potential introduction of new visual elements, noise, and vibration upon existing cultural resources would need to will be further assessed in subsequent environmental review. As discussed in Section 3.6, Aesthetics and Visual Resources, the majority of the study area would have low to medium visual impacts as a result of implementation of proposed physical components improvements. Some of the proposed physical components improvements would include the visual presence of construction equipment, light and glare impacts from any nighttime construction work, and newly disturbed natural land cover that would recover to its original undisturbed form. As elements of the Build Alternative are carried forward for further design, funding, and implementation, The potential for the Build Alternative resources to indirectly affect or contrast substantially with the existing railroad/transportation use of the corridor is unlikely. With regard to noise and vibration To the extent any of these Build Alternative physical components improvements are ultimately carried forward for further design leading to construction, heavy equipment and vehicles could result in temporary increases in noise and vibration levels. These temporary construction impacts would be more pronounced at nighttime when overall ambient noise levels are lower. Once any of the potential proposed physical components improvements are operational, noise and vibration effects would occur primarily on approach and pass through urban areas. While these effects would likely be found negligible and further found not to diminish the integrity of location, setting, feeling, association, workmanship, design or materials for any historic property, further analysis will be needed to make conclusions for any specific locations along the corridor. 3.10.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, potential impacts to cultural and paleontological resources for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located, as summarized in Table 3.10-2. The discussions below therefore assess effects of modified or excluded components. The vast majority of the sites in Table 3.10-2 were recorded but the resources were not evaluated for eligibility.  Archaeological Resources Based on further review of the location of the King City siding and passenger station, no archaeological resources are located within proximity to these improvement areas. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would be unlikely to affect known archaeological sites within these areas. As noted for the Build Alternative, the four curve realignments have the potential to result in impacts to six archaeological sites. Because the Preferred Alternative excludes these curve realignments, potential cultural impacts would be avoided. The Preferred Alternative would include the installation of a 27-mile “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). As summarized in Table 3.10-2 below, archaeological resources have been identified between McKay and Santa Margarita. Although archaeological resources are located within the vicinity of the Coast Corridor alignment within these 27 miles of proposed CTC, implementation of CTC would be located within the existing railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. As a result, implementation of CTC would be unlikely to affect recorded archaeological sites within this portion of the corridor. Historical Resources The Build Alternative includes one potentially historic structure located within the King City passenger station . The revised passenger station footprint under the Preferred Alternative would affect two additional potentially historic structures. Therefore, implementation of the passenger station as part of the Preferred Alternative would potentially affect up to three historic structures. With regard to the two additional structures, while the structures appear to be older than 45 years in age, the actual year of their construction is not recorded in County or City records. The structures appear to be utilitarian storage buildings, with metal exteriors and are located within the railroad ROW. In its preliminary design work for the proposed station, the City of King did not identify these structures as potentially historic resources. While it is highly unlikely that these structures possess historic value, without a more formal evaluation, there is not enough evidence to conclusively determine in this Program EIS/EIR whether one or both may be eligible historic resources. Accordingly, it is unlikely that these structures are eligible historic resources. However, because the year these buildings were constructed cannot be readily verified based on available information, any future project-level environmental review of the proposed station would require a site-specific analysis to determine eligibility. There are six potentially historic resources within the Build Alternative’s King City siding extension. The revised siding extension included under the Preferred Alternative would only affect one potentially historic resource that was never evaluated. This resource is a portion of the Southern Pacific Railroad and is part of the Build Alternative under Existing Alignment 3, but would be within the King City siding extension under the Preferred Alternative. Therefore, this resource had already been accounted for in the total number of potential historic structures and disclosed as part track improvements under the Build Alternative. Similar to the Build Alternative, the proposed King City siding extension under the Preferred Alternative would include work within the ROW. Physical improvements would be unlikely to alter historical values or eligibility as the improvements would be consistent with existing railroad use. However, future project-level environmental review would be necessary to formally determine the potential to affect historic resources in this location. As noted for the Build Alternative, the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County would have resulted in potential impacts to eight potentially historic resources. Since the Preferred Alternative excludes these curve realignments, potential cultural impacts associated with these curve realignments would be avoided. As discussed above, the Preferred Alternative would include the installation of a 27- mile “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). Implementation of CTC would be located within the existing railroad ROW and thus would be limited to already disturbed areas. As a result, implementation of CTC within these 27 miles would be unlikely to affect recorded historical sites within this portion of the corridor. Overall, implementation of the Preferred Alternative would avoid eight potentially historic resources in comparison to the Build Alternative. Although eligibility for the NRHP or CRHR has not been determined for these resources, they may be eligible because of their age or cultural importance on a local level. As noted in the Section 3.10.3 below, future project-level plans and environmental review will require a more detailed analysis of potential cultural resources which could include formal evaluation under federal and/or state requirements.  Paleontological Resources Most of the underlying soil within Monterey County is quaternary alluvium and marine deposits from the Holocene epoch. This geologic unit is considered to have low sensitivity to encounter paleontological resources because it is young in geologic age. The revised King City siding extension and passenger station are underlain by the same types of deposits and each would have low paleontological sensitivity. Additionally, the installation of a 27-mile “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). Implementation of CTC would be located within the existing railroad ROW within an area with generally low paleontological sensitivity. As a result, implementation of CTC within these 27 miles would be unlikely to affect paleontological resources within this portion of the corridor. Table 3.10-2 Summary of Potential Impacts to Cultural and Paleontological Resources Proposed Component No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative  Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Salinas Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0 0 Low 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Spence Siding Extension N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0 1 Low 0 1 Low 0 1 Low Gonzales Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Soledad Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Soledad New Passenger Station N/A 0 9 Low 0 9 Low Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments N/A 0 6 Low 0 6 Low Chalone Creek New Siding N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0 2 Low 0 2 Low 0 1 Low Proposed Component No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative  Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Coburn Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low King City Siding Extension N/A 0 6 Low 0 1 Low King City New Passenger Station N/A 0 1 Low 0 3 Low King City Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 Low 0 0 Low 0 0 Low MP 165 Curve Realignment N/A 0 3 Low 0 3 Low San Lucas New Siding N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0 2 Low 0 2 Low 0 2 Low MP 172 Track Realignment N/A 0 2 Low 0 2 Low San Ardo Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments N/A 3 1 Low 3 1 Low Proposed Component No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative  Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Bradley Siding Extension N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Bradley Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 4 6 Low 4 6 Low 4 6 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 1 1 Low 1 1 Low 1 1 Low McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments N/A 0 2 Low None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. McKay East Powered Switches N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Wellsona New Siding N/A 1 0 Low 1 0 Low Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 1 4 Low 1 4 Low 1 4 Low Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments N/A 0 3 Low None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton Siding N/A 1 0 Low 1 0 Low Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments N/A 4 0 Low None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Proposed Component No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative  Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Archaeo Sites Historic Architectural Resources Paleo Sensitivity Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 8 3 Low 8 3 Low 8 3 Low Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment N/A 2 3 Low None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Santa Margarita Powered Switch N/A 0 0 Low 0 0 Low Cuesta Second Main Track N/A 0 3 High 0 3 High Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 2 1 High 2 1 High 2 1 High Source: ICF, 2013 (Appendix D of the Draft Program EIS/EIR). a The table does not show any traditional cultural properties because none have been identified to date by the NAHC. b Archaeological sites include those for which eligibility has not yet been determined as well as one resource for which eligibility was previously determined. c Historic architectural resources listed here include those for which eligibility has not yet been determined as well as nine resources for which eligibility was previously determined. 3.10.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES General mitigation strategies identified in the Draft Program EIS/EIR for the Build Alternative would be entirely applicable to the Preferred Alternative The measures listed below are applicable to both the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project improvement will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. Such measures provide guidance as to additional analysis, evaluation and development of appropriate site specific mitigation prior to implementing elements of the Build Alternative or Preferred Alternative. . MIN-CUL-1. Recordation: The lead agency(s) should would ensure that cultural resources adversely affected by the Build Alternative are recorded and documented in a similar manner to a Historic American Building Survey (HABS) or Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) to be coordinated with the SHPO. . MIN-CUL-2. Design Guidelines: The lead agency should would ensure that design guidelines are developed for appropriate and compatible construction with regard to aesthetics. Design guidelines would meet HABS and HAER standards and would be reviewed by SHPO and other agencies. . MIN-CUL-3. Interpretive/Educational Materials: The lead agency should may prepare interpretive and/or educational materials regarding affected historic properties or resources. The focus of this mitigation would be the historic themes related to of this resource. . A-CUL-4. Relocation: Historic properties or resources that would be demolished because of the project should be relocated and rehabilitated. The lead agency should would prepare a removal plan, including site plans for the new locations and placing them on new foundations. . MIN-CUL-5. Monitoring: Project construction documents and new construction should would be monitored to ensure they confirm to the design guidelines. A professional should would monitor construction to identify conditions that would conflict with the mitigation measures.  . MIN-CUL-6. Minor Repairs and Reconstruction: The lead agency should would ensure that inadvertent damage to historic properties or resources would be repaired in accordance Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties. . MIN-CUL-7. Salvage: The lead agency should would ensure that selected decorative or architectural elements of any adversely affected historic properties or resources should be reviewed for feasibility of salvage to mitigate loss or destruction. Where possible, these elements should would be retained and reused in construction. Where not possible, selected salvaged elements should would be made available for educational purposes. . MIN-CUL-8. Paleontological Resources: Mitigation measures for paleontological resources should would be identified prior to implementing specific elements of the Build or Preferred Alternative, such as education of workers, recovery of fossils found during reconnaissance, monitoring construction. Furthermore, mitigation strategies should would include establishing protocols for recovering fossils during construction for identification, dating, interpreting, and preserving at appropriate facilities. 3.10.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Where resources exist in the immediate area of the proposed project components, additional evaluation of the potential effects to cultural resources would will be conducted prior to implementing specific components of the Build Alternative action alternatives. Additional evaluation will include further identification and analysis of resources present, their condition and eligibility, and the potential direct and indirect effects of the proposed improvements components to adversely affect the resources’ eligibility status. All identified archaeological and historical resources will be evaluated using NRHP and CRHR eligibility criteria. Further evaluation of paleontological resources will include field reconnaissance to identify any exposed resources and determine sensitivity. Further consultation with NAHC and Native American groups would be necessary with a more precise study area to determine potentially sensitive resources or territories within the study area. Project level review may trigger further consultation with the NAHC and Native American groups consistent with Section 106 of the NHRP and AB 52.                   Page Intentionally Left Blank 3.11 GEOLOGY, SOILS, AND MINERALS This section describes the existing geologic setting and soil conditions in the study area as well as any potential impacts that would occur with either the No Build or Build Alternative This section evaluates existing fault lines, seismic hazards, landslide susceptibility, and liquefaction susceptibility, and discloses locations of oil and gas fields, mineral resource sites, and bedrock conditions that are relevant for any potential excavation activities. This section also describes the potential geologic and seismic impacts associated with the Preferred Alternative in comparison with the No Build and Build Alternatives. The analysis also discloses locations of oil and gas fields, mineral resource sites, and bedrock conditions that are relevant for any potential excavation activities. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided two comments on the geology section (see comments A-3.52 through A- 3.53). These comments were focused on the composition of the Build Alternative. Comment I-12.1 is about the geologic conditions on the south side of the Cuesta Grade. The comment is consistent with conclusions in the Program EIS/EIR (Table 3.11-2) that this area (Existing Alignment Section #10) has a high to very high landslide potential. This information is reflected in Table 3.11-3 of this Final Program EIS/EIR. 3.11.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS There are no federal statutes or regulatory provisions related to geology and soils considerations on non-federal lands. However, a number of state and local regulations apply to geologic hazards and engineering best practices. 3.11.1.1 State Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Zoning Act (Public Resources Code § 2621 et seq.) The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Zoning Act regulates development and construction in designated corridors along active faults (earthquake fault zones) where there is elevated risk of surface fault rupture. Earthquake fault zone maps are prepared by the State Geologist to indicate areas with potential surface fault rupture hazards. Before a project can be permitted or developed, cities and counties must conduct a  site-specific geologic investigation to determine if the project would cross an active fault. The Act prohibits the location of most types of structures for human occupancy across the active traces of faults in earthquake fault zones. Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (Public Resources Code § 2690- 2699.6) The Seismic Hazard Mapping Act was adopted in 1990 following the Loma Prieta earthquake to reduce threats to public health and safety and to minimize property damage caused by earthquakes. The act directed the California Department of Conservation to identify and map areas prone to the earthquake hazards of liquefaction, earthquake-induced landslides, and amplified ground shaking. The act further required most new development projects for human occupancy with designated zones to undergo site-specific geotechnical investigations to identify potential seismic hazards and formulate/implement mitigation measures. Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Public Resources Code § 2710 et seq.) The Surface Mining and Reclamation Act established a program to regulate surface mining activities to assure that adverse environmental impacts are minimized and mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition. The law sets uniform requirements for areas that are known to contain mineral deposits important to meet the future needs of the area. 3.11.1.2 Local Monterey County General Plan The Monterey County General Plan Safety Element contains policies for seismic and geologic hazards. The overall goal of these policies is to minimize the potential for loss of life and property resulting from geologic and seismic hazards. The policies include enforcement of state policies, site-specific geologic studies as it relates to for new development, land use designations, and required involvement of a California licensed civil engineer or landscape architect, when necessary. San Luis Obispo County General Plan The San Luis Obispo County General Plan Safety Element contains policies for seismic and geologic hazards. The overall goal of these policies is to minimize the potential for loss of life and property resulting from geologic and seismic hazards. The General Plan includes policies, standards, and a corresponding implementation program that relates to fault rupture hazards, groundshaking, liquefaction and seismic settlement, slope instability and landslides, and coastal bluff erosion. 3.11.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION To assess potential impacts related to geology, soils, and minerals, aerial mapping was used to obtain information for the existing Coast Corridor rail alignment and the proposed physical component improvement areas. Proposed Physical components improvements were mostly evaluated as having high, medium, or low potential geologic impacts based on the number of geologic constraints identified. Active faults, ground shaking, liquefaction, slope stability, and soil type are evaluated in the analysis. The data used for the aerial mapping incorporated the permanent and temporary footprints for each proposed physical component improvement and the existing alignment to determine the findings. Table 3.11-1 summarizes potential geological and soils-related effects. Table 3.11-2 and Table 3.11-3 summarizes specific geologic and soils related issues for each of the proposed physical components improvements. The permanent and temporary footprint areas are defined as follows: . Impact Type Definitions: . Permanent: Areas where affected resources would not be restored back to their original conditions (i.e., new track locations). . Temporary: Areas that would be disturbed during construction and then returned to their original conditions post construction (i.e., staging areas and ingress/egress). . Track/Signal Upgrades: . Existing railroad ROW (upgrades would be constructed via existing tracks – No Impacts are assumed) . Sidings: . Permanent = Existing railroad ROW . Temporary = 50 feet on either side of existing ROW . Curve Realignments: . Permanent =100 foot wide corridor . Temporary = 200 feet on either side of 100 foot corridor for a total width of 500 feet . Second Mainline: . Permanent = Existing railroad ROW . Temporary = 100ft on either side of existing railroad ROW . Stations . Soledad Station: 1.9 acres – permanent impact area is based on conceptual station plans from the Soledad Downtown Specific Plan (2012). . King City Station: 2.4 acres – permanent impact area is based on the conceptual station plans from the King City First Street Corridor Master Plan (2013) Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design ((MMTC) 2014). Faults The permanent and temporary impact footprints were measured to identify any Alquist-Priolo and Quaternary faults that cross the existing alignment and the areas with proposed physical components improvements. The data was measured in the amount of feet of the proposed physical components improvements that would be within a fault zone; the results are expressed as a percentage within Table 3.11-2. Ground Shaking The permanent and temporary impact footprints were measured to show the level of ground motion that may affect the areas with proposed physical components improvements. The data was categorized as low, medium, and high horizontal ground accelerations using California potential shaking ranges. Low is classified as 0.0 – 0.83g, medium is 0.83 – 1.66g, and high is 1.66 – 2.50g. Liquefaction The permanent and temporary footprints of proposed physical components improvements were measured to show the relative susceptibility for liquefaction (accounting for the age and type of soil/sediment, relative density of the mater, and the depth of the water table). The data was ranked to show whether the area would be very low, low, moderate, high, and very high susceptibility to liquefaction. Slope Stability The permanent and temporary footprints of physical components improvements were measured to show areas that may be susceptible to landsliding. The data was ranked to show whether the area would be very low, low, moderate, high, and very high susceptibility to liquefaction.  Shrink-Swell Potential The permanent and temporary footprints of proposed physical components improvements were measured to show areas of soils that would be considered expansive by the Uniform Building Code (1994). The data was ranked as low, moderate, or high susceptibility to shrink-swell. Corrosive Soils The permanent and temporary footprints of proposed physical components improvements were measured to show areas of soils that would be considered corrosive to uncoated steel and concrete. The data was ranked as low, moderate, or high susceptibility to corrosion. Soil Erosion The permanent and temporary footprints of the proposed physical components improvements were reviewed in light of existing slope and vegetation coverage to determine whether construction activities would have high, medium, or little/low potential to result in soil erosion. Mineral Resources The presence and number of important mineral resources, such as oil/gas fields and geothermal wells are evaluated in the analysis. The aerial mapping data incorporated the permanent and temporary footprints for each proposed physical component improvement and the existing alignment relative to known oil and gas fields. The number of such fields crossed by the proposed improvements is noted. 3.11.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 3.11.3.1 Geologic Setting California’s central coast has a dynamic and varied landscape made up of coastal mountain ranges, gently sloping hills, and valley flats. Over time, tectonic plate activity and instances of high-pressure and heat (metamorphism) changed the composition and structure of underlying materials. As a result, Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties are geologically complex and seismically active.  The Coast Corridor is situated in the Coastal Ranges Geomorphic Province with the Pacific Ocean to the west and the Great Valley Geomorphic Province to the east, with the distant Sierra Nevada Mountain Range Geomorphic Province farther east.1 The California coastal mountain ranges were formed by vertical uplift as the Pacific tectonic plate and the North American tectonic plate converged and compressed. Over tens of millions of years, these mountain ranges eroded and deposited nutrient-rich soil on the California central valley flats. The earth’s climate changed over time, shifting between glacial maximums and interglacial periods, and resulted in sea level fluctuations. When the seas advanced, marine layers were deposited and formed the rich soils found in the Salinas Valley, which continue today to lend themselves to intensive agricultural uses. 1 California Geological Survey, 2006 2 County of Monterey, 2006, pp. 4.4-1-2, 25 In the northern portion of the study area within Monterey County, most of the underlying geologic units are quaternary alluvium and marine deposits from the Pliocene to Holocene epoch, between the present time and 1.6 million years ago (mya). The quaternary alluvium deposits are generally young and made up of unconsolidated sand, silt, and clay-bearing material. 2 San Luis Obispo County is primarily underlain with quaternary alluvium and marine deposits and Franciscan Complex. The underlying Franciscan Complex formed when subsurface soils underwent high-pressure and heat as the Pacific and North American plates interacted. These geological deposits are much older than quaternary alluvium; they were formed between the Jurassic to Cretaceous epochs (between 65 and 200 mya). 3.11.3.2 Seismic Hazards Faults Tectonic plate activity in Central California has resulted in a variety of active fault zones. A fault is a fracture on the earth’s surface where two blocks of the earth’s crust slide past each other. In most of California, large faults form in response to stress caused by relative displacement between the North American and Pacific tectonic plates. Over time, the displacement stresses build up enough strain that the two blocks slip past each other to alleviate the tension, causing an earthquake. Surface rupture occurs when the ground surface is broken due to fault movement during an earthquake. Several faults are located within the Coast Corridor rail alignment, as shown in Figure 3.11-1 and Figure 3.11-2.3 3 This graphic depicts only terrestrial portions of the illustrated fault lines within Monterey County. 4 County of Monterey, 2006, p. 4.4-. 5 Rosenberg and Bryant, 2003 6 County of San Luis Obispo, 1999,pp. 57-60 The California Geological Survey and the United States Geological Survey (USGS) classify active faults if they have ruptured in the last 11,000 years (or within the Holocene epoch). All other faults are considered inactive.4 The Rinconada quaternary fault is the most prevalent active fault within the Coast Corridor alignment. The Rinconada fault zone is a strike-slip fault that is part of the San Andreas Fault system and extends west of King City southeast for approximately 74 miles to Santa Margarita.5 The Rinconada fault is parallel to the Coast Corridor throughout most of Monterey County. Near Paso Robles, the existing rail alignment travels turns towards the southwest direction and traverses the fault line through Templeton, Atascadero, and Santa Margarita. According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, the Rinconada fault has a low-rated slip potential and is not expected to produce large earthquakes. No major earthquake has occurred along this fault within the past 100 years. Small portions of the Cambria and Oceanic faults traverse the existing rail alignment near the City of San Luis Obispo. The Cambria fault trends northwest and is approximately 39 miles long. The Oceanic Fault Zone trends north-northwest for 62 miles.6 Ground Shaking Ground or seismic shaking is the motion of the earth’s surface resulting from an earthquake generated by a sudden slip at a fault line. An earthquake with moderate to high magnitude can generate considerable ground shaking. The degree of shaking is dependent on the magnitude of the earthquake, distance to the epicenter, duration of strong ground motion, and local geologic conditions (soil type, topography, etc). The most common damage from ground shaking is structural damage to buildings. Both Monterey County and San Luis Obispo Counties are located in a seismically active region subject to earthquakes and potentially strong ground shaking from nearby faults and generally unconsolidated alluvial areas. The most recent large earthquake in the region was the 2003 San Simeon earthquake, which registered a magnitude of 6.5. This event resulted in two fatalities from a building collapse in downtown Paso Robles. The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake resulted in moderate to light ground shaking in the northern Salinas Valley. Although most of Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties are subject to strong ground shaking, the vast majority of the existing Coast Corridor alignment and proposed components improvements have a low potential for ground shaking, as further discussed below. One portion of Section #1 of the existing alignment within Monterey County, south of Salinas, has moderate ground shaking potential. Liquefaction Liquefaction is the process in which water-saturated sediment temporarily loses strength and acts as a fluid. During liquefaction, the soil undergoes temporary loss of strength causing the soil to behave as a fluid for short periods of time. To be susceptible to liquefaction, a soil is typically cohesionless, with a grain size distribution of a specified range (generally sand and silt), loose to medium dense, below the groundwater table, and subjected to a sufficient magnitude and duration of ground shaking. Liquefaction-related damage could include loss of support beneath foundations and other rail components improvements. Figure 3.11-3 and Figure 3.11-4 summarizes show the areas of liquefaction potential of the Coast Corridor. According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, ground shaking that causes liquefaction is most prevalent in alluvial basins in Monterey County. The portions of Coast Corridor within Monterey County are most subject to liquefaction near the Salinas River and floodplain. In San Luis Obispo County, areas that are underlain by young, poorly consolidated, saturated granular alluvial sediments are most susceptible to liquefaction. Areas adjacent to rivers and creeks are also considered vulnerable. Liquefaction potential along the Coast Corridor ranges from very low to very high, but most of the existing alignment and proposed components improvements have moderate potential. Slope Stability Slope failure can occur as either rapid movement of large masses of soil (landslide) or slow, continuous (creep). The primary factors influencing the stability of a slope are the nature of the underlying soil or bedrock, the geometry of the slope (height and steepness), rainfall, and the presence of previous landslide deposits. Landslides typically occur in areas of steep slopes where underlying earth materials are relatively weak and particularly where high rainfall occurs and/or high groundwater levels are present. Water can act as a lubricant to decrease resisting forces. Ground shaking due to earthquakes can also cause landslides. The Coast Corridor alignment is located along largely flat areas where landslide hazard risk is generally low, with the exception of several high-risk area as discussed below. 3.11.3.3 Soils Shrink-Swell Potential Expansive soils can undergo significant volume change (shrink or swell) due to variations in moisture content. Earth materials susceptible to these volumetric changes include soils and rock formations containing clays. Changes in soil moisture content can result for rainfall, irrigation, utility leakage, surface drainage, perched groundwater, drought, or other factors. During shrink-swell cycles, the volume of the soil changes and can cause damage to infrastructure. Expansive soils vary in severity along the existing Coast Corridor alignment and where there are proposed physical components improvements. In Monterey County, expansive soils are most severe in the northern portions of the existing alignment. Most of the proposed physical components improvements have low or moderate amounts of expansive soil. In San Luis Obispo County, the shrink-swell potential for soils is much lower than in Monterey County. Along the existing Coast Corridor alignment, the presence of expansive soils is mostly moderate to low. Corrosive Soils A corrosive substance is one that will destroy or irreversibly damage another surface or substance with which it comes into contact. Corrosive soils are a potential hazard to concrete and metal foundations, utilities, and other buried or ground-level improvements. Soil Erosion Soil erosion is a natural process that can be caused by wind, water, waves, or corrosion. Erosion can lead to soil loss, degraded water quality, and other effects. In agricultural areas of the Salinas Valley, erosion is common when flooding is prevalent. As a result, sediment is picked up and deposited in another location. Wind is another common source of erosion in the Salinas Valley, especially in areas with sandy deposits.7 Most of the existing Coast Corridor alignment has soil prone to moderate erosion. 7 County of Monterey, 2006,pp. 4.4-21-23 3.11.3.4 Mineral Resources Geological resources in California include oil and gas fields, geothermal fields, and a wide range of mineral resources. Given the value of these resources, CEQA requires consideration of whether a project would eliminate or otherwise reduce access to such resources. According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, there are oil wells scattered throughout Monterey County, but the vast majority are clustered in the San Ardo oil and gas field, the sixth largest oil field in the State of California. The existing Coast Corridor rail alignment passes through a portion of the San Ardo field. 3.11.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.11.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service. The only physical component improvement would be the implementation of PTC along the corridor, including modification to signaling and communications equipment. These PTC related changes are not expected to result in heightened risk associated with geology or soils-related effects. As such, existing passenger and freight operations (along with potential additional freight operations) would continue to be susceptible to the existing geologic hazards present within the study area. 3.11.4.2 Build Alternative The Build Alternative would construct physical components improvements in areas with high geological impact potential. Table 3.11-1 summarizes potential geological and soils-related effects. Table 3.11-2 summarizes specific geologic and soils issues for each of the proposed physical improvements components of the Build Alternative. Table 3.11-1 Types of Potential Impacts from Geologic and Soil Conditions Geologic Condition Potential Impact Ground Shaking/Liquefaction Ground shaking and liquefaction effects from an earthquake could pose safety hazards to workers and public from possible derailment, collapse of infrastructure, or damage to facilities. Active Fault Crossing Active fault crossings could pose potential risk to workers and public due to interruption of service or derailment due to surface rupture along faults. Slope Stability Landslide potential could pose potential risk to workers and public due to failure of natural and/or construction cut slopes or retention structures. Soil Conditions Expansive soil, corrosive soil, and soil erosion could damage infrastructure and cause premature deterioration of underground structures. Oil & Gas Fields Potential migration of oil & gas fields could release toxic gases into subsurface materials. Mineral Resources Potential project costs and delays due to potential impacts on existing mineral resource areas and facilities, including remediation. Source: Circlepoint, 2014. Table 3.11-2 Summary of Potential Geologic and Soil Impacts - Build Alternative Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete Salinas Powered Switch 0% Low High Low Moderate High Low Low 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0% Low/ Moderate High Low High (56%) Moderate (12%) Low (32%) High Low Very Low 0 Spence Siding Extension 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate/ High High Low Low 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0% Low Moderate Moderate High (28%) Moderate (28%) Low (37%) N/A (5%) High Low/ Moderate High (8%) Moderate (2%) Low (90%)  0 Gonzales Powered Switch 0% Low Moderate Moderate Moderate High Low Low 0 Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete Soledad Powered Switch 0% Low Moderate Low High High Low Low 0 Soledad New Passenger Station 0% Low Moderate Low High High Low Low 0 Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 0% Low High Moderate Low High Low Low/ Moderate 0 Chalone Creek New Siding 0% Low High Moderate Low/ Moderate High Low Low 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0% Low High Moderate High (36%) Moderate (22%) Low (32%) N/A (11%) High Low High (11%) Moderate (23%) Low (66%)  0 Coburn Curve Realignments 0% Low High Moderate Moderate/ High High Low Low 0 King City Siding Extension 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate High Low Low 0 Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete King City New Passenger Station 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate High Low Low 0 King City Powered Switch 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate High Low Low 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate (44%) Low (31%) N/A (26%) High Low High (26%) Moderate (4%) Low (71%)  0 MP 165 Curve Realignment 0% Low Moderate Low High High Low/ Moderate Low/ Moderate 0 San Lucas New Siding 0% Low Moderate Low Low/High High Moderate Low/ Moderate 0 Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0% Low High High High (13%) Moderate (51%) Low (32%) N/A (4%) High Low Very High (6%) High (11%) Moderate (5%) Low (78%)  2 MP 172 Track Realignment 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate High Low/ Moderate Low/ Moderate 0 San Ardo Powered Switch 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate High Low Low 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 0% Low Moderate High Low/ Moderate High Low Low/ Moderate 0 Bradley Siding Extension 0% Low High Moderate High High Low/ Moderate Low 0 Bradley Powered Switch 0% Low High Moderate High High Low/ Moderate Low 0 Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 0% Low High Low High (14%) Low (96%) High Low Low 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 0% Low Moderate (95%) Very High (5%) Low Low Moderate Low Low 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 0% Low Moderate/Very High Low Low Moderate Low/ Moderate Low/ Moderate 0 McKay East Powered Switches 0% Low Moderate Low Low Moderate Low Low 0 Wellsona New Siding 0% Low Moderate/ Very High Low Low Moderate Low Low/ Moderate 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 0.21% Low Very Low (47%) Moderate (23%) Very High (30%) Low Moderate (41%) Low (59%) Moderate /High Low/ Moderate Low/ Moderate 0 Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 0% Low Moderate Low Low Moderate / High Low/ Moderate Low 0 Templeton Siding Extension 2.02% Low Moderate/ High Low Low/ Moderate Moderate / High Low Low 0 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 0% Low Moderate Low Low Moderate Low/ Moderate Moderate 1 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 0.84% Low Very Low (27%) Moderate (72%) Very High (1%) Low (68%) Moderate (16%) High (16%) High (6%) Moderate (38%) Low (56%) Moderate Low Low 0 Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 18.31% Low Very Low/ Moderate Low Low/ Moderate Moderate Low/ Moderate Low 0 Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0% Low Moderate Low Low Moderate Low/ Moderate Low 0 Build Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete Cuesta Second Main Track 0% Low Very Low/ Moderate Low/High Low/ Moderate Moderate / High Moderate/ High Moderate/ High 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 0.58% Low Very Low (83%) Moderate (17%) Low (15%) High (80%) Very High (4%) High (30%) Moderate (62%) Low (8%) High Low/ Moderate Low/ Moderate 0 Source: ICF, 2013  Seismic Hazards As shown in Table 3.11-2, geologic conditions in the study area generally present low to moderate constraints on development. Overall, the study area has a low potential for ground shaking because few active faults cross the existing and proposed alignment areas; however, about 18 percent of the proposed Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment area would traverse the Rinconada Fault. The Rinconada fault has a low-rated slip potential and is not expected to produce large earthquakes as discussed in Subsection 3.11.3. Nonetheless, this Build Alternative component would require special designs to minimize potential damage to the tracks and other infrastructure from surface fault rupture. Liquefaction potential is generally moderate to high for most of the study area. The Coburn curve realignment, Harlem/Metz curve realignment, Bradley siding extension, and the new siding at Chalone Creek are most notable in Monterey County for high susceptibility to liquefaction potential. Similarly, the proposed McKay/Wellsona curve realignment, Templeton siding extension, and new siding at Wellsona are proposed to be located in areas of high potential susceptibility to liquefaction in San Luis Obispo County. Portions of the existing alignment and proposed physical components improvements within Monterey County would mostly be located in areas with low potential for landslides because the topography is generally flat, as shown in Figure 3.11-5. However, several portions of the alignment extend run immediately adjacent to or near relatively steep slopes. These areas include the Harlem/Metz and Coburn curve realignments, Chalone Creek new siding, and upgrades to existing alignment #3. These Build Alternative components would have moderate potential to be impacted by for landslides. Farther south, the Getty/Bradley curve realignments and the Bradley siding extension would be located in areas that have moderate to high potential for landslides. In San Luis Obispo County, the existing railroad alignment is within an area of generally low landslide potential. Overall, The physical proposed components improvements with the most noteworthy geologic risks are the Getty/Bradley curve realignments, Harlem Metz curve realignments, Bradley siding extension, and the new siding at Chalone Creek, which would face be located in areas of moderate to high risks for both liquefaction and landslide potential.  Soils As shown in Table 3.11-2, soil conditions in the study area generally present moderate constraints on development. Most of the proposed improvements Build Alternative components located within Monterey County would be within areas that have moderate to high shrink-swell potential, particularly the Spence siding extension, Coburn curve realignment, MP 165 curve realignment, Bradley siding, San Lucas siding, and the proposed Soledad station have several acres of high potential shrink-swell soil potential. In San Luis Obispo County, shrink-swell soil potential in improvement areas and existing areas is generally low to moderate the Build Alternative components would be located in areas with low to moderate shrink-swell soil potential. Most of the soils in areas of the proposed physical components improvements located in Monterey County are highly corrosive to steel and low to concrete with low potential for soil erosion. Most of the soils in San Luis Obispo County are moderately corrosive to steel and concrete with low to moderate soil erosion potential. Mineral Resources The proposed Templeton/Henry curve realignment would cross extend through one oil and gas field that is no longer in use. There are no geothermal wells within any of the proposed physical component improvement areas. 3.11.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative includes revised plans for the City of King siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects from geology, soils, and minerals for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess geologic, soil, and mineral effects of modified or excluded components.  Seismic Hazards Under the Preferred Alternative, overall potential seismic hazards are similar to those described in the Build Alternative. However, about 18 percent of the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment area would have traversed the Rinconada Fault. Because the Preferred Alternative excludes this curve realignment the impacts associated with surface fault rupture would not occur. High liquefaction potential was identified near the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment. Because the Preferred Alternative excludes this curve realignment it would have reduced risk for impacts from liquefaction. Modifications to the footprints of the City of King siding extension and passenger station would not substantially alter the potential seismic hazards identified for the Build Alternatives because the new footprints would be located in regions with similar geologic conditions. The addition of the 27 miles of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita would be placed within the existing railroad ROW between sections 6 through 9 of the alignment (refer to Table 3.11-3). Moderate to high liquefaction potential and moderate soil shrink-swell potential exists throughout this portion of the corridor. However, given that CTC is a signaling system, it would be placed on the ground adjacent to the existing railroad and would not entail any substantially increased risk to persons or property. As summarized in Table 3.11-3, the Preferred Alternative would not result in any new substantial seismic adverse effects. Mineral Resources Under the Preferred Alternative, effects to mineral resources would be similar to those described for the Build Alternative. In the Build Alternative, the proposed Templeton/Henry curve realignment would cross over one oil and gas field that is no longer in use. Since the Preferred Alternative excludes this curve realignment, potential impacts of crossing the oil and gas field would be reduced. No new substantial effects to mineral resources would occur under the Preferred Alternative (refer to Table 3.11-3 below).  Table 3.11-3 Summary of Potential Geologic and Soil Impacts - Preferred Alternative Preferred Alternative Component Active Fault Crossing (% of length) Ground Shaking Potential (H/M/L) Liquefaction Potential (H/M/L) Landslide Potential/ Slope Stability (H/M/L) Soil Shrink- Swell Potential (H/M/L) Soil Corrosivity Potential (H/M/L) Soil Erosion Hazard Potential (H/M/L) Oil & Gas Fields (# crossed) Steel Concrete King City Siding Extension 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate/High High Low Low 0 King City New Passenger Station 0% Low Moderate Low Moderate High Low Low 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Note: All other proposed physical components are the same between the Build and Preferred Alternatives and the impacts would be the same and are therefore not repeated in this table. Source: ICF, 2015 3.11.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The physical individual components improvements comprising the Build Alternative will be designed to minimize impacts related to geology and soils along the Corridor. The following strategies The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. 3.11.5.1 Ground Shaking Ground shaking hazards cannot be mitigated completely and thus can be unpredictable. The following minimization strategies should be implemented to reduce potential adverse effects from ground shaking in areas where substantial risk is present: MIN-GEO-1. Infrastructure would be designed to withstand strong ground motion. Designs typically include additional ductility in the structure. The design needed to reduce ground shaking would be determined upon for structures during subsequent stages of development, when detailed design plans are created. MIN-GEO-2. Liquefaction potential would be reduced through site-specific methods such as soil densification or structural design. 3.11.5.2 Fault Crossings MIN-GEO-3. Techniques to monitor track alignment as routine maintenance and the installation of ground motion warning systems would be used to reduce the effects of fault crossings. 3.11.5.3 Slope Stability/Landslides A-GEO-4. Geotechnical studies during subsequent site-specific evaluation would assist in determining the potential for failure of natural and constructed slopes and identifying temporary and permanent slope reinforcement and protection measures where appropriate. 3.11.5.4 Soil Hazards A-GEO-5. As one or more components of the Build Alternative are selected for further design A site-specific subsurface evaluation would be performed by a qualified geologist to evaluate the extent of soils susceptible to shrink-swell present along the alignment in the area of the physical component. Where expansive soil conditions are found and would be detrimental to proposed physical components improvements, measures recommended by the geologist would be implemented in project design. MIN-GEO-6. A subsurface evaluation would be performed prior to design and construction to evaluate the potential for corrosive soil and identify recommendations to minimize or avoid any potential effects related to the presence of such soils (including but not limited to corrosion of rails or ties). 3.11.5.5 Hazards Related to Oil and Gas Fields Hazards from potential migration of hazardous gases due to the presence of oil fields, gas fields, or other subsurface sources will be avoided by following strict federal and state Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA/CalOSHA) regulatory requirements for excavations, and consultation with the California Department of Conservation (Division of Oil and Gas) and California Department of Toxic and Substances Control regarding DTSC for known areas of concern. Mitigation strategies would include: A-GEO-7. The use of safe and explosion-proof equipment during construction and testing for gases regularly. A-GEO-8. Active monitoring systems and alarms would be required in underground construction areas and facilities where subsurface gases are present. 3.11.5.6 Mineral Resources A-GEO-9. Important mineral sites will be identified as early as possible during detailed project-level reviews and avoided where possible. 3.11.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Prior to implementing specific elements of the Build Alternative individual components, component-specific geology, soils and minerals evaluations will be conducted. These evaluations will be used to determine if additional mitigations strategies from those discussed above in Subsection 3.11.5 are applicable.                Page intentionally left blank 3.12 HYDROLOGY AND WATER RESOURCES This section addresses the potential hydrologic and water resource impacts of the No Build and Build Alternatives action alternatives. Water resources analyzed include floodplains, surface waters, and groundwater. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments regarding project elements that have been incorporated into the Preferred Alternative (see comments A-3.54 through A-3.58, A-3.77 and A-3.78). Section 3.12.2 below provides analysis of the Preferred Alternative. Individual comments I-7.2, I-7.3, and I-18.2 are also related to hydrologic conditions and water resources related to features of the Build Alternative but do not require changes to the analysis or findings. 3.12.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.12.1.1 Federal Clean Water Act The Clean Water Act (CWA) was enacted by Congress in 1972 and subsequently amended several times. It is the primary federal law regulating water quality in the United States, and has formed the basis for several state and local laws throughout the country. The key objective of the CWA is to protect water quality by regulating pollution in the nation’s rivers, stream, lakes, and coastal waters. The CWA prescribed the basic federal laws for regulating discharges of pollutants as well as set minimum water quality standards for all “waters of the United States.” The CWA makes the discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States unlawful without a proper permit. Several additional mechanisms are employed to control domestic, industrial, and agricultural pollution under the CWA. At the federal level, the CWA is administered by the EPA. In California, the CWA is administered and enforced by the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and the Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCBs). The State of California has developed a number of water quality laws, rules, and regulations, in part to assist in the implementation of the CWA and related federally mandated water quality requirements. In many cases, the federal requirements set minimum standards and policies; the laws, rules, and regulations adopted by the state and regional boards often exceed the federal requirements. Important sections of the CWA include: . Section 303 and 304: Require states to promulgate water quality standards, criteria, and guidelines. Section 303(d) specifically regulates impaired water bodies and requires each state to identify waters that will fail to achieve water quality standards even after maintaining effluent standards, and to enact improvement plans. Each state must develop load-based (rather than concentration based) limits called total maximum daily loads (TMDL) for each water body and pollutant for which water quality is considered impaired. It is up to the state to prioritize development of TMDLs based on the severity of the pollution and the beneficial uses of the water body. . Section 401: Requires a federal permit to conduct any activity that may result in a discharge to waters of the US. The applicant must obtain certification from the state that the discharge will comply with other provisions of the act. . Section 402: Establishes the NPDES, a permitting system for point source discharges (except for dredge or fill material) of any pollutant into waters of the United States, as authorized by the CWA. RWQCBs administer this permitting program in California. The entirety of the Coast Corridor under review here (Salinas to San Luis Obispo) is within the Central Coast RWQCB based in San Luis Obispo. Section 402(p) requires NPDES permits for discharges of storm water from industrial/construction and municipal sources into storm sewer systems. The permit ensures the receiving waters will meet water quality standards. . Section 404: Establishes a permit program for the discharge of dredge and fill materials into waters of the United States. This permit program is administered by USACE. Rivers and Harbors Act Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act prohibits the unauthorized obstruction or alteration of any navigable water of the United States. The construction of any structure in or over any navigable water of the United States, the excavation from or depositing of material in such waters, or the accomplishment of any other work affecting the course, location, condition, or capacity of such waters is unlawful unless the work has been recommended by the Chief of Engineers and authorized by the Secretary of the Army. The instrument of authorization is designated a Section 10 permit.  Flood Disaster Protection Act The Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 requires flood insurance for the protection of property located in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SHFAs). Flood-prone areas are identified and flood insurance is provided to residents and businesses in those areas. Executive Order 11988 Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management) addresses floodplain issues related to public safety, conservation, and economics. The Executive Order requires federal agencies to avoid short- and long-term impacts resulting from the modification and development of floodplains to the maximum extent feasible. 3.12.1.2 State Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act The Porter-Cologne Act, enacted in 1969, provides the legal basis for water quality regulation within California. The law gives responsibility to the SWRCB and the RWQCBs to establish the water quality standards (objectives and beneficial uses) required by the CWA. Additionally, the SWRCB and RWQCBs regulate discharges to ensure compliance with water quality standards. In California, Regional Boards designate the beneficial uses for all water body segments in their jurisdictions, and then set criteria necessary to protect these uses. California Fish and Game Code, Section 1602 Pursuant to Section 1602 of the California Fish and Game Code, CDFW regulates activities that divert, obstruct, or alter stream flow, or substantially modify the bed, channel, or bank of a stream, which CDFW typically considers to include riparian vegetation. Any proposed activity in a natural stream channel that would adversely affect an existing fish and/or wildlife resource, would require entering into a Streambed Alteration Agreement (SAA) with CDFW prior to commencing work in the stream. However, prior to authorizing such permits, CDFW typically reviews an analysis of the expected biological impacts, any proposed mitigation plans that would be implemented to offset biological impacts and engineering and erosion control plans.  State Agency Drought Declarations On August 14, 2014, the CPUC directed all state water utilities to achieve compliance with SWRCB conservation efforts. On March 17, 2015, the State Water Resources Control Board, noting continued drought conditions, adopted additional emergency measures to conserve state water resources. 3.12.1.3 Local City of Salinas General Plan The City of Salina General Plan sets forth policies intended to ensure a safe and adequate water supply for community uses and to encourage the conservation of water resources. Specific policies aim to maintain and restore natural watersheds to recharge the aquifers and ensure the viability of the ground water resources. Cooperation with the SWRCB and the RWQCB is encouraged to address poor water quality in the area. The General Plan also promotes regional efforts to protect and enhance water quality. City of Soledad General Plan The City of Soledad General Plan sets forth policies requiring projects to allocate land as necessary for the purpose of retaining flows and/or for the incorporation of mitigation measures for water quality and supply impacts related to runoff. Mitigation related to controlling pollutant loads in urban storm water runoff must be coordinated with responsible agencies, such as the RWQCB. City of King (King City) General Plan The City’s General Plan includes goals and policies assuring groundwater resources are available to the city and that their quality is not degraded. Specific policies aim to preserve and protect all groundwater recharge areas from sources of pollution, and to regulate development in such areas to ensure that recharge capabilities are not significantly diminished. City of El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles) General Plan The City of El Paso de Robles General Plan contains goals and policies aiming to ensure the city has an adequate supply of water. Specifically, the development and implementation of innovative water provision and conservation programs is encouraged, particularly through non-traditional methods, such as storm drainage system design integrating Low-Impact Development features to reduce hydromodification from development and other improvements to recharge groundwater. City of San Luis Obispo General Plan The City of San Luis Obispo General Plan includes goals, policies, and programs related to water supply and demand, with a focus on ensuring a long-term, reliable water supply to meet both current and future water demand associated with development envisioned by the General Plan. 3.12.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION The components of the Build Alternative action alternatives would have varying potential to result in environmental effects related to hydrology and water resources. The study area for hydrology and water resources is defined as the existing railroad ROW, the potential locations of the physical improvements, and conservative buffer areas around the proposed physical components improvements. Below, this section discusses how each component was evaluated and what study area was considered. 3.12.2.1 Impact Evaluation by Resource Surface Waters To determine potential impacts to hydrologic features, including streams, rivers, canals, by the proposed physical improvements project components, national hydrography data from the United States Geologic Survey (USGS) was used. Permanent and temporary impacts were located by identifying where proposed physical components improvements would intersect known flowlines. From this, the size of the impact was computed in linear feet in the jurisdictional areas. Groundwater Impacts to groundwater resources were evaluated qualitatively by examining the potential for the physical components improvements to interfere with groundwater recharge or to deplete groundwater supplies. Groundwater resources serving communities along the alignment were identified, along with any potential impacts the physical components improvements may have. For this analysis, it is assumed that among all proposed physical components improvements, only proposed new station areas would have any significant potential to impact groundwater resources due to the likely addition of impervious surface area. Other proposed components improvements, such as new tracks, would not introduce substantial new impervious areas. Floodplain To determine the extent to which proposed physical improvements could be located within areas of subject to heightened flood risk (i.e., 100-year floodplains or other SFHAs), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood maps were consulted. The analysis computes acreages of proposed improvements within these areas subject to heightened risk of flood such areas. Impaired Bodies Impacts to impaired bodies of water within the exiting alignment and resulting from the proposed physical components improvements were identified by using the US EPA 303(d) list. Any impacted surface waters were cross-checked with the 303(d) to determine if they are currently considered impaired. The linear feet of impaired water body were calculated for each of the physical improvements. Erosion Potential erosion impacts were evaluated by using GIS data and aerial mapping to identify proposed improvements that could occur in areas with steep slopes. Areas near steep slopes are more likely to experience erosion, particularly if proposed components improvements would require substantial grading in such areas. 3.12.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 3.12.3.1 Hydrological Resources in the Study Area Surface Waters Surface waters, including streams, lakes, rivers, ponds, and reservoirs, provide critical habitat for fish and wildlife, offer locations for groundwater recharge, and direct pathways connecting resources. They also help convey flood waters, facilitating and maintaining water supply. (See Section 3.13, Biological Resources and Wetlands, for a discussion of wetlands and native species habitats). The major surface water resource within and immediately adjacent to the study area is the Salinas River. The Salinas River stretches approximately 184 miles north/northwest, from the Santa Lucia and La Panza Mountain Ranges in San Luis Obispo County, through the Salinas Valley, and finally terminating in Monterey Bay near Castroville. The river meanders amidst 230,000 acres through the Salinas Valley floor, fed by several tributaries along the way. The river flow averages approximately 282,000 acre-feet per year (AFY). Surface waters in the study area are shown in Figure 3.12-1. Between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, the existing railroad crosses or is in close proximity to a number of other named streams, including the San Antonio River, Nacimiento River, Jack Creek, Santa Margarita Creek, Paso Robles Creek, Atascadero Creek, Chualar Creek, Stonewall Creek, Chalone Creek, Pancho Rico Creek, Sargent Creek, San Lorenzo Creek, Pine Creek, San Marcos Creek, Yerba Buena Creek, Paloma Creek, Graves Creek, Brizzolara Creek, Stenner Creek, and several unnamed creeks. Groundwater Rainfall, snowmelt, and other types of water infiltration may penetrate the ground surface moving downward through spaces between soil particles, eventually encountering an impermeable layer. At this impermeable layer water begins to build up, ultimately becoming an aquifer. A groundwater basin contains one large aquifer or several connected and interrelated aquifers. Groundwater basins are distinguished by natural or artificial divides, such as impermeable layers, in the water table. Precipitation as well as artificial infiltration can serve to recharge the groundwater basin. Groundwater recharge is most effective in areas where surface water is easily able to penetrate into the ground, such as along undeveloped river channels or beneath lakes. Groundwater is an important resource to Monterey County. Overall, the groundwater is considered to be of good quality; however, localized groundwater quality issues exist, resulting from seawater intrusion in northern Monterey County (not an issue for the inland Salinas Valley) and nitrate contamination. Through Monterey County and parts of San Luis Obispo County, the Coast Corridor study area lies within the Salinas River Basin, extending a length of approximately 130 miles. The Salinas River Basin consists of one large hydrologic unit consisting of four subareas, each containing their own hydrogeological and recharge characteristics. Water can move freely between them as they are not separated by any horizontal flow barrier. Groundwater resources in the study area are shown in Figure 3.12-2. Groundwater is the primary water resource in the Salinas Valley and supplies a variety of uses, including irrigation, as well as domestic, municipal, and industrial purposes. In the Salinas Valley, groundwater recharge occurs primarily through the Salinas River, Arroyo Seco River, and some infiltration from rainfall. Lake San  Antonio serves in part to collect water to recharge the San Antonio River, a tributary to the Salinas River. Some infiltration from small streams and inflow from bedrock areas adjoining the basin does occur, but to a much lesser extent.1 1 County of Monterey, 2006, pp. 4.3-2-4.3-6 2 County of San Luis Obispo, 2009, p. 3.7-1 3 City of Paso Robles, 2014 4 City of San Luis Obispo, , 2010, pp. 8.1-8.4 5 United States Department of Agriculture, National Drought Mitigation Center, 2015. San Luis Obispo County obtains approximately 80 percent of its water supply from groundwater.2 As of 2014, Paso Robles relieds entirely on groundwater, drawn from a large aquifer known as the Paso Robles Basin and the Salinas River Underflow. However, in 2015, Paso Robles is scheduled to begin receiving surface water (4,000 AFY) from the Lake Nacimiento Water Project.3 The City of San Luis Obispo obtains water from Santa Margarita Lake, Whale Rock Reservoir, Nacimiento Reservoir, recycled water from the city’s WRF, and groundwater. The city’s groundwater basin is relatively small and recharges quickly after rainfall events. Currently, the city operates one potable and one non-potable well. Two of the city’s largest producing wells were shut down after elevated nitrate levels were detected. The potable well produces approximately 11 acre-feet per minute (AFM), about 2 percent of the city’s total water use. The non-potable well serves construction activities in the area, such as soil compaction and dust control. Two additional wells are operated by the Laguna Lake Golf Course that serve to help meet irrigation demands at the course. The remainder of the irrigation demand for the golf course is met by the WRF.4 Drought A prolonged drought period has affected flows in local waterways. For most of 2014 and year 2015 to date, the United States Drought Monitor has noted “exceptional drought” conditions in San Luis Obispo County.5 Floodplains Floodplains are flatlands adjacent to rivers, lakes, and oceans that are subject to flooding when the nearby water body overflows, resulting in a variety of geomorphic and hydrological processes. A total of 49 acres of SFHAs have been designated within the Coast Corridor study area, and are shown in Figure 3.12-3. Water Quality Issues Impaired Bodies Impaired water bodies are those that do not meet water quality standards after application of effluent limits under the CWA. Water bodies with impaired water quality in the vicinity of the Coast Corridor study area include Atascadero Creek, Chualar Creek, Salinas River, San Lorenzo Creek, and Stenner Creek.6 These water bodies are considered impaired because they exceed the limits for fecal coliform, e. coli, low dissolved oxygen, boron, chloride, electrical conductivity, sodium, pH, chlordane, pesticides, total dissolved solids, toxaphene, nitrate, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), enterococcus, diazinon, chlorpyrifos, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane (DDD), and a number of other pollutants. 6California EPA, 2013 Erosion Potential Erosion is the slow deterioration of land surface by flowing water, wind, waves, and corrosion, typically leading to soil loss and degraded water quality. Soil erosion can occur in areas near steep slopes, and during construction activities that involve grading and other earth moving activities. See Section 3.11 Geology, Soils, and Minerals for an in-depth discussion of soil erosion in Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Most of the Coast Corridor study area has low soil erosion potential; very few areas are identified as having moderate to severe erosion potential. The topography of the existing Coast Corridor study area is predominately flat; however, several portions of the alignment run adjacent to areas with steeper topography, where any ground disturbance would increase the potential for erosion and sedimentation. 3.12.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.12.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical component improvement expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of PTC, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. PTC equipment would likely be installed within the existing railroad ROW or would modify existing signaling equipment, and train operations would continue as at present it currently does. As a result, no new impacts to hydrology and water resources would not change under current operation and no new impacts would be expected to occur. 3.12.4.2 Build Alternative Surface Waters/Impaired Water Bodies The Build Alternative could result in potential proximity impacts to surface waters through runoff during construction activities, operation-related pollution in areas immediately adjacent to surface waters, and potential surface water crossings. Table 3.12-1 below shows potential impacts to surface waters resulting from various elements the components of the Build Alternative. Potential temporary and permanent surface water impacts are reported as linear feet, which represents areas in which Build Alternative components would come within close proximity to surface water resources. For example, construction activities occurring to upgrade existing alignment #1 would temporarily be in close proximity to 83 linear feet of surface waters. Once operational, these upgrades would be within the existing railroad ROW and would not be in close proximity to any water resources. As such, no permanent impacts are reported. Table 3.12-1 Build Alternative: Potential Proximity Impacts to Surface Waters Build Alternative Components Surface Water Impacts (linear feet)  Temporary Permanent Salinas Powered Switch 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 83 0 Spence Siding Extension 130 83 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 2,411 0 Gonzales Powered Switch 0 0 Soledad Powered Switch 0 0 Soledad New Passenger Station 0 0 Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 302 0 Build Alternative Components Surface Water Impacts (linear feet)  Temporary Permanent Chalone Creek New Siding 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 120 0 Coburn Curve Realignments 61 0 King City Siding Extension 133 100 King City New Passenger Station 0 0 King City Powered Switch 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 MP 165 Curve Realignment 403 100 San Lucas New Siding 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 1,732 0 MP 172 Track Realignment 785 150 San Ardo Powered Switch 0 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 1,636 417 Bradley Siding Extension 109 109 Bradley Powered Switch 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 1,076 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 287 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 0 0 McKay East Powered Switches 0 0 Wellsona New Siding 123 124 Build Alternative Components Surface Water Impacts (linear feet)  Temporary Permanent Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 612 0 Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 0 0 Templeton Siding 267 227 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 1,846 0 Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 5,719 305 Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0 0 Cuesta Second Main Track 5,986 749 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 3,620 0 Totalsa 27,442a 2,264a Note: a) Rounded to the nearest whole number. Source: ICF, 2013 The Build Alternative would result in some potential proximity impacts to surface waters, including potential crossings of 17 streams and rivers on at 117 occurrences locations.7 More specific construction-period and operational impact discussions are provided below. 7 More than 17 streams may be crossed; however, of all the streams crossed in the study area, only 17 are named. Construction-Period Effects Construction activities could result in potential proximity impacts to approximately 5.2 miles of surface waters within the study area. Construction activities may also result in potential proximity impacts to water quality along the corridor. During construction, erosion and runoff could result in an increased risk of sedimentation in nearby surface waters. This mainly results from the proximity of construction work and associated staging areas, vehicle ingress/egress, etc. to surface waters. The Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment and the Cuesta Second Main Track would both affect approximately one mile of surface waters each during construction activities. Construction of the King City Siding Extension could result in a potential temporary impact to the San Lorenzo Creek; however, this impact would extend for only 133 linear feet. Upgrades to Existing Alignment section #10 would potentially impact just over a half mile (3,620 linear feet) of surface waters during construction activities. Following construction work, these impacted areas would be restored back to their original condition. Operational Effects Five (5) of the seventeen (17) streams and/or rivers that would be crossed by one or more of the elements of the Build Alternative are considered impaired. Of the impaired water bodies in the Corridor, San Lorenzo Creek is the only body of water that is not currently crossed by the existing alignment. The proposed King City Siding Extension is the only proposed physical improvement Build Alternative component that would add a new crossing of San Lorenzo Creek. Once operational, the number of daily trains on the corridor would increase, and there would be increased potential for operation-related pollutants to enter the environment. Potential permanent proximity impacts could occur to approximately 0.4 miles (2,264 linear feet) of surface waters. Like construction-period effects, these impacts would result from the proximity of the various proposed improvements Build Alternative components (new sidings, siding extensions, etc.) and subsequently close proximity of trains to surface waters. The King City Siding Extension has the potential to result in impacts to the San Lorenzo Creek for approximately .02 mile (100 linear feet) once operational. Operation of the Cuesta Second Main Track could result in approximately 0.15 mile (749 linear feet) of potential impacts to surface waters. All of the remaining new sidings/siding extensions would have potential impacts to already affected surface waters in a length of less than one tenth of a mile in the vicinity of the alignment. Erosion Potential Construction-Period Effects Several elements components of the Build Alternative could result in potential erosion impacts during construction. Particularly The Harlem/Metz Curve Realignment, New Chalone Creek Siding, Coburn Curve Realignments, Bradley Siding, and Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments are located near steep slopes and could result in potential erosion impacts. The Cuesta Second Main Track is proposed in an area near steep topography; however, potential for soil erosion is low in this area because it is forested and agricultural uses are negligible. The Harlem/Metz and Coburn Curve Realignments would move the track farther away from sloping hillside areas. These realignments, along with the Chalone Creek New Siding, would be located on relatively flat land, reducing the potential for erosion and potentially creating a beneficial effect. Operational Effects Once operational, the Build Alternative would have minimal potential to result in erosion as erosion because it is typically associated with grading and other land disturbing activities that occur during construction. Groundwater Construction-Period Effects Little groundwater use is anticipated for construction of all of the proposed physical components improvements. Curve realignments, siding extensions, new power switches, and the second main track would have little to no impact to groundwater as construction activity associated with these components improvements does not require water. Construction of the new stations and concrete platforms would require water. Water use may also be needed during construction activities for dust control and other best management practices (BMPs); however, water use would be minimal and temporary. Furthermore, construction activities would truck water to the sites rather than need to withdraw it from wells, which would have no impact to groundwater resources located within the study area. Since permanent sources of water are not needed for construction, new wells would not be developed and the study area groundwater would not be depleted. Operational Effects Both Soledad and King City get municipal water from groundwater. The new station areas proposed in Soledad and King City would require some new water use to operate restroom facilities and offer drinking water. Water use at existing stations (Salinas, San Luis Obispo, and Paso Robles) may increase as ridership is projected to increase (add 124,000 annual riders by 2020)8 with the improved Coast Corridor service. Salinas draws at least a portion of its water from groundwater resources and Paso Robles relies completely on groundwater for its municipal water as of 2014. However, water use is generally minimal as the existing stations do not offer 8 Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b shower facilities only supply water for restroom and drinking water amenities. Therefore, although increased operational demand for groundwater may occur with the proposed physical improvements Build Alternative components, no significant increase in use is anticipated. Floodplain In the study area, 100-year flood hazard areas (or SFHAs) exist around flat lands surrounding the Salinas River and creeks in San Luis Obispo County. Portions of the existing alignment are located within the 100-year floodplain. Portions of the railway within the floodplain are at risk of being inundated and potentially impassible during a storm event. Table 3.12-2 below lists the element component of the Build Alternative that would be located within the designated 100-year floodplain. Table 3.12-2 Build Alternative: Acreage of Proposed Improvements within 100- Year Floodplain Build Alternative Components 100yr Floodplain (Acres)  Temporary Permanent Salinas Powered Switch 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0 0 Spence Siding Extension 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 5 0 Gonzales Powered Switch 0 0 Soledad Powered Switch 0 0 Soledad New Passenger Station 0 0 Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 61 14 Chalone Creek New Siding 0.5 .03 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 1 0 Coburn Curve Realignments 20 1.5 King City Siding Extension 1 1 King City New Passenger Station 0 0 King City Powered Switch 0 0 Build Alternative Components 100yr Floodplain (Acres) Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 8 0 MP 165 Curve Realignment 6 1 San Lucas New Siding 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 6 0 MP 172 Track Realignment 6 .01 San Ardo Powered Switch 0 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 19 3 Bradley Siding Extension 0 0 Bradley Powered Switch 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 2 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 2 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 10 0.2 McKay East Powered Switches 0 0 Wellsona New Siding 1 0.2 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 13 0 Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 0.9 0 Templeton Siding 6 3 Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 10 0 Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 19 4 Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0 0 Cuesta Second Main Track 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 2 0 Totalsa 200 29 Note: a Rounded to the nearest whole number. Source: ICF, 2013  Elements of the Build Alternative would be located within approximately 229 acres of the 100-year flood zone, putting them at risk of inundation by flooding. Temporary inundation can result in travel delays. Over time, frequent temporary inundations could result in damage to tracks or other rail facilities. Construction-Period Effects Approximately 200 of the acres potentially affected during construction of the Build Alternative would be within SFHAs only during construction activities. Temporary staging areas associated with for construction of the Coburn, Getty/Bradley, Harlem/Metz, and Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignments would result in the majority of temporary acreage identified as potentially within SFHAs. These areas would only be at risk of flood impacts during the construction period, and measures could be taken to reduce the likelihood of impacts (storing equipment on high ground, etc.). Operational Effects The remaining Approximately 29 acres of identified within the flood zone would be required for implementation of specific physical improvements potentially be affected during operation of the Build Alternative. Almost half of this amount (14 acres) is associated with the potential construction of would be from several segments of the Harlem-Metz curve realignment located near a stretch of the Salinas River. Given the relatively small amount of land that would be permanently affected within the existing 100-year flood zone and that impacts to the flood zone would be spread across a relatively wide geography within the study area, the Build Alternative would not result in a substantial increase in flood elevations or substantially shift the location of flood zones. However, these areas would be at risk of flood inundation during a severe weather event. 3.12.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and passenger station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita).  Accordingly, effects to hydrology and water quality for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess hydrology and water quality of the modified or excluded components. Surface Waters/Impaired Water Bodies The Preferred Alternative revises the King City siding extension to extend on the north side of the existing siding only. The siding would extend from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length. In the Build Alternative, construction of the southern portion of the King City siding extension would have potentially resulted in both temporary and permanent impacts to the San Lorenzo Creek. Because the Preferred Alternative revises the King City siding extension to extend only on the north end, the revised siding extension would not result in impacts to surface waters during construction and operation (refer to Table 3.12-3). The Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. One of the excluded realignments (Henry/Santa Margarita) had the potential to impact approximately one mile of surface waters during construction, and about one tenth of a mile during operation. Because this curve realignment would not be constructed as part of the Preferred Alternative, these impacts would not occur. Floodplain Components of the Build Alternative (the King City siding extension and three of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments) would have resulted in constructionperiod and operational impacts to floodplains. Modifications to and the exclusion of these components incorporated in the Preferred Alternative would avoid these impacts (refer to Table 3.12-3 below).  Table 3.12-3 Summary of Changes in Potential Impacts to Hydrology and Water Quality  No Build Alternative Build Alternative Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Surface Water Impacts (linear feet) 100yr Floodplain (Acres) Surface Water Impacts (linear feet) 100yr Floodplain (Acres) Surface Water Impacts (linear feet) 100yr Floodplain (Acres)   Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm King City Siding Extension N/A 133 100 1 1 0 0 0 0 King City New Passenger Station N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 10 0.2 None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0.9 0 None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments N/A 0 0 0 0 None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment N/A 5,719 305 19 4 None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Note: All other proposed components are the same between the Build and Preferred Alternatives, thus the impacts would be the same and are not repeated in this table. Source: ICF, 2015 3.12.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The Build Alternative will be designed to minimize impacts to biological resources along the Corridor. The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. Surface Waters Strategies to reduce potential impacts on surface waters include the following: A-BIO-1 A-HYD-1. Many of the potential impacts to water resources could be avoided through Where feasible, project-level design would avoid adverse impacts to water resources. For example, siding extension impact areas were analyzed assuming one mile extension areas could occur entirely on one side or the other. In the event that one end of a siding extension would impact a surface water body, the siding extension would be designed on the opposite side and away from the water resource area, thus removing the impact altogether. MIN-BIO-2 MIN-HYD-2. NPDES permits and Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPP) would be obtained prior to implementing elements components of the Build or Preferred Alternative. California NPDES permit requirements would be followed and BMPs would be implemented as mandated. These would include measures to provide permeable surfaces, where feasible, and to retain and treat stormwater onsite using catch basins and treatment wetlands. These measures will be particularly valuable in areas where new stations would be constructed and/or paved parking areas would be developed or expanded The SWPPP would include BMPs to minimize potential sediment transport due to construction activities, including obligatory erosion control techniques, stormwater management, and channel dewatering for all stream/river crossings. The SWPPP would also include measures to control the overall amount and quality of stormwater runoff to regional systems. Potential BMPs may include the following:  . Practices that minimize contact between construction materials, equipment, and maintenance supplies with stormwater; . Practices that reduce soil erosion including watering for dust control, perimeter silt fences, placement of rice straw bales, sediment basins, and soil stabilization; and . Practices that maintain water quality including filtration, detention, and retention systems, constructed wetland systems, biofiltration/bioretention systems, grass buffer strips, ponding areas, organic mulch layers, planting soil beds, sand beds, or vegetated systems (biofilters) such as vegetated swales and grass strips designed to convey and treat either shallow flow (swales) or sheerflow (filter strips) runoff. MM-BIO-3 MM-HYD-3. The project sponsor would obtain permits required under Sections 401 and 404 of the CWA and comply with mitigation measures required in the permits. Mitigation measures may include compensation for habitat loss involving habitat restoration, reconstruction onsite, or habitat replacement offsite, with the ultimate goal of ensuring minimal impact to surface water quality. MIN-BIO-4 MIN-HYD-4. For any water body designated as Navigable If required, the project sponsor would comply with any permit conditions required under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act would be adhered to. MIN-BIO-5 MIN-HYD-5. If required, the project sponsor would secure a Lake or Streambed Alteration Agreement would need to be obtained for any work that would take place along the banks of surface water bodies. MIN-BIO-6 MIN-HYD-6. The project sponsor would manage potential fuel or other spills and a spill prevention and emergency response plan would be developed and implemented. Floodplains Strategies to reduce potential impacts on floodplains should include the following: A-BIO-7 A-HYD-7. Prior to implementing physical components improvements that would introduce new structures in the study area, such as curve realignments, further evaluation of potential 100-year flood risk areas would be conducted. Construction of facilities within floodplains would be avoided where feasible, and floodplains temporarily impacted by construction activities would be restored as much as possible so they can function as before.  MIN- BIO-8 MIN-HYD-8. Where avoidance is infeasible, the footprint of facilities within the floodplain would be minimized to the extent possible. All opportunities for redesign or modification to minimize flooding risk and potential harm to or within the floodplain would be assessed. For instance, siding extensions can be designed to either extend from the north or south end of the existing siding, potentially avoiding a flood-prone area. Groundwater Strategies to reduce potential impacts from construction and operation of the physical components improvements on groundwater resources should include the following: A-BIO-9 A-HYD-9. Design facilities that are elevated and/or permeable so as to not affect recharge potential where construction is required in areas of potentially substantial groundwater discharge or recharge. MIN-BIO-10 MIN-HYD-10. Minimize development of facilities in areas that have substantial groundwater discharge or that would affect recharge. MM-BIO-11 MM-HYD-11. Obtain waste discharge permits where required. MIN-BIO-12 MIN-HYD-12. Obtain a NPDES permit and implement permit requirements, as well as BMPs that would control the release of contaminants near areas of surface water or groundwater recharge. MIN-BIO-13 MIN-HYD-13. Consider use and retention of native materials with high infiltration potential at the ground surface in areas that are critical to infiltration for groundwater recharge. 3.12.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Additional analysis to further identify potential impacts on hydrology and water resources would be needed. The subsequent analysis would include the following; . Further assessment of potential construction and facility impacts on surface waters and hydrology. . As specific locations and facility designs are developed, further analysis of potential impacts on floodplains. . Field surveys of potential water impacts to further analyze potential impacts on water quality, obtain required permits from the appropriate agencies, and develop suitable BMPs. . Assessment of significant alteration in water-flow and drainage patterns, including increased stormwater runoff, or changes to groundwater discharge or recharge. . Analysis of potential impacts of the physical improvements on groundwater recharge and infiltration systems. . Identification of shallow groundwater areas to determine potential impacts from dewatering during construction. . Assessment of how the various physical improvements would contribute to additional impervious surface and the subsequent potential additional impacts to surface runoff. This assessment would include potential mitigation measures. . Field surveys of groundwater discharge/recharge conditions including additional analysis of groundwater conditions with information from other geotechnical studies.                     Page intentionally left blank This page intentionally left blank.  3.13 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES AND WETLANDS This section addresses the potential impacts of the No Build Alternative and the action alternatives Build Alternative on biological resources and wetlands in the corridor. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments on project elements that have been incorporated into the Preferred Alternative (see comments A-3.59 through A-3.63). Section 3.13.4.3 below provides analysis of the Preferred Alternative. 3.13.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS Numerous federal, state, and local regulations and agencies have been enacted/created to protect biological resources. Listed below are pertinent regulations and/or oversight agencies for biological resources and wetlands. 3.13.1.1 Federal Endangered Species Act The Endangered Species Act (ESA)1 establishes protection for species that are listed as endangered or threatened by USFWS. Sections 9 and 4(d) of the ESA prohibit “take” of endangered and threatened animal species. The USFWS has jurisdiction over wildlife and resident fish; the National Marine Fisheries Service (NOAA Fisheries) has jurisdiction over anadromous fish.2 For plants, the ESA prohibits the removal or destruction of any endangered plant on federal land as well as destruction of an endangered plant species in non-federal areas in knowing violation of any state law. Section 7 of the ESA mandates that all federal agencies consult with the USFWS to ensure that federal agencies’ actions do not jeopardize the continued existence of a listed species or adversely modify critical habitat for listed species. 1 16 USC 1531-1543 2 Anadromous fish are fish that are born in freshwater, spend most of their lives in the sea, and return to fresh water to spawn. Salmon, smelt, shad, striped bass, and sturgeon are common examples. (http://www.nefsc.noaa.gov/faq/fishfaq1a.html) Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) of 1918 The MBTA3 prohibits take of most species of birds and their active nests, eggs, and nestlings, without a permit from USFWS. Activities that cause abandonment of a nest are also considered non-permitted take, prohibited by the MBTA. 3 16 USC 703-712 4 33 USC 1251-1376 5 33 USC 401 et seq 6 16 USC 661-666 Clean Water Act Under Section 404 of the CWA4, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USACE regulates the discharge of dredged, or fill material into “Waters of the United States” including wetlands. Section 401 of the CWA requires a water quality certification from the state for all nationwide or individual permits issued by the USACE under Section 404. The RWQCB is the state agency that issues Section 401 certifications. Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act Section 105 regulates construction activities in “navigable waters” including rivers. The construction of any structure in or over any navigable water of the United States, the excavation from or depositing of material in such waters, or the accomplishment of any other work affecting the course, location, condition, or capacity of such waters is unlawful unless the work has been recommended by the Chief of Engineers and authorized by the Secretary of the Army. The instrument of authorization is designated a Section 10 permit. Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act The Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (FWCA)6 requires that wildlife conservation be given equal consideration to other features of water-resource development programs through planning, development, maintenance and coordination of wildlife conservation and rehabilitation. Wildlife resources are defined by the Act to include birds, fish, mammals and all other classes of wild animals and all types of vegetation upon which wildlife is dependent. Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands Executive Order (EO) 11990, Protection of Wetlands (DOT Order 5660.1A) is an overall wetland policy for all agencies managing federal lands, sponsoring federal projects, or providing federal funds to state and local projects. It requires federal agencies to follow procedures for avoidance, mitigation, and preservation, with public input, before proposing new construction in wetlands. When federal lands are proposed for lease or sale to nonfederal parties, EO 11990 requires that the lease or conveyance contain restrictions to protect and enhance the wetlands on the property. The restrictions of this executive order apply to wetlands on military installations proposed for closure. In this capacity, EO 11990 can affect the sale of federal lands with wetlands. Compliance with Section 404 permit requirements may constitute compliance with EO 11990. Executive Order 13112, Invasive species EO 13112 directs all federal agencies to refrain from authorizing, funding, or carrying out actions or projects that may spread invasive species (including weeds). The order further directs federal agencies to prevent the introduction of invasive species, control and monitor existing invasive species populations, restore native species to invaded ecosystems, research and develop prevention and control methods for invasive species, and promote public education on invasive species. 3.13.1.2 State California Endangered Species Act The California Endangered Species Act (CESA)7 prohibits the take of state-listed endangered and threatened species unless specifically authorized by CDFW. CDFW administers the CESA and authorizes take through permits or memorandums of understanding. Section 2090 of the California Fish and Game Code requires state agencies to comply with threatened and endangered species protection and recovery and to promote conservation of these species. 7 California Fish and Wildlife Code 2050 et seq 8 California Fish and Wildlife Code Division 3, Chapter 7.5, Sections 2700-2729 9 California Fish and Wildlife Code Sections 1900 – 1913 Wildlife and Natural Areas Conservation Program The Wildlife and Natural Areas Conservation Program of the State Fish and Wildlife code gives CDFW the authority to create and administer wildlife areas.8 Native Plant Protection Act The Native Plant Protection Act (NPPA)9 includes provisions that prohibit the taking of endangered or rare native plants from the wild and a salvage requirement for landowners. CDFW administers the NPPA and generally regards as “rare” many plant species included on lists 1A, 1B and 2 of the California Native Plant Society (CNPS) Inventory of Rare and Endangered Vascular Plants of California (CNPS, 2001). Streambed Alterations California Fish and Game Wildlife Code Sections 1601-1603 The California Fish and Wildlife Game Code regulates activities that interfere with the natural flow of, or substantially alter the channel, bed, or bank of a lake, river, or stream. Lakebed and streambed alteration activities are covered under Section 1602 for public and private entities. Requirements to protect the integrity of biological resources and water quality are often conditions of Streambed Alteration Agreements SAAs administered under Sections 1600 to 1616. 3.13.1.3 Local There are no Habitat Conservation Plans in place within the project corridor.10 10 County of San Luis Obispo, 2011 3.13.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION The components of the action alternatives Build Alternative would have varying potential to result in significant environmental effects, either directly or indirectly, to biological resources in the study area as described below. This section discusses how each component was evaluated. Appendix G of the CEQA Guidelines was consulted to assist in determining whether the project would have significant impacts on biological resources. 3.13.2.1 Study Areas and Impact Footprints for Biological Resources For the purposes of this evaluation, study areas are defined as the proposed work area composed of both permanent and temporary impact areas, along with an additional 250-foot-wide buffer zone on all sides. The 250-foot buffer was selected primarily, but not exclusively, for vernal pool species and wetlands that could be indirectly affected by alterations in hydrology from project construction. This buffer also serves to define an area of potential indirect effects upon species that may be affected by construction dust, noise, fuel and oil spills, and visual disturbance. These indirect effects have the potential to disrupt normal behavior patterns (e.g., disrupt nesting or foraging) or result in the exclusion of species from these areas. Because these areas are generally already subject to rail operations, it is assumed that the operational indirect effects would be relatively similar to the baseline conditions. 3.13.2.2 Biological Resource Evaluation Sensitive Plant and Wildlife Species and Associated Habitat Impacts to special-status species were evaluated using a variety of government and private foundation databases. CDFW’s California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) records and CNPS inventories were used to first identify all species occurring in the study area vicinity. Each impacted species was crosschecked with USFWS and CNPS inventories to determine legal status, geographic distribution, habitat description, reported blooming period for plants, potential for occurrence in the study areas, and whether there are CNDDB records within the study areas. The potential for occurrence of special-status species was further assessed using the land cover type data from USFS’s CALVEG classification system and the California Fire and Resource Assessment Program (FRAP) to identify suitable habitat. The California Wildlife Habitat Relationship System – Life History Accounts and Range Maps were queried to determine wildlife species’ range and habitat requirements. NatureServe Explorer was used to determine rare wildlife species’ ranges and habitat requirements. Impacts to critical habitat for federally protected wildlife were assessed using USFWS and National Marine Fisheries Service Critical Habitat database. Potential effects to special-status were determined based on whether or not there would be direct and/or indirect impacts to suitable habitat (i.e., land cover types suitable for the species). Wildlife Movement/Migration Corridors Impacts to wildlife movement/migration corridors were identified qualitatively, wherever proposed improvements components would result in new barriers within large open areas, parks and reserve areas, creeks, rivers and riparian areas in undeveloped settings. Jurisdictional Waters and Wetlands Impacts to jurisdictional waters and wetlands were assessed using the USFWS’s National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) for wetlands and the USGS’s National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) for streams. 3.13.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT This section describes the biological and wetland resources present in the project corridor. 3.13.3.1 Biological Resources and Wetlands in the Study Area Regional Summary The project corridor is dominated largely by agricultural uses and urban/suburban areas in the cities of Salinas, Soledad, Paso Robles, Atascadero, San Luis Obispo, and many smaller communities. The Salinas River, a designated wildlife area, and a section of the Los Padres National Forest are each located within the project corridor. Each provides different degrees of habitat quality for plant and animal species. Wildlife may also be found in agricultural or urban/suburban areas, though to a lesser extent. Sensitive Vegetation Communities Sensitive vegetation communities, groups of species, both plant and wildlife, that form communities, and wildlife habitats that are unique, of relatively limited distribution in the region, or of particularly high wildlife value. These resources have been defined by federal, state, and local government conservation programs. The maps comprising Figure 3.13-1 depict these communities in relation to the existing railroad corridor. Riparian Communities Freshwater Ponds hold different plants and animals, depending on pond size and depth. Most permanent ponds support fish life; intermittent types typically do not. Algae, plankton, and pondweeds are typical of shallow lacustrine environments. Birds, mammals, reptiles, and amphibians use lacustrine habitats for reproduction, food, water, and cover.11 11 Grenfell, 1988a Riverine habitats are characterized by the presence of intermittent or continually running water, as in a river or stream. Open water zones provide resting and escape cover for many species of waterfowl, and habitat for aquatic mammals. Insects, such as nymphs of mayflies, caddisflies, alderflies, stoneflies, and their larvae, are  the most common fast stream inhabitants. Water moss and algae grow on rocks. Smaller organisms are found in slow-moving waters. The turbidity and velocity of the river have the most prominent impacts on the species that may be present.12 12 Grenfell, 1988b 13 Grenfell, 1988c 14 US Forest Service, 2009 15 Ritter, 1998 16 Cal Poly Land, n.d. 17 Caltrans, 2007, p. 3.13-6 Valley Foothill Riparian habitats are found in valleys bordered by sloping alluvial fans, lower foothills, and coastal plains. Winter-deciduous trees grow to form a canopy and subcanopy, with an understory shrub layer. Dominant species include cottonwood, California sycamore, valley oak, white alder, bozelder, wild grape, wild rose, and California blackberry.13 Terrestrial Communities Annual Grassland is the most abundant natural community in the project corridor. Where natural conditions restrict the growth of other species, exotic grasses will flourish. Exotic grass species such as wild oats, various Bromes, Foxtail Fescue, and Kentucky Bluegrass are common in these areas.14 Blue Oak Woodland communities often include California juniper and various small shrubs, in addition to the abundant blue oak trees. The term “woodland” is used instead of “forest” because woodlands tend to be more open and sunlit than forests. Blue oak woodlands are typically associated with shallow, rocky, infertile, well-drained soils in dry, hilly terrain. Blue Oak-Foothill Pine is a similar natural community found at higher elevations.15 Coastal Oak Woodland is typically found within a 50-mile radius of the coast, often in drainages in ravines between grassy hillsides. Fog is common in these areas, though soil most often remains too dry to support a forest. In addition to coast live oak trees, California blackberry, creeping snowberry, toyon, and poison oak are commonly present. Wildfire is an intrinsic part of coastal live oak woodland ecology.16 Coastal Scrub is an upland vegetation community characterized by low soft-leaved, drought-deciduous shrubs. Coastal scrub is typically found on dry sites and steep slopes, providing habitat for many endangered and threatened species.17 Mixed Chaparral is a mix of fully woody and sometimes semi-woody, low to midelevation chaparral and coastal sage scrub species. Chaparral is typically dominated by drought-tolerant shrubs with hard evergreen leaves.18 18 US Forest Service, 2009 19 US Forest Service, 2009 20 Non-sensitive land use types are considered to have a low potential of providing habitat for state of federally protected species. Regular maintenance of croplands generally make them unattractive as potential habitat. Valley Oak Woodland is located on low to moderate slopes at elevations below 4,000 feet. Valley Oaks are large, winter-deciduous trees.19 Non-Sensitive Land Use Types20 Urban land includes developed areas near towns and cities. This land can include any combination or residential, commercial, or public uses. Barren land refers to non-urban, non-agricultural, public or private land that is not under special protection under relevant state or federal laws. Cropland includes all agricultural lands, whether for grazing or production of crops. In this section, no distinction is made between various forms of cropland. For additional information on agricultural resources, see Section 3.7, Agricultural and Forest Resources. Sensitive Plant Species Sensitive plant species include those species that have been identified for special status and/or recognition by federal and state resource agencies, as well as relevant private organizations, due to concerns of documented or perceived decline or limitation of population size or geographical extent. Table 3.13-1 lists the 55 species with potential to occur in the study area, per the CNDDB. Of these 55 species, a total of 8 are known or expected to occur in the study area. Sensitive Wildlife Species Sensitive wildlife species include those species that have been identified for special status and/or recognition by federal and state resource agencies due to concerns of documented or perceived decline or limitation of population size or geographical extent. Wildlife that are legally protected or otherwise considered sensitive by federal, state, or local resource conservation agencies and organizations are all considered special-status. Special status species include those species listed in state  and or/federal threatened or endangered species records under the ESA or CESA, those considered as candidates for listing, and species recognized by USFWS and or CDFW as California species of special concern. According to a search of the CNDDB, the study area may contain potential habitat for more than 45 sensitive species of fish, invertebrates, birds, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals. Table 3.13-2 identifies each of these species and evaluates the likelihood of their presence in the study area given particular conditions. Critical Habitat It is assumed that all sensitive vegetation communities within the study area provide wildlife habitat. Certain portions of the existing rail alignment and the proposed improvements occur in areas study area are located in areas that have been designated as Critical Habitat for certain species. Designated critical habitat is defined by the USFWS as habitat believed to be essential to the conservation of a designated threatened or endangered species. The study area contains critical habitat areas for three threatened or endangered species: vernal pool fairy shrimp, California red-legged frog, and south-coast California steelhead. Figure 3.13-2 shows the distribution of critical habitat in the study area. Wildlife Movement/Migration Corridors Any large open areas, parks and reserve areas, creeks, rivers and riparian areas in undeveloped settings are considered potential wildlife movement corridors. Smaller creeks and areas of disconnected habitat can also provide connectivity for wildlife by acting as stepping stones for the regional movement of some avian species, or by providing rest areas for migratory species. At a secondary level, agricultural and even suburbanized areas can provide limited opportunities for wildlife movement. Based on the foregoing, the most likely wildlife movement/migration corridors in the study area include the Salinas River, San Marcos Creek, Santa Margarita Creek, Yerba Buena Creek, San Lorenzo Creek, Camp Roberts, the Big Sandy Wildlife Area, and Los Padres National Forest. Jurisdictional Waters and Wetlands The study area includes numerous creeks, rivers, and wetlands. These bodies are important for consideration as both jurisdictional waters and potential wildlife areas. Figure 3.13-3 shows the distribution of wetlands and jurisdictional waters in the study area.  Table 3.13-1 Special-Status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in Coast Corridor Study Area Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Abbott’s bush-mallow (Malacothamnus abbottii) –/–/1B.1 Known from Monterey County. Occurs in riparian scrub; 135-490 meters. Blooms May- Oct. Low. Suitable habitat occur in one Study Area; and several occurrences in the region No Blochman’s dudleya (Dudleya blochmaniae ssp. blochmaniae) –/–/1B.1 Known from Coastal California from San Luis Obispo County to San Diego County; Baja California. Occurs on clay soils, rock outcrops, in coastal scrub and adjacent grasslands, often on serpentinite; 5-450 meters. Blooms Apr- Jun. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if rocky microhabitat areas are present within grassland and shrubland habitats and several occurrences in the region No Brewer’s spineflower (Chorizanthe breweri) –/–/1B.3 Known from South Coast Ranges, San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on rocky or gravelly serpentinite soils in oak woodland, chaparral, and coastal scrub; 45-800 meters. Blooms Apr- Aug. High. Suitable rocky or gravelly serpentinite substrates may be present in Study Areas and many occurrences in the region No Caper-fruited tropidocarpum (Tropidocarpum capparideum) –/–/1B.1 Historically known from the northwest San Joaquin Valley and adjacent Coast Range foothills; currently known from Fresno, Monterey, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs in grasslands on alkaline hills; below 455 meters. Blooms Mar-Apr. Low. Could occur in one Study Area if suitable alkaline soils are present; one occurrence in region No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Chaparral ragwort (Senecio aphanactis) –/–/2B.2 Known from Scattered locations in central western and southwestern California, from Alameda County to San Diego County. Occurs in oak woodland, coastal scrub, chaparral, open sandy or rocky areas, sometimes on alkaline soils; 15-800 meters. Blooms Jan-Apr. Moderate. Suitable habitat present, and several occurrences in region No Chorro Creek bog thistle (aka San Luis Obispo fountain thistle) (Cirsium fontinale var. obispoense) E/E/1B.2 Known from Endemic to San Luis Obispo County. Occurs in Serpentinite seeps, drainages, and stream banks in chaparral, oak woodlands, coastal scrub, annual grassland; 35-380 meters. Blooms Feb-Jul, less often Aug- Sep. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Areas if alkaline seeps occur, several occurrences known in region No Congdon’s tarplant (Centromadia parryi ssp. congdonii) –/–/1B.1 Known from East San Francisco Bay Area, Salinas Valley, Los Osos Valley. Occurs in alkaline soils in annual grassland, on lower slopes, flats, and swales, sometimes on saline soils; below 230 meters. Blooms May-Oct, less often Nov. High. Suitable habitat may be present if alkaline soils occur in Study Areas, one occurrence known in region is in a Study Area Yes Cuesta Pass checkerbloom (Sidalcea hickmanii ssp. anomala) –/R/1B.2 Known from Cuesta Ridge, San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on serpentinite soils in chaparral; 600-800 meters. Blooms May-Jun. None. Occurs at higher elevations than Study Areas No Cuesta Ridge thistle (Cirsium occidentale var. lucianum) –/–/1B.2 Known only from fewer than 10 extant occurrences in the southern Santa Lucia Mtns. Of San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on serpentinite, often steep rocky slopes and disturbed roadsides, openings in chaparral; 500-750 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun. None. Occurs at higher elevations than Study Areas No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Davidson’s bush-mallow (Malacothamnus davidsonii) –/–/1B.2 Known from Los Angeles, Monterey, Santa Clara, San Luis Obispo, and San Mateo Counties. Occurs in coastal scrub, chaparral, oak woodland, and riparian woodland in sandy washes; 185-855 meters. Blooms Jun-Jan. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present, two occurrences in region No Dune larkspur (Delphinium parryi ssp. blochmaniae) –/–/1B.2 Known from Coastal areas of Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Ventura Counties. Occurs in maritime chaparral, coastal dunes; below 200 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun. Low. Suitable habitat may be present if maritime chaparral occurs in Study Areas, one occurrence in region No Dwarf calycadenia (Calycadenia villosa) –/–/1B.1 Known from about 20 occurrences in interior foothills of South Coast Ranges in Fresno, Kern*, Monterey, Santa Barbara, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on rocky, fine soils in chaparral, oak woodland, meadows and seeps, annual grassland; 240-1,350 meters. Blooms May-Oct. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if suitable soil type occurs, two occurrences in region No Dwarf soaproot (Chlorogalum pomeridianum var. minus) –/–/1B.2 Known from widely disjunct populations in Tehama, Colusa, Lake, Sonoma, and San Luis Obispo counties. Occurs in openings in chaparral, annual grasslands, on serpentinite outcrops; 305-1000 meters. Blooms May-Aug. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if serpentinite soil type occurs, two occurrences in region, including one in Study Area Yes Eastwood’s larkspur (Delphinium parryi ssp. eastwoodiae) –/–/1B.2 Known from Coastal San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on serpentinite substrates in openings in chaparral, annual grassland; 75-500 meters. Blooms Mar, less often Feb. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if serpentinite soil type occurs, several occurrences in region No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Hardham’s eveningprimrose (Camissoniopsis hardhamiae) –/–/1B.2 Known from South Coast Ranges, Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on sandy, decomposed carbonate in disturbed or burned areas in chaparral, oak woodland; 140- 945 meters. Blooms Mar-May. High. Suitable habitat may be present if suitable soil type and microhabitats occur, several occurrences in region, including one in Study Area Yes Hooked popcorn-flower (Plagiobothrys uncinatus) –/–/1B.2 Known from Monterey, San Benito, Santa Clara, San Luis Obispo, and Stanislaus Counties. Occurs in Chaparral on sandy soils, oak woodland, annual grassland; 300-760 meters. Blooms Apr-May. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present, and two occurrences in region No Hoover’s bent grass (Agrostis hooveri) –/–/1B.2 Known from Southern central coast, southern outer South Coast Ranges: Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs usually in sandy soils in chaparral, closed cone forest, oak woodland, annual grassland; 6-610 meters. Blooms Apr-Jul. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present, some occurrences in region No Hutchinson’s larkspur (Delphinium hutchinsoniae) –/–/1B.2 Known from Monterey County. Occurs in broadleaved upland forest, chaparral, coastal prairie, coastal scrub; below 427 meters. Blooms Mar-Jun. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present, only one occurrences in region. No Indian Valley bush-mallow (Malacothamnus aboriginum) –/–/1B.2 Known from Inner South Coast Ranges: Fresno, Kings, Monterey, San Benito, Santa Clara, and San Mateo Counties. Occurs on granitic rocky areas in chaparral and oak woodland, often in burned areas; 150-1700 meters. Blooms Apr- Oct. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if granitic rocky microhabitat is present; several occurrences in region No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Indian Valley spineflower (Aristocapsa insignis) –/–/1B.2 Known from Inner South Coast Range, Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on sandy soils in oak woodland; 300- 600 meters. Blooms May-Sep. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if granitic rocky microhabitat is present; several occurrences in region No Jared’s pepper-grass (Lepidium jaredii ssp. jaredii) –/–/1B.2 Known from Inner South Coast Ranges, Carrizo Plain and western San Joaquin Valley from Kern County south to San Luis Obispo County. Occurs in alkaline, adobe soils in grassland, in sinks, alluvial fans, and washes; 335-1005 meters. Blooms Mar-May. Low. Suitable habitat may be present if alkaline adobe soils occur in Study Areas, only one occurrence in region No Jolon clarkia (Clarkia jolonensis) –/–/1B.2 Known from Northern outer South Coast Ranges, Monterey County. Occurs in chaparral, oak woodland, coastal scrub; 20-660 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun. High. Suitable habitat is present, and several occurrences in region No Jones’ layia (Layia jonesii) –/–/1B.2 Known from Coastal Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on clay soil or serpentinite outcrops in chaparral and annual grasslands; 5-400 meters. Blooms Mar-May. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Area if suitable soil substrates are present; several occurrences in region No Kellogg’s horkelia (Horkelia cuneata var. sericea) –/–/1B.1 Known from Coastal California from San Mateo to Santa Barbara Counties, formerly further north. Occurs in openings in coastal scrub, maritime chaparral, on sandy or gravelly soils; 10-200 meters. Blooms Apr-Sep. None. No suitable habitat is present No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) La Panza mariposa lily (formerly San Luis Obispo mariposa lily) (Calochortus simulans) –/–/1B.3 Known from Southeastern outer South Coast Ranges with occurrences in Santa Barbara and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs in sandy, often granitic, sometimes serpentine soils in chaparral, oak woodland, annual grassland; 395-1,100 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Area if suitable sandy soils are present; several occurrences in region No Lemmon’s jewelflower (Caulanthus lemmonii) –/–/1B.2 Known from Southeast San Francisco Bay Area, south through the South Coast Ranges and adjacent San Joaquin Valley to Ventura County. Occurs on dry, exposed slopes in grasslands and pinyon-juniper woodland; 80-1220 meters. Blooms Mar-May. High. Suitable habitat is present, and several occurrences in region Yes Mesa horkelia (Horkelia cuneata var. puberula) –/–/1B.1 Known from Los Angeles, Orange, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Ventura Counties; extirpated from Riverside, San Bernardino, and San Diego Counties. Occurs on sandy or gravelly soils in oak woodland, maritime chaparral, and coastal scrub; 70-810 meters. Blooms Feb-Jul, occasionally Sep. Low. The CNDDB polygon for this species overlaps the study area but there is likely no suitable habitat (sandy or gravelly soils) in the study area ; Yes Miles' milk-vetch (Astragalus didymocarpus var. milesianus) –/–/1B.2 Known from Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Ventura Counties. Occurs on clay soils in coastal scrub; 20-90 meters. Blooms Mar-Jun. None. Plant occurs at lower elevations than Study Areas No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Monterey spineflower (Chorizanthe pungens var. pungens) T/–/1B.2 Known from Northern and Central Coast, San Francisco Bay in Monterey, Santa Cruz, and San Luis Obispo* Counties. Occurs in sandy areas in maritime chaparral, oak woodland, coastal dunes, coastal scrub, annual grassland; 3-450 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun, less often Jul- Aug. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if sandy soils occur in Study Areas, several occurrences in region No Most beautiful jewel-flower (Streptanthus albidus ssp. peramoenus) –/–/1B.2 Known from Eastern San Francisco Bay area, central outer South Coast Ranges in Alameda, Contra Costa, Monterey, Santa Barbara, Santa Clara, San Luis Obispo, and Stanislaus Counties. Occurs on serpentinite outcrops in chaparral, oak woodland, annual grassland, on ridges and slopes; 94-1000 meters. Blooms Apr-Sep, less often Mar and Oct Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if serpentine outcrops occur in Study Areas, several occurrences in region No Mouse-gray dudleya (formerly San Luis Obispo dudleya) (Dudleya abramsii ssp. murina) –/–/1B.3 Known from San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on serpentinite in chaparral, oak woodland, annual grassland; 90-440 meters. Blooms May- Jun. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if serpentinite substrates occur in Study Areas, many occurrences in region No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Pale-yellow layia (Layia heterotricha) –/–/1B.1 Known from Interior foothills of the South Coast Ranges, Transverse Ranges, and Tehachapi Mountains in Fresno, Kings*, Kern*, Monterey*, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo*, Ventura, and possibly San Benito Counties. Occurs on alkaline or clay soils in coastal scrub, oak woodland, pinyon- juniper woodland, annual grassland in open areas; 300-1705 meters. Blooms Mar-Jun. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if suitable substrates occur in Study Areas, several occurrences in region Yes Palmer’s monardella (Monardella palmeri) –/–/1B.2 Known from Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on serpentinite in chaparral and oak woodland; 200-800 meters. Blooms Jun-Aug. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if serpentinite substrates occur in Study Areas, several occurrences in region No Pecho manzanita (Arctostaphylos pechoensis) –/–/1B.2 Known from Pecho Hills in coastal mountains of San Luis Obispo County, also Santa Barbara County. Occurs on siliceous shale in chaparral, coastal scrub; 125-850 meters. Blooms Nov- Mar. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Area if silaceous shale occurs, only one occurrence in region No Pinnacles buckwheat (Eriogonum nortonii) –/–/1B.3 Known from Restricted to Gabilan Range of Monterey and San Benito Counties. Occurs on sandy soils in chaparral, annual grassland, often on recent burns; 300-975 meters. Blooms May-Aug(Sep). None. Plant occurs at higher elevations than Study Areas No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Recurved larkspur (Delphinium recurvatum) –/–/1B.2 Known from Central Valley from Colusa* to Kern Counties. Occurs on alkaline soils in annual grassland, saltbush scrub, oak woodland; 3-790 meters. Blooms Mar-Jun. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in two Study Area if alkaline soils occur, only one occurrence in region No Robust spineflower (Chorizanthe robusta var. robusta) E/–/1B.1 Known from Coastal central California, from Marin to Monterey County. Occurs on sandy or gravelly areas in coastal scrub, coastal dunes, and openings in oak woodland; 3-300 meters. Blooms Apr-Sep. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Area if suitable sandy openings occur, only one occurrence in region No Round-leaved filaree (California macrophylla) –/–/1B.1 Known from Scattered occurrences in the Great Valley, southern North Coast Ranges, San Francisco Bay Area, South Coast Ranges, Channel Islands, Transverse Ranges, and Peninsular Ranges. Occurs in oak woodland, annual grassland on clay soils; 15-1,200 meters. Blooms Mar-May. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if suitable soil types occur, two occurrences in region No San Antonio collinsia (Collinsia antonina) –/–/1B.2 Known from Outer South Coast Ranges in Monterey County. Occurs in chaparral and oak woodland; 280-365 meters. Blooms Mar-May. None. Plant occurs at higher elevations than Study Areas No San Benito fritillary (Fritillaria viridea) –/–/1B.2 Known from Central Coast Ranges in Fresno, San Benito, Monterey, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on serpentinite outcrops, on slopes in chaparral; 200-1525 meters. Blooms Mar-May. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Area if serpentinite substrates occur, one occurrence in region Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) San Luis mariposa lily (Calochortus obispoensis) –/–/1B.2 Known from Outer South Coast Range in San Luis Obispo County. Occurs often on serpentine soils in chaparral, coastal scrub, annual grassland; 50-730 meters. Blooms May- Jul. High. Suitable habitat is present, many occurrences in region No San Luis Obispo County lupine (Lupinus ludovicianus) –/–/1B.2 Endemic to San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on sandstone or sandy soil in oak woodland, openings in chaparral or pine-oak woodland on carbonate substrate; 50-525 meters. Blooms Apr-Jul. Low. Suitable habitat may be present if sandstone or sandy soils are present in Study Areas, only one occurrence in region No San Luis Obispo owl's-clover (Castilleja densiflora var. obispoensis) –/–/1B.2 Endemic to San Luis Obispo County. Occurs in annual grassland; 10-400 meters. Blooms Mar- May. None. No suitable habitat is present No San Luis Obispo sedge (Carex obispoensis) –/–/1B.2 Known from Outer South Coast Ranges in Monterey, San Diego, and San Luis Obispo County. Occurs often on serpentine seeps, sometimes gabbro soils in chaparral, coastal prairie, coastal scrub, and annual grassland; 10-820 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun. High. Suitable habitat is present, several occurrences in region No Santa Cruz microseris (Stebbinsoseris decipiens) –/–/1B.2 Known from Coastal California: scattered occurrences from Marin County to Monterey County. Occurs in mixed oak forest, chaparral, annual grasslands, coastal prairie, coastal scrub, and open grassy areas in other habitat types, sometimes on serpentinite; 10-500 meters. Blooms Apr-May. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present, one occurrence in region No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws (Calyptridium parryi var. hesseae) –/–/1B.1 Known from Southern San Francisco Bay, Mount Hamilton, Santa Cruz Mountains, northern inner South Coast Ranges, Monterey, San Benito, Santa Clara, San Luis Obispo, Stanislaus, and Santa Cruz Counties. Occurs in sandy or gravelly, openings in chaparral, oak woodland; 305-1530 meters. Blooms May-Aug. Low. Suitable habitat may be present if suitable microhabitat conditions occur in Study Areas, one occurrence in region No Santa Lucia dwarf rush (Juncus luciensis) –/–/1B.2 Known from Lassen, Monterey, Modoc, Napa, Nevada, Placer, Plumas, Riverside, Santa Barbara, San Benito, San Diego, Shasta, San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs in chaparral, meadows and seeps, vernal pools; 300-2040 meters. Blooms Apr-Jul. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present, two occurrences in region No Santa Lucia manzanita (Arctostaphylos luciana) –/–/1B.2 Endemic to Santa Lucia Range in San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on shale outcrops in chaparral and oak woodland; 350-850 meters. Blooms Dec-Mar. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present if shale outcrops occur in Study Areas, several occurrences in region No Santa Margarita manzanita (Arctostaphylos pilosula) –/–/1B.2 Known from South Coast Ranges: near Santa Margarita in Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on outcrops and slopes in chaparral, oak woodland; 170-1,100 meters. Blooms Dec-May. High. Suitable habitat is present, several occurrences in region Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Shining navarretia (Navarretia nigelliformis ssp. radians) –/–/1B.2 Known from Interior foothills of South Coast Ranges from Merced County to San Luis Obispo County. Occurs in Mesic areas with heavy clay soils, in swales and clay flats, in oak woodland, grassland; 76-1000 meters. Blooms Apr-Jul. High. Suitable habitat is present, many occurrences in region No Straight-awned spineflower (Chorizanthe rectispina) –/–/1B.3 Known from Outer South Coast Ranges: Monterey, Santa Barbara, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs often on granitic soils in chaparral, coastal scrub, oak woodland; 85- 1,035 meters. Blooms Apr-Jul. High. Suitable habitat is present, several occurrences in region No Toro manzanita (formerly Monterey manzanita) (Arctostaphylos montereyensis5)  –/–/1B.2 Known from Central Coast, Fort Ord, northern outer South Coast Ranges, Toro Mountain, northwestern Monterey County and San Luis Obispo County. Occurs on sandy soils in maritime chaparral, oak woodland, and coastal scrub; 30-730 meters. Blooms Feb-Mar. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in one Study Area if suitable sandy soils occur, two occurrences in region No Umbrella larkspur (Delphinium umbraculorum) –/–/1B.3 Known from Monterey, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, and Ventura Counties. Occurs in moist areas in oak woodland; 400-1600 meters. Blooms Apr-Jun. None. No suitable habitat is present No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description b Species Potential to Occur in Study Area Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) woodland woolythreads (Monolopia gracilens) –/–/1B.2 Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Monterey, San Luis Obispo, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, and San Mateo Counties. Occurs on serpentinite soils in openings in mixed oak woodland, chaparral, oak woodland, and annual grassland; 100-1200 meters. Blooms Mar-Jul, less often Feb. Low. Suitable habitat may be present in Study Areas if serpentinite soils and suitable microhabitat conditions occur, one occurrence in region No Yellow-flowered eriastrum (Eriastrum luteum) –/–/1B.2 Known from Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Occurs on sandy or gravelly soils in mixed oak forest, chaparral, oak woodland; 290-1000 meters. Blooms May-Jun. Moderate. Suitable habitat may be present in Study Areas if suitable soil types occur, several occurrences in region No Source: ICF, 2013 a Status explanations: Federal E = Listed as endangered under the federal ESA. T = Listed as threatened under the federal ESA. — = No listing status. State E = Listed as endangered under CESA. T = Listed as threatened under CESA. R =Listed as rare under the CESA. This category is no longer used for newly listed plants, but some plants previously listed as rare retain this designation. — = No listing status. Other 1B = CRPR List 1B species: rare, threatened, or endangered; rare in California and elsewhere. 2B = CRPR List 2B species: rare, threatened, or endangered; rare in California but not elsewhere. .1 = seriously endangered in California (over 80% of occurrences threatened–high degree and immediacy of threat). .2 = fairly endangered in California (20-80% occurrences threatened). .3 = not very endangered in California (<20% occurrences threatened). b Distribution information  * = presumed extirpated in that county.  ? = status within county unknown. Table 3.13-2 Special-Status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in Coast Corridor Study Area Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Fish Steelhead - south/central California coast DPS (Oncorhynchus mykiss irideus) T/SSC/- Occurs in rivers and creeks from the Pajaro River south to, but not including, the Santa Maria River. High. Study areas in the range of the species and the Salinas River and tributaries provide habitat for this species. Not in CNDDB but species is noted to occur in the Salinas River according to the National Marine Fisheries Service (2007)b Invertebrates Atascadero June beetle (Polyphylla nubile) -/-/- Known only from sand dunes in San Luis Obispo County None. No suitable habitat in the Study Areas. No California linderiella (Linderiella occidentalis) -/-/- Central Valley of California and central coastal California. Vernal pools, swales, and other ephemeral wetlands found in annual grasslands. Moderate. Potential habitat in annual grasslands. Species known to occur in region. No Conservancy fairy shrimp (Branchinecta conservation) E/-/- Disjunct occurrences in Butte, Tehama, Glenn, Placer, Yolo, Solano, Merced, Stanislaus, and Ventura counties. Found in vernal pools in swales. Most records are in large turbid pools yet they have been found in a few instances in smaller pools with relatively clear water. Low. Potential habitat in annual grasslands. Species not known to occur in region. No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Lompoc grasshopper (Trimerotropis occulens) -/-/- Occurs in San Luis Obispo and Santa Barbara counties. Little is known about the species habitat requirements. CNDDB records indicate that the species is found on exposed, weathered shale. Low. Potential habitat in annual grasslands and one occurrence in the region. No San Luis Obispo pyrg (Pyrgulopsis taylori) -/-/- Occurs in San Luis Obispo County. Snail species found in freshwater habitats, typically springs and creeks. Moderate. Potential habitat in streams and a few occurrences in the region. No Vernal pool fairy shrimp (Branchinecta lynchi) T/-/- Occurs in the Central Valley from Shasta County to Tulare County and the central and southern Coast Ranges from northern Solano County to Ventura County. Occurs in vernal pools and seasonal wetlands found in annual grasslands. Moderate. Potential habitat in annual grasslands. Several occurrences in the region. No Amphibians California red-legged frog (Rana draytonii) T/SSC/- Occurs primarily in the foothills of the central Coast Ranges, with isolated populations in the Sierra Nevada. Ponds and streams with a minimum 11–20 weeks of water for larval development, and upland refugia for aestivation. Recovery Plan identifies Diablo Range and Salinas Valley as part of historic range. High. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and numerous occurrences in the region. No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) California tiger salamander (central California) (Ambystoma californiense) T/T/- Central Valley from Sacramento County south to Kern County, including Sierra Nevada foothills, up to approximately 1,000 feet, and coastal region from San Francisco Bay area south to northeastern San Luis Obispo County. Small ponds or vernal pools in annual grasslands and oak woodlands for aquatic habitat; rodent burrows or soil crevices for adult cover during the summer. Moderate. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and a few occurrences in the region. No Coast Range newt  Taricha torosa -/SSC/- Occurs from Mendocino County south through the Coast Range and on into coastal areas of southern California. Found in woodlands that are interspersed with grassland and chaparral. Breeding takes place in streams, ponds, and lakes. High. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and several occurrences in the region. No Foothill yellow-legged frog  Rana boylii -/SSC/- Occurs in the Klamath, Cascade, north Coast, south Coast, Transverse, and Sierra Nevada Ranges up to approximately 6,000 feet. Creeks or rivers in woodland, forest, mixed chaparral, and wet meadow habitats with rock and gravel substrate and low overhanging vegetation along the edge. Usually found near riffles with rocks and sunny banks nearby. Moderate. Potentially suitable habitat in Study Area and a few occurrences in the region. No Western spadefoot toad  Spea hammondii -/SSC/- Sierra Nevada foothills, Central Valley, Coast Ranges, coastal counties in southern California. Seasonal streams and seasonal wetlands, such as vernal pools in annual grasslands. High. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and numerous occurrences in the region. Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Reptiles Black legless lizard  Anniella pulchra nigra -/SSC/- Subspecies currently distributed in Monterey County between Salinas and Carmel Rivers. Associated with a variety of vegetation types on sandy soils with accessible moisture. Low. Study areas outside species known range. No Coast horned lizard  Phrynosoma blainvillii -/SSC/- Occurs in select regions of the Coast Range, the Sierra Nevada foothills, parts of the Central Valley, South Coast, Tehacapi, Transverse, and Peninsular ranges. Inhabits sandy areas such as washes, flood plains, or windblown deposits. Usually associated with grassland, open chaparral, open coniferous forest, coastal sage scrub, and broadleaf woodlands. Moderate. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and some occurrences in the region. No San Joaquin whipsnake  Masticophis flagellum ruddocki  -/SSC/- Occurs in the southern half of the Central Valley and coast ranges south of San Francisco. Occur in open terrain and most abundant in grasslands, desert, scrub, and chaparral. High. Suitable habitat in Study Area and numerous occurrences in region. Yes Silvery legless lizard  Anniella pulchra pulchra -/SSC/- Patchily distributed from Antioch south along the coast, foothills, San Joaquin Valley, and southern Sierra Nevada. Associated with a variety of vegetation types on sandy soils with accessible moisture. Moderate. Suitable habitat in Study Areas No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Two-striped garter snake  Thamnophis hammondii -/SSC/- Occurs from the Diablo Range and the Salinas Valley south along the South Coast and Transverse ranges to the Mexican border, and on Catalina Island. Associated with permanent and semi-permanent bodies of water in a variety of habitats. Forages primarily along streams and uses mammal burrows and crevices at times for upland cover. Moderate. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and one occurrence in the region. Species likely not typically reported to CNDDB. No Western pond turtle  Emys marmorata -/SSC/- Range spans across California west of the Sierra- Cascade crest, below 5,000 feet in elevation. Forages in ponds, marshes, slow-moving streams, sloughs, and irrigation/drainage ditches; nests in nearby uplands with low, sparse vegetation. High. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and numerous occurrences in region. Yes Birds American peregrine falcon  Falco peregrinus anatum D/D(FP)/BCC Permanent resident along the north and south Coast Ranges. May summer in the Cascade and Klamath Ranges and through the Sierra Nevada to Madera County. Winters in the Central Valley south through the Transverse and Peninsular Ranges and the plains east of the Cascade Range. Nests and roosts on protected ledges of high cliffs, usually adjacent to lakes, rivers, or marshes that support large prey populations Low. The CNDDB polygon for this species overlaps the study area but there is likely no suitable nesting habitat (cliffs) in the study areas. Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Bank swallow  Riparia riparia -/T/- Occurs along the Sacramento River from Tahama County to Sacramento County, along the Feather and lower American Rivers, in the Owens Valley; and in the plains east of the Cascade Range in Modoc, Lassen, and northern Siskiyou Counties. Small populations near the coast from San Francisco County to Monterey County. Nests in bluffs or banks, usually adjacent to water, where the soil consists of sand or sandy loam. High. There are records for colonies along the Salinas River. Portions of the study areas may include suitable habitat. Yes Burrowing owl  Athene cunicularia -/SSC Lowlands throughout California, including the Central Valley, northeastern plateau, southeastern deserts, and coastal areas. Rare along south coast. Level, open, dry, heavily grazed or low stature grassland or desert vegetation with available burrows High. Suitable habitat in Study Areas and numerous occurrences in region. No California condor  Gymnogyps californianus E/E/- Populations exist in central and southern California, northern Arizona, and southern Utah, as well as northern Baja California. Species nests primarily in cavities located on steep rock formations or in the burned out hollows of oldgrowth conifers with less typical nesting occurring on cliff ledges, cupped broken tops of old-growth conifers, and nests of other species. Forage widely in open terrain of foothill grassland and oak savanna habitats. Low. No suitable nesting habitat in the Study Areas (cliffs or old growth trees) but species could forage in Study Areas. CNDBB record polygon is large and actual nesting habitat is far removed from the Study Areas. Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) California horned lark  Eremophila alpestris actia -/-/WL Year-round range spans most of lowland California. Nests and forages in open habitats with sparse vegetation, including grasslands and fallow agricultural fields. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present and some occurrences in the region. No California least tern  Sternula antillarum browni E/E(FP)/- The Pacific Coast from San Francisco to Baja California; winters in Mexico; when feeding, follows schools of fish and is sometimes seen as far north as southern Oregon. Prefers undisturbed nest sites on open or sparsely vegetated, sandy, or gravelly shores on beaches or near shallow-water estuaries where it often feeds; has reportedly also nested on landfills and paved areas. None. No suitable habitat in the Study Areas. No Ferruginous hawk  Buteo regalis -/-/BCC,WL Winter range spans most of California except the higher elevations of the Sierra Nevada and northern Coast Ranges; does not nest in California. Forages most commonly in grasslands and shrublands; also forages in agricultural fields. Moderate. Suitable winter foraging habitat present. A few records in the region. No Golden eagle  Aquila chrysaetos -/FP/BCC,WL Foothills and mountains throughout California. Uncommon nonbreeding visitor to lowlands such as the Central Valley. Nest on cliffs and escarpments or in tall trees overlooking open country. Forages in annual grasslands, chaparral, and oak woodlands with plentiful medium and large-sized mammals. Low-Moderate. Could nest in tall trees in Study Areas if present but typical nesting habitat not likely present. Suitable foraging habitat is present Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Grasshopper sparrow  Ammodramus savannarum -/SSC/- Breeding range spans much of the Central Valley and California coast, but populations are typically localized and disjunct; most individuals migrate, although some may be present year-round. Nests and forages in dense grasslands; favors a mix of native grasses, forbs, and scattered shrubs. Low-Moderate. Suitable habitat present but only one occurrence in the region. No Great blue heron  Ardea herodias -/-/- Year-round range spans most of California except the eastern portion of the State and the highest elevations; winter range expands to include eastern California. Nests colonially in tall trees; forages in freshwater and saline marshes, shallow open water, and occasionally cropland or low, open upland habitats, such as pastures. High. Suitable foraging and nesting habitat is present. Only one rookery reported in the region, yet species typically goes unreported. No Least Bell’s vireo  Vireo bellii pusillus E/E/- Formerly a common and widespread summer resident throughout Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys, and in the coastal valleys and foothills from Santa Clara County south, but its numbers have drastically declined, and the species has vanished from much of its California range. Nests and roosts in low riparian thickets of willows and shrubs, usually near water but sometimes along dry, intermittent streams; other associated vegetation includes cottonwood trees, blackberry, mulefat, and mesquite (in desert). Occurred historically in the Salinas Valley. There are CNDDB records around Paso Robles. Low-Moderate. Suitable habitat is present. Species is rare but there are recent sightings in the region. Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Merlin  Falco columbarius -/-/WL Winter range encompasses most of California except the highest elevations; does not breed in California. Forages in a wide variety of habitats, but in the Central Valley is most common around agricultural fields and grasslands Moderate. Suitable winter foraging habitat present. A few records in the region. No Prairie falcon  Falco mexicanus -/-/BCC,WL Year-round range includes eastern California, the Coast Ranges, and much of southern California; winter range expands to include the Delta, Central Valley, and coastal California. Forages most commonly in grasslands and low shrublands; also forages in agricultural fields. High. Suitable habitat is present and numerous records in the region. Yes Purple martin  Progne subis -/SSC/- Breeding range includes the Sierra Nevada, Cascade Range, portions of the Coast Ranges and coast, and parts of southern California; extirpated from the Delta, and nesting in the Central Valley has been reduced to transportation structures in and around the city of Sacramento. Nests in tree cavities, bridges, utility poles, lava tubes, and buildings; forages in foothill and low montane oak and riparian woodlands, and less frequently in coniferous forests and open or developed habitats. Low. Potentially suitable habitat is present but the species is rare in the region. No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Tricolored blackbird  Agelaius tricolor -/SSC/- Year-round resident throughout the Central Valley and the central and southern coasts, with additional scattered locations throughout California. Nests colonially in large, dense stands of freshwater marsh, riparian scrub, and other shrubs and herbs; forages in grasslands and agricultural fields. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present but the species is rare in the region. Yes  White-tailed kite  Elanus leucurus -/FP/- Lowland areas west of Sierra Nevada from the head of the Sacramento Valley south, including coastal valleys and foothills to western San Diego County at the Mexico border. Low foothills or valley areas with valley or live oaks, riparian areas, and marshes near open grasslands for foraging. High. Suitable habitat is present and species is relatively common in the region. Yes Yellow warbler  Dendroica petechial brewsteri -/SSC/BCC Range includes coastal and northern California and the Sierra Nevada below approximately 7,000 feet; mostly extirpated from the southern Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys. Nests and forages in early successional riparian habitats. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present yet the species is rare in the region. Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Mammals American badger  Taxidea taxus -/SSC/- In California, badgers occur throughout the state except in humid coastal forests of northwestern California in Del Norte and Humboldt Counties. Badgers occur in a wide variety of open, arid habitats but are most commonly associated with grasslands, savannas, mountain meadows, and open areas of desert scrub; the primary habitat requirements for the species appear to be sufficient food (burrowing rodents), friable soils, and relatively open, uncultivated ground. High. Suitable habitat is present and species is common in the region. Yes Big-eared kangaroo rat  Dipodomys venustus elephantinus -/SSC/- Found in Monterey and San Benito counties. Occurs in chaparral-covered slopes of the southern part of the Gabilian Range in the vicinity of Pinnacles. Low. Study areas are outside of the species known range. No Giant kangaroo rat  Dipodomys ingens E/E/- Current population fragmented into six major geographic units: Ciervo-Panoche in western Fresno and eastern San Benito counties; Kettleman Hills in southwestern Kings County; San Juan Creek Valley in eastern San Luis Obispo County; the Lokenr area, Elk Hills in western Kern County; Carrizo Plain in eastern San Luis Obispo County; and Cuyama Valley along the eastern Santa Barabara-San Luis Obispo County line. Occurs in annual grasslands and shrub communities with sandy-loam soils, typically with sparse vegetation. Low. Study areas are outside of the species known range No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Hoary bat  Lasiurus cinereus -/-/M Ranges widely, but populations in the Central Valley are most likely non-reproductive or migratory. Typically roosts alone in a variety of broadleaf tree species such as cottonwood and sycamore; also found roosting in conifers. May be found in a range of vegetation and roost substrates during migration. Moderate. Suitable habitat is present but there are few records in the region. No Pallid bat  Antrozous pallidus -/SSC/H Occurs throughout California except the high Sierra from Shasta to Kern County and the northwest coast, primarily at lower and mid elevations. Occurs in a variety of habitats from desert to coniferous forest. Most closely associated with oak, yellow pine, redwood, and giant sequoia habitats in northern California and oak woodland, grassland, and desert scrub in southern California. Relies heavily on trees for roosts. Moderate-High. Suitable habitat is present and there are multiple records in the region. No Salinas pocket mouse  Perognathus inornatus psammophilus -/SSC/- Found in the Salinas Valley in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Occurs in annual grasslands and desert shrub communities with fine-textured, sandy, friable soils. Moderate-High. Potentially suitable habitat is present and there are multiple records in the region. No San Joaquin kit fox  Vuples macrotis mutica E/T/- Occurs primarily in the southern San Joaquin Valley but is also found in Carrizo Plain, the inner portions of the Coast Range between Santa Clara County and San Luis Obispo County, and there are records in Contra Costa, Alameda, and San Joaquin Counties. The species occurs in grasslands and alkali scrub. High. Suitable habitat is present and there are several records within the region and in the Study Areas. Yes Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) San Joaquin pocket mouse  Perognathus inornatus inornatus -/-/- Year-round range spans the San Joaquin Valley, Delta, Sacramento Valley through Colusa County, and portions of the southern Coast Ranges. Inhabits grassland and scrub habitats with friable soils. Low-Moderate. Suitable habitat is present but only one record within the region. Yes Townsend’s big-eared bat  Corynorhinus townsendii -/SSC/H Year-round range spans most of California except the highest elevations of the Sierra Nevada south of Lake Tahoe. This species may use several alternate roost sites (Woodruff and Ferguson 2005). Typically roosts in colonies of fewer than 100 individuals in caves or mines; occasionally roosts in buildings or bridges, and rarely, hollow trees; forages in all habitats except alpine and subalpine, although most commonly in mesic forests and woodlands. Low. No typical roosting habitat is present in the Study Areas but may use them for foraging. Only a few records in the region. No Common and Scientific Names Statusa (Federal/ State/ Other) Geographic Distribution and General Habitat Description Species Potential to Occur in Study Area CNDDB Occurrences in Study Area (Y/N) Western mastiff bat  Eumops perotis californicus -/SSC/H Year-round range spans most of California, with records absent from the northwest and northeast portions of the State. Typically roosts in crevices in cliffs and rocky outcrops, in colonies of fewer than 100 individuals. May also roost in bridges, caves and buildings that allow sufficient height and clearance for dropping into flight. There is at least one record of this species roosting in an untrimmed palm tree. Forages in a variety of grassland, shrub, and wooded habitats, including riparian and urban areas, although most commonly in open, arid lands. Low. No suitable roosting habitat is present in the Study Areas but may use them for foraging. Only one record in the region. No a Status explanations: Federal E = Listed as endangered under the federal ESA. T = Listed as threatened under the federal ESA. C = Species for which USFWS has on file sufficient information on biological vulnerability and threat(s) to support issuance of a proposed rule to list, but issuance of the proposed rule is precluded. D = Delisted — = No listing status. State E = Listed as endangered under CESA. T = Listed as threatened under CESA. D = Delisted FP = Fully protected SSC = Species of Special Concern — = No listing status. Other BCC = USFWS - Bird of Conservation Concern  WL = California Department of Fish and Wildlife - Watch List  H = Western Bat Working Group – High level of concern  M = Western Bat Working Group – Medium level of concern b National Marine Fisheries Service Southwest Regional Office, 2007  Rivers and Creeks The most prominent river in the study area is the Salinas River. No proposed improvements components would involve crossing the Salinas River. Other streams in the study area include San Marcos Creek, Santa Margarita Creek, Yerba Buena Creek, and San Lorenzo Creek. The areas around each creek are considered potential wildlife habitat. Wetlands and Waters Wetlands are considered a unique biological resource for both sensitive plant and wildlife communities. A wetland is defined by meeting one of the following three jurisdictional criteria: presence of wetland hydrology, predominance of hydrophytic (literally, water-loving) plants, and presence of hydric soils. According to USFWS’s inventory of wetlands (the NWI) four types of wetlands and waters are present in the study area. Wetlands include freshwater emergent wetlands, freshwater forested/shrub wetlands; waters includes freshwater ponds and riverine environments (see Figure 3.13-3). The two types of wetlands present in the study area are described below. Freshwater Emergent Wetlands are characterized by erect, rooted aquatic plants that thrive under frequent flood conditions. In wetter areas, this includes common cattail, tule bulrush, river bulrush, and arrowhead. On the drier margins of these wetlands, big leaf sedge, baltic rush, redroot nutgrass and saltgrass can be found. Freshwater emergent wetlands occur in virtually all exposures and slopes, however they are most often found on level to gently rolling topography.21 21 Mayer and Laudenslayer, 1988, p. 124 22 Cowardin et al., 1979 23 Personal Communication with Bob Stafford on March 8, 2013 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetlands often occur adjacent to riverine habitats. They are characterized by woody vegetation, including broad-leaved deciduous.22 There are situations where riverine and freshwater pond habitats could possess emergent vegetation and thus be classified as wetlands. Nonetheless, all of the waters assessed herein are afforded the same protection under the CWA. Habitat Conservation Plans and Habitat Reserves There are no adopted Habitat Conservation Plans in the study area. The Big Sandy Wildlife Area, occupying two sections of land in the study area, is a reserve under the jurisdiction of the CDFW. CDFW has not to date adopted any plan to more specifically regulate resources within Big Sandy.23 3.13.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.13.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service. Under the No Build Alternative, passenger rail operations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo would not change. Coast Starlight service would continue through the corridor. Pacific Surfliner service to southern California would continue to originate/terminate in San Luis Obispo. The only physical improvement component expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of PTC along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. PTC equipment would likely be installed within the existing railroad ROW, likely in close proximity to the rail bed. These are highly developed areas that are unlikely to contain protected species or sensitive habitat areas. As a result, the No Build Alternative would be unlikely to result in any substantial new impacts to biological resources. 3.13.4.2 Build Alternative Construction-Period Effects Table 3.13-3 summarizes potential temporary construction-period effects for Build Alternative components. Critical habitat for special-status species is typically recorded in acreages for terrestrial or wetland habitat and linear feet for watercourses, such as streams and river. Certain proposed physical components improvements, including such as curve realignments and new or extended sidings, may in some cases would diverge substantially from the existing railroad ROW. Construction (and as described further below, operation) of such these physical components improvements would require staging areas on adjacent lands that may be protected for sensitive vegetation, special-status species, critical habitat for protected species, wetlands, or nonjurisdictional waters. Access routes to construction sites and construction staging areas could disturb biological resources by traveling through and potentially damaging these sensitive habitats. These uses would be temporary, lasting for the duration of construction. Where possible, these protected areas would be returned to pre-construction conditions. rehabilitated. Table 3.13-3 Build Alternative: Potential Construction-Period Biological Resource Impacts Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Salinas Powered Switch None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 None None None None None Spence Siding Extension 0.1 freshwater emergent wetland 10 animal species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.09 Riverine – 0.03 129 linear feet Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 None None None None None Gonzales Powered Switch None None None None None Soledad Powered Switch None None None None None Soledad New Passenger Station None None None None None Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 52.8 ac grassland 0.1 ac riverine 1.0 ac valley foothill riparian 30 animal species 6 plant species None Riverine – 0.13 302 linear feet Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Chalone Creek New Siding 21.9 ac grassland 0.1 coastal oak woodland 0.7 ac freshwater emergent wetland 1.2 ac valley foothill riparian 29 animal species 4 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.66  None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 None None None None None Coburn Curve Realignments 32.2 ac grassland 0.1 ac riverine 24 animal species 1 plant species None Riverine – 0.12 61 linear feet King City Siding Extension 4.0 ac grassland 0.1 ac freshwater emergent wetland 21 animal species 3 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.05 133 linear feet King City New Passenger Station None None None None None King City Powered Switch None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 None None None None None MP 165 Curve Realignment 21.8 ac grassland 0.2 freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.5 ac freshwater pond 24 animal species 3 plant species None Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.24 Freshwater Pond – 0.49 403 linear feet Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) San Lucas New Siding 8.9 ac grassland 0.8 ac valley foothill riparian 26 animal species 2 plant species None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 None None None None None MP 172 Track Realignment 8.5 ac grassland 0.8 ac valley foothill riparian 26 animal species 3 plant species None None 785 linear feet San Ardo Powered Switch None None None None None Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 54.3 ac grassland 1.3 ac blue oak woodland 0.9 ac coastal scrub 0.7 ac freshwater pond 3.5 ac riverine 11.7 ac valley foothill riparian 36 animal species 4 plant species None Freshwater Pond – 0.65 Riverine – 3.49 1,636 linear feet Bradley Siding Extension 34.1 ac grassland 0.7 ac riverine 4.5 ac valley foothill riparian 35 animal species 3 plant species Vernal pool fairy shrimp – 5 ac Riverine – 0.73 109 linear feet Bradley Powered Switch) None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 None None None None None Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 None None None None None McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments 6.0 ac blue oak woodland 12.4 ac coastal oak woodland 12.6 ac freshwater emergent wetland 1.2 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.1 ac riverine 16 animal species 10 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 12.57 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 1.22 Riverine – 0.11 None McKay East Powered Switches None None None None None Wellsona New Siding 4.5 ac grassland 8.8 ac blue oak woodland 14.4 ac coastal oak woodland 11.7 ac freshwater emergent wetland 1.6 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.1 ac riverine  32 animal species 9 plant species South-Coast California steelhead – 66 linear feet Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 11.68 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 1.65 Riverine – 0.15 123 linear feet Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 None None None None None Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments 8.8 ac grassland 2.3 ac blue oak woodland 1.0 ac coastal oak woodland  26 animal species 8 plant species None None None Templeton Siding 7.3 ac grassland 1.2 ac blue oak woodland 0.5 ac freshwater emergent wetland 2.1 freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.8 ac riverine 0.3 ac valley foothill riparian 30 animal species 8 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.52 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 2.11 Riverine – 0.77 267 linear feet Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments 1.7 ac grassland 2.5 ac blue oak woodland 0.1 ac blue oak-foothill pine 6.2 ac coastal oak woodland 3.3 ac unknown shrub type 23 animal species 8 plant species None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 None None None None None Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 44.5 ac grassland 25.1 ac blue oak-foothill pine 1.6 ac coastal oak woodland 10.1 ac coastal scrub 3.4 ac freshwater emergent wetland 3.3 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 1.1 ac freshwater pond 4.8 ac riverine 0.9 ac valley oak woodland 33 animal species 19 plant species California redlegged frog – 0.001 ac South-Coast California steelhead – 1,362 linear feet Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 3.40 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 3.34 Freshwater Pond – 1.14 Riverine – 4.75 5,719 linear feet Santa Margarita Powered Switch None None None None None Build Alternative Components Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Cuesta Second Main Track 10.2 ac grassland 5.4 ac blue oak woodland 14.8 ac coastal oak woodland 2.1 ac coastal scrub 0.1 ac freshwater emergent wetland 6.7 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 1.4 ac riverine 1.5 ac valley oak woodland 29 animal species 23 plant species California redlegged frog – 46 ac Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.14 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 6.67 Freshwater Pond – 0.04 Riverine – 1.41 5,986 linear feet Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 None None None None None Source: ICF, 2013  Generally, construction of any of the proposed physical components improvements that would be placed within in the existing railroad ROW (i.e., rail and track upgrades, signal upgrades, and powered switches) would result in little or no impact to adjacent protected lands and special status species, as such because construction work would take place entirely within the existing rail transportation corridor ROW. Therefore, all of the existing alignment areas listed in the Table below are noted as having no sensitive biological resources. As identified in Table 3.13-3 above, many of the proposed Build Alternative physical components improvements that would require use of land outside of the existing railroad ROW have greater potential to impact biological resources. Most of the temporary impact areas for curve realignments and the second mainline include substantial areas of land not currently in transportation use. Some of these areas host sensitive habitats and protected species, of note is the including the critical habitat areas of the California Red-Legged Frog located within the area of the proposed second mainline near Cuesta Grade and that of the South-Coast California Steelhead located within the Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment. Temporary impacts associated with one from the curve realignment at Getty/Bradley have the potential to intrude into the river during construction. As discussed above, construction activities have the potential to introduce dust, noise, fuel, and other disturbances that could indirectly affect species within the vicinity of the project alignment. The measures listed below would avoid or minimize any potential indirect effects, and the identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Operational Effects Permanent impact areas comprise the potential footprint of the new component improvement or extended ROW necessary for the specific improvement component. For those elements the components of the Build Alternative that could be constructed within or immediately adjacent to the railbed, impacts to biological resources and wetlands are not considered would not be considered significant because it is unlikely that sensitive biological resources are located within the railbed, due to train operations, and unsuitable habitat such as rocks, dirt, and the railway itself. This is expected to These Build Alternative components include track and signal upgrades and new powered switches. There is some potential for biological resources to be present outside of the railbed but within the railroad ROW. New stations are also expected to have non-significant impacts to biological resources, since they are located in urban areas and mostly surrounded by developed lands. Outside of the railroad ROW, curve realignments, several sidings, and siding extensions could have permanent impacts to biological resources. This assessment is intended to represent worst case conditions; conservative (i.e., large) impact buffers were used and the maximum potential footprint for each of the components improvements was assumed. Table 3.13-4 summarizes the potential permanent impacts to biological resources that are associated with the various components of the Build Alternative. As summarized in Table 3.13-4 below, potential permanent impacts are most likely associated with would most likely occur from the curve realignments and second mainline, as each would require lands outside the existing railroad ROW where sensitive biological resources are or are suspected of being present. The second mainline has the potential to impact approximately 26 acres of California red-legged frog habitat, several special-status species, and almost 20 acres of sensitive vegetation communities. The Bradley siding extension may impact up to 7 acres of vernal pool fairy shrimp habitat and as many as 36 special-status animal species. The Harlem/Metz curve realignments may impact over 15 acres of sensitive vegetation communities and 26 special-status animal species. The McKay/Wellsona curve realignments and the Wellsona new siding may each impact over 7 acres of freshwater emergent wetlands, and several special-status species. Additional potential biological resource impacts would result from the various other physical improvements components. There is considerable uncertainty whether some or all of the Build Alternative improvements components would be carried forward. Physical improvements components likely to be carried forward are those that most cost-effectively improve rail service. Elements Components of the Build Alternative that would require substantial biological permitting and/or mitigation would likely be deemed less feasible and less cost-effective than elements without conditions such hindrances. Information in this document Program EIS/EIR will be useful in the future preparation of detailed design plausibility for various improvements. While future design efforts are likely to make every effort to develop alignment and improvement options that will include options to minimize impact to these resources to the extent feasible, in some cases, construction and operation of the proposed physical improvements components could permanently remove or alter habitat outside of the existing railroad ROW and could result in significant/substantial effects on protected species and/or their habitat. Table 3.13-4 Build Alternative: Potential Operational Biological Resources Impacts Build Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage/ Linear Feet) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Salinas Powered Switch None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 None None None None None Spence Siding Extension None 5 animal species None Pond – 0.00 Riverine – 0.01 83 linear feet Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 None None None None None Gonzales Powered Switch None None None None None Soledad Powered Switch None None None None None Soledad New Passenger Station None None None None None Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 15.0 ac grassland 0.3 ac valley foothill riparian 26 animal species 5 plant species None None None Chalone Creek New Siding 10.4 ac grassland 0.6 ac freshwater emergent wetland 1.1 ac valley foothill riparian 28 animal species 2 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.60 None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 None None None None None Build Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage/ Linear Feet) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Coburn Curve Realignments 5.5 ac grassland 19 animal species 1 plant species None None None King City Siding Extension 3.5 ac grassland 18 animal species 3 plant species None None 100 linear feet King City New Passenger Station None None None None None King City Powered Switch None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 None None None None None MP 165 Curve Realignment 6.3 ac grassland 0.1 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.2 ac freshwater pond 24 animal species 3 plant species None Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.13 Freshwater Pond – 0.15 100 linear feet San Lucas New Siding 7.7 ac grassland 0.9 ac valley foothill riparian 26 animal species 2 plant species None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 None None None None None MP 172 Track Realignment 1.4 ac grassland  19 animal species 2 plant species None None 150 linear feet San Ardo Powered Switch None None None None None Build Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage/ Linear Feet) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 16.2 ac grassland 0.3 ac riverine 3.8 ac valley foothill riparian 35 animal species 3 plant species None Riverine – 0.26 417 linear feet Bradley Siding Extension 48.0 ac grassland 0.3 ac riverine 3.7 ac valley foothill riparian 36 animal species 3 plant species Vernal pool fairy shrimp – 7 ac Riverine – 0.27 109 linear feet Bradley Powered Switch) None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 None None None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 None None None None None McKay/ Wellsona Curve Realignments 2.4 ac blue oak woodland 4.6 coastal oak woodland 7.2 ac freshwater emergent wetland 0.7 freshwater forested/shrub wetland 13 animal species 10 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 7.20 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.65 Riverine 0.00 None McKay East Powered Switches None None None None None Build Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage/ Linear Feet) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Wellsona New Siding 3.2 ac grassland 6.1 ac blue oak woodland 8.1 coastal oak woodland 7.2 ac freshwater emergent wetland 0.8 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 30 animal species 9 plant species South-Coast California steelhead – 61 linear feet Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 7.20 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.82 Riverine – 0.04 124 linear feet Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 None None None None None Wellsona/ Paso Robles Curve Realignments 3.8 ac grassland  22 animal species 7 plant species None None None Templeton Siding 7.3 ac grassland 1.5 ac blue oak woodland 0.7 ac freshwater emergent wetland 0.8 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.4 ac valley foothill riparian 28 animal species 8 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 0.67 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.84 Riverine – 0.05 226 linear feet Templeton/ Henry Curve Realignments 0.6 ac grassland 0.6 ac blue oak woodland 2.1 ac coastal oak woodland 0.7 ac unknown shrub type 23 animal species 8 plant species None None None Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 None None None None None Build Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage/ Linear Feet) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment 13.3 ac grassland 6.1 ac blue oak-foothill pine 2.7 ac coastal scrub 0.8 ac cropland 1.4 ac freshwater emergent wetland 0.4 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.1 ac freshwater pond 0.1 ac riverine 0.0 ac unknown shrub type 1.7 ac urban 33 animal species 19 plant species None Freshwater Emergent Wetland – 1.37 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.36 Freshwater Pond – 0.11 Riverine – 0.08 305 linear feet Santa Margarita Powered Switch None None None None None Cuesta Second Main Track 8.9 ac grassland 2.4 ac blue oak woodland 6.7 ac coastal oak woodland 1.2 ac coastal scrub 0.7 ac freshwater forested/shrub wetland 0.1 ac riverine 0.6 ac valley oak woodland 28 animal species 23 plant species California red-legged frog – 26 ac Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland – 0.69 Riverine – 0.09 749 linear feet Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 None None None None None Source: ICF, 2013 3.13.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the same physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative would include modified footprints for the King City siding extension and station, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative includes a 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects on biological resources and wetlands under the Preferred Alternative would be the same as under the Build Alternative except for the areas where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess biological resource and wetlands effects from modified or excluded components. The results in Tables 3.13-5 and 3.13-6 below reflect the revised methodology discussed above in Section 3.13.2. Construction-Period Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, fewer components are proposed that would require construction activity outside of the existing railroad ROW. The Preferred Alternative excludes 4 curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County, reducing construction-period impacts to biological resources, including special-status species and wetlands. As shown in Table 3.13-5, the City of King siding extension is not expected to have any direct impact or encroachment to critical habitat areas or wetlands during construction. Additionally, there are fewer special-status plant and animal species and fewer sensitive vegetation communities identified for the City of King siding extension. Similar to the Build Alternative, construction activities associated with the King City siding have the potential to introduce dust, noise, fuel, and other disturbances that could indirectly affect species within the vicinity of the project alignment. The measures listed below would avoid or minimize any potential indirect effects, and the identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Implementation of the island CTC would not require any heavy machinery or intensive construction activity. Accordingly, no substantial new construction-period affects are anticipated to biological resources and wetlands under the Preferred Alternative. Table 3.13-5 Preferred Alternative: New Potential Construction-Period Biological Resource Impacts Build Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) King City Siding Extension 3.0 ac grassland  18 animal species 1 plant species None 0 0 King City New Passenger Station None None None 0 0 McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Source: ICF, 2015 Operational Effects Outside of the railroad ROW, physical components such as curve realignments and the second mainline could have permanent impacts to biological resources. The Preferred Alternative excludes 4 curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County, all of which had identified potential permanent impacts to biological resources and wetlands. Given the removal of these curve realignments, permanent impacts to biological resources would be reduced in these locations. The City of King siding extension has fewer potential operational impacts to specialstatus plant species, sensitive vegetation communities, and non-wetland jurisdictional waters compared to the Build Alternative (refer to Table 3.13-5 and 3.13-6). Furthermore, because the Preferred Alternative excludes 4 curve realignments assessed in the Build Alternative, overall potential permanent impacts to biological resources would be reduced under the Preferred Alternative. The island CTC would be constructed within the railroad ROW and the King City station would be located entirely within urban landscape; therefore, no impacts to biological resources or wetlands are anticipated as a result of these physical components. Table 3.13-6 Preferred Alternative: New Potential Operational Biological Resource Impacts Preferred Alternative Component Sensitive Vegetation Communities (Type/Acreage) Number of Special Status Species Critical Habitat Area (Species/Acreage) Wetlands and Waters (Acres) Non Wetland Jurisdictional Waters (linear feet) King City Siding Extension 2.7 ac grassland  18 animal species 1 plant species None 0 0 King City New Passenger Station None None None 0 0 McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment None. This component is not part of the Preferred Alternative. Source: ICF, 2015 3.13.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES Individual improvements comprising the Build Alternative should be designed to minimize impacts to biological resources along the Corridor. The measures listed below are applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and have been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. Additional avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures may also be identified during that review. Individual components comprising the Build and Preferred Alternative should be designed to minimize impacts to biological resources along the Corridor. MIN-BIO-1. Field surveys would should be conducted to determine the extent and type of general and sensitive biological resources, including focused surveys following resource agency protocols for special- status species. MM-BIO-2. Biological Resources Management Plans (BRMP) would should be prepared to specify the design and implementation of biological resources mitigation measures, including habitat replacement and revegetation, protection during construction, performance (growth) standards, maintenance criteria, and monitoring requirements. USFWS, CDFW, and USACE would review Draft BRMPs. The primary goal of a BRMP is to ensure the long- term perpetuation of the existing diversity of habitats in the study area and adjacent urban interface zones. BRMPs will contain the following: . Specific measures to ensure the protection of sensitive amphibian, mammal, bird, and plant species during construction activities. . Identification and quantification of habitats that will be removed, as well as the locations where these habitats are to be restored or relocated. . Procedures for vegetation analyses of adjacent protected habitats to estimate their relative composition; site preparation (clearing, grading, weed eradication, soil amendment, topsoil storage); irrigation, planting (container plantings, seeding); and maintenance (weed control, irrigation system checks, replanting). This information would be used to determine the requirements for revegetation areas. . Proposed sources of plant materials and methods of propagation. . Specific parameters for the determination of the amount of replacement habitat for temporary disturbance areas. . Specification of parameters for maintenance and monitoring of re-established habitats, including weed control measures, frequency of field checks, and monitoring reports for temporary disturbance areas. . Specification of performance standards for growth of re-established plant communities and cut-and-fill slopes. . Remedial measures to be taken if performance standards are not met. . Procedures and requirements to monitor all restoration/replacement efforts. . Measures to preserve topsoil and control erosion control. . Design of protective fencing around Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) and construction staging areas. . Identification of location and quantities of gallinaceous guzzlers (catch basin/artificial watering structures, if needed); specification of monitoring of water levels in guzzlers. . Location of trees that are designated as protected for wildlife habitat (roosting sites) and locations for planting of replacement trees. . Identification of the purpose, type, frequency, and extent of chemical use for insect and disease control operations as part of vegetative maintenance within sensitive habitat areas. . Specific monitoring programs for sensitive species during construction. . Specific procedures to ensure the protection of sensitive species identified for preservation. These measures may include, but are not limited to, erosion and siltation control measures, protective fencing guidelines, dust control measures, grading techniques, construction area limits, and biological monitoring requirements. . Provisions for biological monitoring during construction activities that ensure the compliance and success of the proposed protective measures. The monitoring procedures would (1) identify specific locations of wildlife habitat and sensitive species to be monitored; (2) identify the frequency of monitoring, monitoring methodology (for each habitat and sensitive species to be monitored); (3) list required qualifications of biological monitor(s); and (4) identify reporting requirements. MM-BIO-3. Mitigation techniques to protect plant and wildlife species would may include, but would not be limited to on- and/or off-site revegetation/restoration of plant species, and purchase of credits from existing mitigation banks. Requirements for mitigation ratios would vary depending on the character of the impacted plant community and whether or not it provides notable habitat for sensitive plant or wildlife species. Regulatory agencies would be consulted to determine appropriate mitigation ratios. Relocation of plants, seed collection, plant propagation, outplanting to a suitable mitigation site, and participation in an existing HCP would could be employed to mitigate for impacted plant species.24 Restoration of suitable breeding and foraging habitat, purchase of credits from an existing mitigation bank, and participation in an existing HCP would could mitigate for impacted wildlife species. 24 An HCP is a planning document required as part of an application for an incidental take permit. They describe the anticipated effects of the proposed taking, how those impacts will be minimized or mitigated, and how the HCP is to be funded. Whenever possible, on-site mitigation would be preferred to off-site. Off-site mitigation would must be located within the same watershed or in close proximity to the impact area, where feasible. MIN-BIO-4. Minimization measures would may include, but not be limited to, preconstruction focused surveys and construction monitoring. Prior to construction, focused surveys would should be conducted for sensitive plant and wildlife species identified as occurring in the study area. Locations of sensitive plant/wildlife species observed would be mapped on construction drawings. Research would must be conducted on appropriate methods to use on a species-by-species basis (i.e., transplantation, germination from seed, greenhouse propagation), and construction could would be phased around the breeding season for sensitive wildlife species (See also BRMP information above.) MIN-BIO-5. Specific measures would be developed to minimize or avoid the propagation of weeds during construction and operation. Potential preventive measures during construction could include identification of areas with existing weed problems and measures to control traffic moving out of those areas (e.g., cleaning of construction vehicles, limitations on movement of fill). Mitigation for operational impacts would be developed similarly. MIN-BIO-6. Field studies would identify locally significant wildlife movement/migration corridors beyond those discussed in this programmatic document and provide data to assist in the design of bridges and wildlife crossings at crucial travel route points. Wildlife crossings would be designed to mimic natural corridors and must be sufficiently attractive to encourage wildlife use. Where feasible, overcrossings and undercrossings for wildlife would be appropriately vegetated to afford cover and other species requirements. Functional corridors would be established to provide connectivity to protected land zoned for uses that provide wildlife permeability. Corridors would be designed using the following procedure:  . Identify the habitat areas the corridor is designed to connect; . Determine several species of interest from the species present in these areas; . Evaluate the relevant needs of each selected species; . For each potential corridor, evaluate how the area will accommodate movement according to the needs of each species of interest; . Map the corridors; . Design a monitoring program. MM-BIO-7. Delineation of jurisdictional waters and wetlands would be conducted to determine the extent of USACE and CDFW jurisdiction, and consultation with these agencies to determine appropriate mitigation would occur. . The amount of mitigation required would be assessed on an acreage basis, with ratios depending upon the nature and condition of the jurisdictional areas located within the impact areas. Whenever appropriate and feasible, on-site mitigation would be preferred. Off-site mitigation should be located within the same watershed or as close in proximity to the area of impact as possible. Mitigation options for unavoidable impacts to state and federal jurisdictional waters would include on- or off-site restoration, creation, or enhancement, mitigation banking, or in-lieu fee payments, as described below: . Restoration – Return degraded habitat to a pre-existing condition. . Creation – Conversion of a persistent non-wetland habitat into wetland (or other aquatic) habitat. The created habitat may be self-sustaining or dependent upon artificial irrigation. . Enhancement – Increase one or more functions of a replacement habitat through activities such as plantings or non-native vegetation eradication. . Passive Revegetation – Allow a disturbed area to naturally revegetate without intervention or plantings. . Mitigation Banking – Purchase of units of previously restored or enhanced wetland or waters habitat within a larger managed conservation area. These units are often known as “credits” and are typically sold by the acre. . In-Lieu Fee Program – A monetary payment would be made to an entity approved by an agency that provides habitat conservation or restoration. For example, the Nature Conservancy may receive in-lieu fee payments for impacts in all watersheds. . Current federal and state policy emphasizes a "no net loss" of wetlands habitats policy, which is usually achieved through restoration of areas subject to temporary impacts or creation of wetlands to offset permanent impacts. However, according to the January 27, 2003, Special Public Notice for Mitigation and Monitoring Guidelines, USACE favors the use of approved mitigation banks or in-lieu fee programs in the event that these programs would result in a net increase in regional or watershed benefit over on-site compensatory mitigation. Approved mitigation and in-lieu fee programs include measures designed to ensure the no net loss of wetlands policy is met. The strategies presented herein, including provisions for further study to obtain additional data and refine site-specific mitigation measures, can be expected to substantially lessen or avoid impacts to biological resources and wetlands. Impacts to biological resources and wetlands will be reduced through subsequent environmental review, ongoing consultation with resource agencies, the requirements associated with the permit-acquisition process for segments of the rail improvements, and compliance with those permit terms and conditions. Until these plans and provisions have been implemented, potential impacts to biological resources and wetlands should be considered significant and unavoidable under CEQA. 3.13.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Some plant and wildlife species require specific habitat elements that cannot be detected at the scale of this assessment. It is assumed that Further detailed analysis will be conducted prior to implementing any elements components of the Build or Preferred Alternative in order to conclusively determine the presence of biological resources in affected areas. Consultation and possibly permits may be necessary from federal and state resource agencies prior to implementing specific elements of the Build or Preferred Alternative. The consultation and permit process would result in the development of site-specific avoidance and minimization strategies. For example, permits under the CWA require the USACE to identify the “least environmentally damaging practicable alternative” or “LEDPA.” The discussion of potential impacts to various biological resources presented herein has relied primarily on the available GIS database, other GIS tools, and review of available literature. While these sources can be expected to present an accurate overview of natural resources conditions in the corridor, they may not exactly correspond to actual field conditions. In order to obtain more reliable assessments of potential impacts to biological resources, further environmental studies should be conducted prior to implementing elements components of the Build or Preferred Alternative.           Page intentionally left blank 3.14 GROWTH INDUCEMENT This section discusses the potential growth-inducing effects that could result from the No Build Alternative and action alternatives Build Alternative. The analysis considers regional and local population and employment growth trends in evaluating the potential for the alternatives to influence these trends, either directly or indirectly. As population and employment growth are closely linked to land use regulations, please also refer to Section 3.5, Land Use and Planning. Growth inducing effects of the Build Alternative action alternatives would be most prominent around existing and proposed stations, because these areas would see increases or new passenger ridership; it would have the potential to spur economic activity. As a result, this discussion is focused on the growth issues in areas immediately surrounding the existing and proposed stations (described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives). Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. Of all comments received, 4 are related to the issue of growth in the Draft Program EIS/EIR (A-3.64 through A-3.66, and A-3.72). Specifically, all of these comments relate to elements of the Preferred Alternative, analysis of which is included in Section 3.14.4.3. 3.14.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 3.14.1.1 Federal Federal Railroad Administration Under its Procedures for Considering Environmental Impacts, FRA states that an EIS should address the number and kinds of available jobs to be affected by an alternative, impacts to local government services and revenue, and impacts on commerce in communities within the immediate study area. In cases where displacement of housing is involved, FRA stipulates an assessment of the availability and adequacy of relocation housing. FRA guidance also suggests analysis of the positive and negative consequences of each alternative on growth in the community and its surrounding metropolitan area, specifically near existing business districts and the immediate study area. 3.14.1.2 State CEQA Guidelines Section 15126 states that an EIR shall “…discuss the ways in which the proposed project could foster economic or population growth, or the construction of additional housing, either directly or indirectly, in the surrounding environment.” 3.14.1.3 Local Monterey County General Plan The Monterey County General Plan contains goals and policies related to promoting appropriate and orderly growth and development. This includes growth areas in areas where adequate level of services and facilities exist or can be assured to be concurrent with growth and development. Policies also aim to encourage major industrial and commercial centers to accommodate future rail support facilities and to promote transit-oriented development around existing and future rail stations.1 1 Monterey County, 2010, p. LU-3, CIRC-11 2 City of Soledad,2012b, p. 4.4-9 3 City of Soledad, 2012a, p. 2-2 City of Salinas General Plan The City of Salinas General Plan (2002) contains policies aiming to maintain a circulation system that meets the current and future needs of the community, including collaboration with Amtrak to provide commuter rail service. Continued maintenance and expanded use of the City’s Intermodal Transportation Center is included as a priority. Implementation of the Build Alternative would potentially increase ridership of the Coast Corridor, thus would allow for expanded usage of the existing Salinas Intermodal Transportation Center, consistent with city policy. City of Soledad General Plan The Soledad Downtown Specific Plan (2012) contemplated conceptual plans for a proposed new passenger rail station (identical to the station included here as part of the Build Alternative). In its environmental review of the specific plan as a whole, the city concluded that future placement of a multi-modal train station in Soledad would be consistent with the Coast Daylight Implementation Plan.2 Furthermore, a train station would create an environment that attracts tourists and locals throughout the region.3 City of King (King City) General Plan King City adopted the First Street Corridor Master Plan, in which the city contemplated a number of land use changes, including conceptual plans for a passenger rail station. Accordingly, the city encourages the return of passenger service to King City as it would serve to benefit the community in terms of economic opportunities as well as reestablishing the historic downtown area.4 As described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design ((MMTC) (2014)). 4 City of King, 2013, p. 29, p. 82 5 San Luis Obispo County, 2009, 4-4, 4-16 6 City of El Paso de Robles, 2011 7 City of San Luis Obispo, 2006 San Luis Obispo County General Plan The San Luis Obispo General Plan includes goals and policies encouraging the use of strategic growth principles in development that create a range of housing choices, mixed land uses, preserve open space, and focus development in urban areas. Strategic growth strategies are to be implemented when planning and reviewing new development proposals.5 City of El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles) General Plan The City of El Paso de Robles General Plan contains policies and action items aimed at establishing a safe, balanced, efficient, and multimodal circulation system, focusing on the mobility of people, and preserving the city’s character. The expansion of Amtrak rail service is encouraged and included as an Action Item included within a policy to promote regional, interstate, and intra-state rail service.6 City of San Luis Obispo General Plan The San Luis Obispo General Plan supports rail transportation as an energy efficient travel option. General plan policies support the increased availability of rail service for travel within the county, within the state, and among states. Daily train service with departures and arrivals in the morning and evening, connecting San Luis Obispo with points north and south is also encouraged within the general plan.7 3.14.2 METHODS OF EVALUATION This analysis qualitatively assesses the direct and indirect growth potential of the alternatives. The study area for this analysis is mostly focused on areas immediately surrounding existing and proposed station areas, as they are the railroad’s “interfaces” where growth effects are most likely to be realized. However, other areas are also assessed. Please also refer to Section 3.5, Land Use and Planning, which addresses the potential for community impacts, a closely related consideration. Direct growth effects are those caused by any alternative occurring at the same time and place. Direct growth effects include any permanent jobs directly associated with an alternative, as well as any displacement of housing related to the from construction or operation of the proposed rail facilities project components. Indirect growth effects are considered to be reasonably foreseeable effects caused by the Build Alternative action alternatives, typically occurring later in time or further in distance from the project. These include positive or negative growth in population numbers and/or patterns, positive or negative growth in local or regional economic vitality, and associated alterations in land use patterns that could occur with implementation of the Build Alternative action alternatives. Removal of existing obstacles to growth would also be considered indirect growth effects. “Removal of obstacles to growth” would include the extension of public services and utilities to a previously undeveloped area, where the provision of such services could have a foreseeable increase in population and/or economic growth. 3.14.3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties have experienced gradual population, housing, and employment growth over the past several decades. Local agricultural and tourism industries are leading employment sectors in these counties. The Build Alternative action alternatives propose new passenger stations in the City of Soledad and King City and increased passenger rail activity at existing train stations in Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo. The stations are the only direct “interfaces” between the rail system and people and comprise the most realistic engines of growth. Therefore, this analysis focuses primarily on the station areas and their surrounding communities.  City of Salinas According to the 2010 US Census, Salinas had a population of 150,498. The Salinas General Plan Final Program EIR (2002) projects the population at the time of buildout of the General Plan (between 2030 – 2040) to be approximately 213,063 living in 58,056 housing units, which is an increase of 49 and 48 percent, respectively, over existing conditions. Based on development assumptions and historic growth rates, it is projected that by 2020, approximately 184,000 people will reside in 50,100 dwelling units and that 90,300 employment opportunities will exist in the planning area.8 8 City of Salinas, 2002b, Population and Housing 9 City of Soledad, 2005b, p. IV-4 10 City of Soledad, 2005b, p. 5.11-5 11 City of Soledad, 2012b, p. 2-62-13 12 City of King City. 2013,. First Street Corridor Master Plan. Pg32 13 King City, 2013, p. 21 City of Soledad According to the 2010 US Census, Soledad had a population of 25,738. A year earlier, the City’s 2009 Housing Element Update projected the population to increase to 33,760 by 2020. The Soledad General Plan EIR build-out scenario determined there is potential for the city to grow to 57,000 people by the year 2040.9 The city further projects a total of 22,000 jobs and 14,000 dwelling units by 2040.10 A substantial complement of projected growth is associated with the city’s Downtown Specific Plan, adopted in 2012. Existing development of the downtown area includes 437 housing units and 1,722 residents. Buildout of the Downtown Specific Plan is expected to yield 570 housing units and 1,828 people by the year 2032.11 City of King According to the 2010 US Decennial Census, King City had a population of 12,874. King City anticipates the total population to increase to 24,726 people by 2035.12 According to the First Street Master Plan, King City is growing at 4 percent per year, and is looking to add an additional 800 homes to the downtown area. Growth would encourage an increase manufacturing and service industries. A multi-modal transit center is also anticipated to spur commercial and retail developments on the First Street Corridor.13 City of El Paso de Robles According to the 2010 US Census, the City of Paso Robles population was 29,793 people. The Paso Robles Land Use Element population planning threshold for future development was 44,000 persons.14 This number includes existing dwelling units plus all proposed maximum number of potential dwelling units authorized by the Land Use Element (with a 2.7 persons per household occupancy rate). Areas for housing growth have been identified in both the east and west sides of the city. The west region includes the city’s historic core and the existing transit center station. As of December 2010, capacity for over 6,000 new units was identified for the areas.15 14 City of El Paso de Robles, 2012, p. LU-1 15 City of El Paso de Robles, 2011b, 16 City of San Luis Obispo, 2010, Housing Element 17 City of San Luis Obispo, 2010, pp. 1-23 City of San Luis Obispo According to the 2010 US Census, the City of San Luis Obispo population was 45,115 people. During workdays, the city’s population increases to an estimated 70,000 persons, accounting for the largest concentration of jobs in the County. From 1992- 2010 the rate of housing production in San Luis Obispo slightly exceeded the rate of population growth. Between 1990 and 2008, the city added about 2,700 residents, an increase of about seven percent. During the same period, the city’s housing stock grew by about 1,400 units, and increase of about eight percent.16 The San Luis Obispo Land Use Element anticipates a population of 56,750 people by 2029.17 3.14.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 3.14.4.1 No Build Alternative The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service. The only proposed physical improvement component would be the implementation of PTC along the corridor, including modification to signaling and communications equipment. These PTC related changes are not expected to result in any growth related impacts because they would neither directly nor  indirectly lead to any substantial increases in jobs, housing, or other growth-related factors at existing or proposed station areas or other locations along the rail corridor. According to the SDP, freight rail operations are likely to increase from 2 daily freight trains today to 4 daily trains in 2020 into 2040. Though not contemplated directly in the SDP, the proposed Phillips 66 Company Rail Spur Extension Project (pending approval by the County of San Luis Obispo), would, if constructed, allow for 5 weekly oil trains that would travel the entirety of the existing Salinas to San Luis Obispo rail corridor. Implementation of these projects could occur regardless of whether or not any of the proposed physical components improvements comprising the Build Alternative action alternatives are ultimately constructed. The No Build Alternative may result in regional job growth related to increased freight activity, but such growth would likely be negligible insofar as freight trains traversing the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor typically have start and endpoints outside this corridor. 3.14.4.2 Build Alternative An adverse, direct growth effect would occur if the anticipated growth associated with from the Build Alternative would exceed growth projections at local and/or regional levels. An adverse indirect growth effect would occur if the Build Alternative would involve the removal of obstacles to growth, result in negative growth associated with local and/or regional economic vitality, and/or substantial positive or negative growth in population numbers or patterns. Construction-Period Effects Direct Impacts Implementation of the Build Alternative would result in temporary employment opportunities associated with designing and constructing one or more of the proposed improvements project components. Possible job opportunities include contractor, engineer, management professional, and city planning-related positions. The anticipated degree of growth such growth of job opportunities is likely correlated correlates with the size and complexity of the Build Alternative components improvement(s) carried forward into design and construction (as well as any required environmental mitigation). Moreover, except for direct construction positions, many of these job opportunities could be fulfilled outside the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor area. Some of the curve realignments included in the Build Alternative would require the temporary/permanent acquisition and/or conversion of various lands. These activities could have growth-related effects if residential lands are involved. Conversion of residential lands to a transportation use could have a negative effect on growth. The Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment was identified as having the potential to could potentially result in the acquisition of residential property if this particular component improvement is selected to move forward. In the event that the component improvement cannot be designed to avoid take of residential properties, minor growth-related effects could occur. Consequently, such effects would be considerable for affected property owners. However, Any potential acquisition would require compliance with numerous federal and state property acquisition regulations. Nevertheless, The area of the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment is not densely populated and the growth-related impacts would be low. Indirect Impacts Construction of the Build Alternative in essence, is a direct project activity. Construction activities associated with the proposed improvements would not occur indirectly; therefore, there would not result in any indirect construction growthrelated effects because all of the potential impacts are considered direct effects. Operational Effects Direct Impacts Direct operational impacts of the Build Alternative are effects that would be directly caused by implementation of proposed project improvements components over the long-term. The Build Alternative proposes reinstitution would reinstitute the Coast Daylight passenger rail service. The additional service would require several permanent jobs to operate and service trains, as well as to manage proposed new and existing stations. No train service facility is located in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the Coast Corridor, so the potential creation of would be minimal for operations or service jobs to be created between Salinas and San Luis Obispo would be minimal. The closest maintenance area is in Los Angeles County. Potential new stations could introduce employment opportunities in Soledad and King City. Given the anticipated train schedule (2 daily trains initially increasing to 4 daily trains by 2040), there is little likelihood of substantial low potential for stations to directly affect employment resulting. In all, the passenger rail aspect of the Build Alternative would result in little direct employment-related growth effects in the Monterey and San Luis Obispo County areas. The anticipated direct growth effects around the existing and proposed station areas might best be characterized as beneficial or at least community-desired effects. Both Soledad and King City have made the proposed stations centerpieces of adopted downtown revitalization strategies. Additionally, the Cities of Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo have supported intermodal transportation development to meet the current and future needs of the community. Therefore, the Build Alternative proposed improvements components are consistent with city goals to increase rail service and expand usage of transportation facilities. None of the proposed project components would have a substantial direct impact to growth; therefore, no growth inducement would occur under the Build Alternative. Indirect Impacts Implementation of the Build Alternative would result in indirect growth related effects, particularly in areas surrounding the new proposed stations in Soledad and King City, as well as in Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo. The City of Soledad set forth goals to revitalize its downtown in its 2012 Downtown Specific Plan. The Specific Plan identifies a proposed passenger rail station site and also encourages opportunities for economic development to spur economic vitality in Soledad. Similarly, King City’s First Street Corridor Master Plan includes conceptual plans for a proposed passenger rail station. As further described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design ((MMTC) (2014)). Accordingly, these plans have been incorporated into the Preferred Alternative and discussed in Section 3.14.4.3 below. New passenger stations and increased service and the Coast Daylight Starlight service throughout the corridor would attract additional passengers and potentially attract development in and around all station areas. As a result, the Build Alternative could indirectly result in increased economic activity around both existing and proposed new station areas. Increased economic activity in these areas may indirectly influence population growth, development patterns, and tourism in the nearby area.  3.14.4.3 Preferred Alternative The Preferred Alternative would include the same service as the Build Alternative and would retain all corridor-wide and almost all of the location-specific physical components. The only differences are that the Preferred Alternative incorporates revised draft plans for the King City station (includes a modified footprint for the King City siding extension, and would exclude each of the four curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. Additionally, the Preferred Alternative explicitly includes the aforementioned 27 mile “island” of CTC between MP 202 and 229 (McKay to Santa Margarita). Accordingly, effects to growth inducement for the Preferred Alternative would be the same as the Build Alternative except where the modified or excluded components are located. The discussions below assess traffic and travel effects of modified or excluded components. Construction-Period Effects Under the Preferred Alternative, construction activities would be similar to those described under the Build Alternative. Proposed curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County are excluded from the Preferred Alternative. Some of these curve realignments considered in the Build Alternative would have required the temporary/permanent acquisition and/or conversion of various lands. As described, these activities could have growth impacts to the effected residential properties. Conversion of residential lands to a transportation use could have a negative effect on growth. Accordingly, construction-period growth effects would be expected to be lower for the Preferred Alternative than the Build Alternative. Operational Effects In the Preferred Alternative, Coast Daylight service would operate in the same capacity as in the Build Alternative and would have the same potential to induce planned, beneficial growth as the Build Alternative. None of the modified or excluded components would have a substantial impact to growth; therefore, no new growth inducement would occur with the Preferred Alternative. 3.14.5 AVOIDANCE, MINIMIZATION, AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES The individual improvements comprising the Build Alternative should be designed to minimize direct and indirect adverse growth related effects along the Corridor. As noted above, the extent of adverse growth-related effects would be limited to any required acquisition and permanent conversion of residential lands into transportation uses. As components of the Build Alternative move forward into design, avoidance/or minimization of such acquisitions should be an important consideration. The following strategy has been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The individual components should be designed to minimize direct and indirect adverse growth effects along the Corridor. The measure listed below is applicable to the Build and Preferred Alternatives and has been identified at this preliminary stage to avoid, minimize, and/or mitigate any potentially significant impacts. The identification and implementation of specific mitigation measures necessary for each project component will occur as part of subsequent project-level environmental review. MIN-GR-1. New station development would be coordinated early in project-level reviews with local jurisdictions. This would ensure that land use plans and controls can be revised and implemented in conjunction with any new station development. 3.14.6 SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS Prior to implementing any individual improvements components of the Build Alternative action alternatives, site specific evaluation would should be conducted for the need for property acquisition, including the potential for displacement of homes or businesses or substantial conflict with locally adopted land use policies. Any homes or businesses with the potential for displacement could will be studied through a relocation impact analysis. Additional environmental assessment and design development to determine alignment options during future studies will ensure a more precise evaluation of site-specific impacts and mitigation effectiveness.                  Page intentionally left blank 3.15 CUMULATIVE IMPACTS EVALUATION This section evaluates the potential for the Build Alternative action alternatives, in combination with other past, present and future reasonably foreseeable projects, to result in or contribute to cumulative environmental effects. A cumulative impact includes the total effect on a natural resource, ecosystem, or human community that is attributable to past, present, or reasonably foreseeable future activities/actions of federal, nonfederal, public, or private entities. Cumulative impacts may also include the effects of natural processes and events, depending on the specific resource in question. Cumulative impacts include the total of all impacts on a particular resource that have occurred, are occurring, and will likely occur as a result of any action or influence, including the direct and indirect effects of a federal activity. Accordingly, there may be different levels of cumulative impacts on different environmental resources. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. Of all the comments received, there were several reference issues pertinent to the cumulative analysis. Responses to each comment are provided in Chapter 5.0; this section includes analysis of the Preferred Alternative that responds to several of these comments. 3.15.1 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS Federal Under NEPA, a cumulative impact on the environment results from the incremental impact of an action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions, regardless of what agency (federal or nonfederal) or person undertakes such other actions. Cumulative impacts may result from individually minor but collectively significant actions taking place over a period of time. State Under CEQA, cumulative impacts are defined as two or more individual effects, which, when considered together, are considerable or that compound or increase other environmental impacts. The cumulative impact from several projects is the change in the environment that results from the incremental impact of the project when added to other closely related past, present, and reasonably foreseeable  probable future projects. Cumulative impacts can result from individually minor but collectively significant projects taking place over a period of time (CEQA Guidelines Section 15355). Consistent with Section 15130(a) of the CEQA Guidelines, the discussion of cumulative impacts in this program-level Program EIS/EIR focuses on significant and potentially significant cumulative impacts. Per Section 15130(b) of the CEQA Guidelines: “The discussion of cumulative impacts shall reflect the severity of the impacts and their likelihood of occurrence, but the discussion need not provide as great a detail as provided for the effects attributable to the project alone. The discussion should be guided by the standards of practicality and reasonableness, and should focus on the cumulative impact to which the identified other projects contribute rather than the attributes of other projects which do not contribute to the cumulative impact.” A project’s contribution to a cumulative impact may be considered less than significant if it is implementing a plan or program designed to avoid the cumulative impact or if it will implement or fund its fair share of a mitigation measure designed to alleviate the cumulative impact. 3.15.1.1 Methods of Evaluation The cumulative analysis describes the potential for the alternatives, in combination with related past, present and future projects, to result in cumulatively adverse environmental effects. Each analysis considers the area of cumulative analysis and identifies the relevant past, present, and future related to the potential cumulative impact. The evaluation identified whether the cumulative impact would be substantial and whether the contribution from a project alternative to a substantial cumulative impact would be considerable. Past, Present, and Foreseeable Actions and Projects Considered in the Cumulative Analysis Between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, the areas of the Coast Corridor and US 101 have served as important north-south routes for people and vehicles for more than two centuries. The relatively narrow and flat Salinas Valley facilitated the growth of El Camino Real dating back to the Mission Period in the late 18th century. Much of this historic route is now incorporated into either US 101 or nearby adjacent streets. The Coast Corridor railroad is located in generally close proximity to US 101 for much of its length, particularly between Salinas and Soledad. Railroads have  operated along most of the Salinas Valley since the late 19th century. A continuous rail route from San Francisco to Los Angeles was completed just before the turn of the 20th century.1 1 Ryan and Breschini, 2010 This cumulative impacts discussion takes into account this past history, the proposed action, and other reasonably foreseeable future actions and projects. Given the programmatic nature of this analysis, the future foreseeable actions have been drawn from two main categories - land development and transportation projects. Land development projects are likely to occur in and near the communities along the railroad. For the purposes of evaluating land development in the corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, this analysis draws on the environmental reviews of the respective county General Plans (Monterey and San Luis Obispo) and, where more fine-grained analysis is appropriate, environmental reviews of locally adopted plans. In addition, this analysis takes into account planned and programmed transportation improvement projects in the vicinity of the existing Coast Corridor rail alignment, US 101, and major local roadways. Therefore, proposed projects near US 101 are relevant to assess cumulative impacts for this program-level environmental document. These projects were obtained by review of federal and regional transportation improvement plans for Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Table 3.15-1 below summarizes the list of nearby projects assessed in this cumulative analysis. Since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, one project has been added to the list of nearby projects included in the cumulative analysis. It should also be noted that additional information has become available for one cumulative project, the Phillips 66 Rail Spur Extension Project. In November 2014, the County of San Luis Obispo published a recirculated Draft EIR for this project. Accordingly, the cumulative analysis in Section 3.15.2 below includes updated information drawn from the recirculated Draft EIR for the Phillips 66 project. Table 3.15-1 Planned and Programmed Transportation Improvements, Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties ID Number Project Title Project Description Project Location Related Regional Projects NA California High-Speed Rail Construct a high-speed rail system running from San Francisco to Los Angeles/Anaheim via the Central Valley, and later to Sacramento and San Diego San Francisco/Sacramento to Los Angeles/San Diego NA  Phillips 66 Company Rail Spur Extension (Phillips 66) Project Philips 66 proposes to modify the existing rail spur currently on the southwest side of the Santa Maria Refinery (SMR). The proposal would add up to 5 weekly trains that would likely from Utah, North Dakota, and/or Canada (based on market economics and other factors), entering the Coast Corridor somewhere from the north (likely Gilroy) and then arriving at the SMR. Nipomo (San Luis Obispo County) Monterey County NA Downtown Addition Specific Plan, City of King Adopted specific plan for a 110 acre area immediately adjacent to proposed City of King passenger station calling for up to 650 housing units and over 190,000 square feet of retail development Immediately adjacent to proposed City of King passenger station site on east side of railroad, downtown City of King CT014 US 101 - Airport Blvd. I/C East Reconstruct interchange on the eastern portion of US 101/Airport Boulevard US 101 at Airport Boulevard in Salinas CT017 US 101 Improvements through Salinas Analyze Salinas General Plan buildout traffic along the US 101 corridor through Salinas, determine mainline improvements to address long term needs and construct improvements. Between Russell/Espinosa Road and Harris Road in Salinas ID Number Project Title Project Description Project Location CT018 US 101 - Harris Road/Eastside Connector Construct new Interchange on US 101 at Harris Road and construct 4 lane connector between Harris Road and Williams Road. From US 101 at Harris Road to Williams Road in Salinas. CT019 US 101 - South County Frontage Roads Construct Frontage Roads from Harris Road to Chualar, then to Soledad US 101 between Harris Road/Abbott Street (Salinas) and Soledad GON008 Alta Street Widen and reconstruct roadway From Gonzales city limits to US 101 interchange – approx. 2 miles GON012 US 101 5th St Bridge Widening Widen 5th Street over US 101 US 101 at 5th Street, Gonzales GON013 US 101/Gloria Road Interchange Reconstruct US 101/Gloria Rd Interchange US 101 at Gloria Rd., Gonzales GRN019 US 101 – Walnut Avenue Interchange Relocate and replace existing US 101/Walnut Avenue Interchange US 101 at Walnut Avenue, Greenfield GRN023 Pine Avenue Overcrossing at 101 Construct new bridge over US 101 to improve E-W traffic flow US 101 at Pine Avenue, Greenfield KCY013 US 101 – First street interchange Extend San Antonio over railroad tracks from lone oak to US 101/First street interchange King City SNS045 Airport Boulevard Improvements Widen Airport Blvd. from Elks Lodge to US 101 and extend bike lanes Airport Blvd. from Elks Lodge to US 101, Salinas SNS084 Salinas Intermodal Transportation Center Station Improvements Upgrades to passenger service terminal and freight buildings Salinas train station SOL023 US 101 North Soledad Interchange Modify North Soledad interchange on US 101 and construct ramp improvements US 101 and Front Street (Moranda Road), Soledad SOL024 US 101 South Interchange Modify South Soledad interchange on US 101 and construct ramp improvements US 101 and Front Street (Santa Lucia Drive) , Soledad ID Number Project Title Project Description Project Location SOL025 US 101 – Camphoria Interchange Install new interchange at Camphoria-Gloria Road US 101 and Camphoria Gloria Road, Soledad SOL026 SR 146- Bypass to US 101 Construct a new road from SR 146/Metz Road at City Limits to Los Coches Drive, to South US 101 interchange City of Soledad SOL036 Camphoria Gloria Road Construct to 4 lanes From US 101 to Orchard Lane Extension, Soledad SOL044 Frontage Road Construct to 4 lanes From Front Street to Camphoria Gloria Road, Soledad TAM018 Rail Capital Improvements Includes station, platform, rail yard, track and parking improvements for the rail extension to Salinas project Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, and Monterey Counties TAM007 Rail Operations Operating costs to run two round trips per day between Gilroy and Salinas Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, San Benito, and Monterey Counties San Luis Obispo County  22300000243 Cuesta Grade to Santa Margarita Median Barrier In SLO County, collision reduction project to install concrete median barrier and improve the intersection at Tassajara Creek Road to improve traffic safety and reduce cross median collisions. US 101 22300000297 North Cuesta Grade Wildlife Fencing Project On Route 101 From 0.1 mile south of the Cuesta Grade 0verhead to 1.5 miles north of the Santa Margarita Creek Bridge and on Highway 58 from the Route 101/58 Separation to 0.9 miles east of the Route 101/58 Separation, to install black vinyl clad chain link fencing for routing of wildlife to safe under highway culvert crossings for enhancing wildlife connectivity and reduce collisions. US 101 ID Number Project Title Project Description Project Location 22300000302 Paso Robles Median Barrier Near Paso Robles, from South Paso Robles Overhead to Route 46; construct concrete median barrier. US 101 22300000303 Cuesta Grade North Retaining Wall Near San Luis Obispo, from 3.4 to 3.7 miles south of Route 58; construct retaining wall. US 101 22300000331 101 Pavement Rehabilitation near Atascadero In San Luis Obispo County, near Atascadero, rehabilitate 18.4 lane miles of pavement, dig out and repair areas of failure, seal cracks larger than 0.02 ft., and overlay existing pavement with 0.20 ft. conventional Asphalt Concrete (AC) along US 101 from north of Traffic Way UC to Vineyard Drive OC. US 101 22300000340 North County Shoulder Improvements Remove and replace shoulders from San Marcos Creek Bridge to San Luis Obispo/Monterey County lines. US 101 22300000342 North Paso Robles Rehab In San Luis Obispo county, in and near San Miguel, from San Marcos Creek Bridge to the Monterey County line, also in Monterey County (PM 0 - 1.9); pavement rehabilitation. US 101 22300000438 US 101 Collision Reduction at Various Locations In and near the city of San Luis Obispo, from Santa Maria River Bridge to Cuesta overhead at various locations; construct roadside paving, access gates, weed barriers and relocate facilities. US 101 22300000439 US 101 Collision Reduction at Various Locations (North County) In and near Atascadero, from Cuesta overhead to South Camp Roberts overhead, at various locations, construct roadside paving, access gates, weed barriers and relocate facilities. US 101 22300000440 US 101 Roadway Preservation In the city of San Luis Obispo, from San Luis Obispo Creek Bridge to 0.3 miles south of Santa Fe Bridge undercrossing, rehabilitate pavement. US 101 ID Number Project Title Project Description Project Location 22300000443 Tassajara Median Barrier Landscape Mitigation In SLO County near Santa Margarita from 0.8 miles south to 0.7 miles north of Tassajara creek road; landscape mitigation. US 101 22300000522 US 101 Highway Planting Rehabilitation In SLO County, replace irrigation pressure and lateral supply lines, repair booster pump and motor covers and install appropriate replacement plantings on Route 101 at various locations from 0.2 mile south of Tefft Street Overcrossing to 0.2 mile north of Avila Road Overcrossing. US 101 22300000523 US101/SR58 Off ramp reconfiguration In SLO County, near Santa Margarita, reconfigure Route 101 southbound off-ramp to Route 58 to abate illegal left-turn movements at Route 101 southbound off-ramp terminus. US 101 Sources: Transportation Agency for Monterey County, 2010; SLOCOG, 2013 3.15.2 CUMULATIVE IMPACT ANALYSIS The cumulative impacts analysis follows the same order of environmental topics as Chapter 3.0, Affected Environment. In considering cumulative effects at the program level, there is no substantial difference between the Build and Preferred Alternatives and, unless otherwise noted, for purposes of analysis the past and future projects are the same. In general, the Preferred Alternative would result in fewer/lesser impacts than the Build Alternative in the areas where components have been modified or excluded. For the purposes of this analysis, the following discussions summarize the effects of the action alternatives as equally applicable to both the Build and Preferred Alternatives unless otherwise noted. The No Build Alternative is mentioned only when there are potential cumulative impacts that could result from not proceeding with either action alternative the Build Alternative. Where the No Build Alternative would not result in impacts by 2020, or where the existing conditions would not change (or future conditions were considered too speculative to predict), the No Build Alternative is not addressed 3.15.2.1 Traffic and Travel Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis for effects related to on traffic and travel include the US 101 corridor, the existing Coast Corridor railroad, roadways around existing and proposed train stations, and other major roadways between San Luis Obispo and Salinas. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The Build Alternative traffic and travel analysis determined that Construction of many of the proposed physical improvements components would have potential to temporarily disrupt freight and passenger rail; but these effects would be temporary limited to active construction periods. Based on the analysis included in the SDP, the railroad between Salinas and San Luis Obispo can accommodate projected future levels of both freight and passenger traffic without significant disruption of on-time service. Near existing and proposed passenger station areas, automobile traffic is anticipated to increase with the introduction of proposed Coast Daylight passenger rail service near existing passenger stations in Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo, and at proposed stations in Soledad and King City. Despite these localized effects, increased passenger rail ridership is anticipated to result in small reductions in vehicle miles traveled/automobile traffic on US 101. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could affect traffic and travel include transportation and land development projects in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties, including the Phillips 66 Project and the City of King’s Downtown Addition Specific Plan, each of which are discussed in more detail below. Potential for Cumulative Effects: The Build Alternative action alternatives, when combined with other transportation and land use development projects, may result in increased traffic levels near existing and proposed station areas that could worsen level of service at key intersections and thus cumulatively affect traffic in these locations. The potential for cumulative traffic impacts effects is considered below for land development projects, roadway transportation projects, and rail transportation projects. It should be noted that recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.1, Traffic and Travel of this Final Program EIS/EIR would be incorporated in future development of any particular component of the action alternatives Build Alternative to lessen any traffic or travel impacts. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative action alternatives and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures regarding traffic and travel. Therefore, the Build Alternative would not contribute considerably to any cumulative impact related to traffic/transportation. Land Use Projects: In particular, The City of Soledad identified cumulative traffic impacts regarding from new traffic in the downtown area generated as part of its Downtown Master Plan. This cumulative impact was based on the entire program of land development, one component of which was a rail passenger station and passenger train service identical to those elements of the action alternatives Build Alternative considered here. The action alternatives Build Alternative would not result in any new, not previously disclosed cumulative impact in the Soledad station area. However, buildout of the Downtown Master Plan (including the new passenger station and additional service) would result in a cumulative traffic impact Similarly, the City of King concluded that a cumulative traffic impact would result from implementation of the Downtown Addition Specific Plan. The Downtown Addition Specific Plan emphasizes residential and commercial uses that are intended to capitalize on its adjacency to the proposed City of King rail passenger station. In its EIR for the Downtown Addition Specific Plan (2008), the City of King concluded that buildout of the Downtown Addition area would result in a cumulative traffic impact at the intersection of Broadway Circle and the US 101 NB ramp (located approximately 1 mile west of the proposed City of King passenger station).  Additionally, as described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, since publication of the Draft EIS/EIR the City of King has adopted draft revised plans for the Multi-Modal Transportation Center – Conceptual Design ((MMTC) (2014)). The action alternatives are focused on making rail system improvements. The Soledad and City of King land use projects were based in part of a presumption of passenger rail expansion and related rail system improvements. The key land use components of the action alternatives are the new station areas in Soledad and the City of King. Both cities identified potential cumulative effects on traffic resulting from buildout of respective downtown plans. The action alternatives -- assuming they incorporate expanded passenger rail service with stops in these cities -- would not be adding any intensity or density to these projects beyond that which has been previously analyzed at conceptual levels. Therefore, the action alternatives would not contribute considerably to any cumulative land development impact. Roadway Transportation Projects: Other roadway projects in the vicinity entail operational- and safety-related improvements to US 101 and other major roadways. While construction may include impacts such as temporary detours and lane closures, most of the construction work would occur within or immediately adjacent to the roadway. Once these improvements are implemented, they would be consistent with existing roadway use. Therefore, the action alternatives Build Alternative combined with other transportation projects in the Central Coast region would not cumulatively affect traffic or travel in the study area. Rail Transportation Projects: Phillips 66 proposes to modify has proposed to improve and make operational the existing rail spur to its Santa Maria refinery (SMR) near the community of Nipomo to allow accommodate up to five weekly trains delivering crude oil. It is anticipated that some of the oil trains would travel from points north and east, entering the Coast Corridor at San José and traveling south to the SMR. However, oil trains could also arrive at the SMR via a southern route that would not use any portion of the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. It is expected that the majority of the trains would travel south on the Coast Corridor to the SMR, likely entering the corridor at San Jose. All but one existing siding (Templeton) are of sufficient length to accommodate the proposed Phillips 66 trains. A draft EIR for the Phillips 66 project did not identify any substantial impacts to on-time train performance and did not identify any need for any new physical rail facilities necessary in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo area. The additional freight traffic associated with the Phillips 66 proposal is consistent with anticipated longterm increases in freight traffic as considered in the Coast Corridor SDP. Given that the Build Alternative would improve elements of the existing rail infrastructure, and would likely create and increase the length of multiple sidings, potentially including the Templeton Siding, the Build Alternative combined with the Phillips 66 Project and other potential increases in freight rail using the corridor, would not result in a cumulative impact. The recirculated Draft EIR noted that three of the existing rail sidings between Salinas and San Luis Obispo (Bradley, McKay, and Templeton) are currently too short to accommodate the anticipated length of proposed oil trains. The action alternatives would extend the length of two of these insufficient sidings (Bradley and Templeton) such that oil trains could be accommodated. The recirculated Draft EIR concludes that there would be no cumulative rail traffic effect, the conclusion based in part on the SDP’s analysis of future freight traffic on the Coast Corridor. Notwithstanding the lack of a cumulative or even project-level rail effect, the Draft EIR includes a mitigation measure calling for the project applicant (Phillips 66) to coordinate with UPRR in the scheduling of oil trains to minimize potential interference with all passenger trains on the Coast Corridor (existing Coast Starlight and Surfliner trains and prospective Coast Daylight). Accordingly, since the action alternatives are intended to allow for expansion of passenger rail without disruption to existing or projected levels of freight traffic and the Phillips 66 project recirculated Draft EIR includes mitigation to coordinate with UPRR to reduce passenger rail conflicts, no cumulative effect regarding rail traffic would result. 3.15.2.2 Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis for effects to air quality and GHG emissions includes the North Central Coast and San Luis Obispo County Air Basins. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The action alternatives would be constructed in two different air basins that are in attainment for most criteria pollutants, but are both subject to substantial emissions from previously developed roadway and railroad systems. The Build Alternative action alternatives would potentially result in new air quality and GHG emissions from construction of any or all of the physical components improvements and from increased train operations (locomotive emissions). These emissions would be somewhat lower for the Preferred Alternative compared to the Build Alternative because it would exclude four curve realignment areas in San Luis Obispo County. However, the Build  Alternative both action alternatives would potentially offset some of these emissions over time as increased rail passenger ridership associated with on the Coast Daylight would result in small reductions in regional air pollutant emissions and GHGs. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could affect air quality include other land development and transportation projects within the cumulative analysis area (the respective air basins), the construction or operation of which would result in increased regional emissions. Potential for Cumulative Effects: With regard to regional effects, neither County concluded that General Plan buildout would result in cumulative air quality or GHG emissions impacts. In the EIR for its Downtown Specific Plan, the City of Soledad concluded that specific plan buildout (which included -- but was not limited to -- the proposed passenger station and reinstitution of railroad passenger service) would contribute considerably to a cumulative adverse impact on regional air quality. Because this previously identified cumulative impact is directly related to proposed station area and railroad service included as part of the Build Alternative action alternatives, the action alternatives would not contribute any further to this cumulative impact. The recirculated Draft EIR for the Phillips 66 project concluded that operations of new oil trains accessing the Santa Maria Refinery would result in cumulatively considerable emissions of NOX and GHGs. As described in Section 3.2, the action alternatives would result in reduced regional VMT and would decrease regional emissions of air pollutants. Overall, the Build Alternative action alternatives, when combined with planned and programmed transportation improvement projects, may affect air quality and GHG emissions in the two counties and the larger region over time. The planned and programmed transportation improvements are heavily focused on capacity optimizations of existing roadways in the project vicinity. No widening or other physical expansion of US 101 is planned, although some local streets in the vicinity of US 101 are planned to be widened or expanded. Operations of improved roadways could result in an increase in VMT and correlating increases in vehicle emissions. Construction of these transportation improvements as well as of and anticipated land development projects would entail one-time, construction-period emissions of air pollutants and GHGs. Project-specific environmental reviews of these components improvements would likely incorporate conditions of approval and/or mitigation measures intended to limit construction-related period emissions. Therefore, there would not likely be a cumulative impact related to construction emissions. Operations of improved roadways could result in an increase in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and related increases in vehicle emissions. As noted above, the Build Alternative presents some action alternatives are likely to result in some small potential reductions in emissions of air pollutants and GHGs through an expected mode shift from automobile to passenger rail. Passenger rail has considerably lower GHG emissions per passenger mile than other modes, including aircraft, passenger cars and light-duty trucks. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.2, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions, would be incorporated in future design and environmental documentation of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives moved forward for construction. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative action alternatives and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures for air quality and GHG emissions. Therefore, the Build Alternative action alternatives would not contribute considerably to any cumulative impact related to air quality or GHG emissions. 3.15.2.3 Noise and Vibration Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area for cumulative analysis includes approximately a .-mile radius from individual components of the Build Alternative action alternatives. This area is based on the extent to which potentially significant noise and vibration can travel from the existing railroad and proposed physical improvements components. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: Existing roadways and railways are major contributors to ambient noise and vibration levels. Generally, noise will continue to grow as population increases and use of these existing highways and railroads increases. The Coast Corridor study area travels through many agricultural areas with low population density as well as urban and developed areas action alternatives would increase noise and vibration levels to sensitive receptors in these areas, owing to expanded passenger rail service and physical improvements particularly when trains sound their horns, travel at faster speeds, or where the tracks are realigned closer to residential areas. The Build and Preferred Alternatives differ notably in the potential to result in noise on nearby sensitive receptors. The Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in populated areas of San Luis Obispo County; the Draft Program EIS/EIR concluded the potential for these curve realignments to result in potential noise effects. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that have noise and vibration impacts include other land development and transportation projects within the cumulative analysis area, where the construction or operation of which would result in increased noise and vibration. The City of King’s Downtown Addition Specific Plan noted the potential for a cumulative effect to result from automobile traffic noise along San Antonio Drive approximately 1/2-mile north of the proposed passenger station. Given this distance, the action alternatives would be unlikely to contribute considerably to this cumulative effect. Potential for Cumulative Effects: A substantial portion of the existing railroad alignment between Salinas and San Luis Obispo is located within . mile of US 101, so rail and traffic noise can combine to result in cumulative effects. Similar to the Build Alternative as a whole components of the action alternatives, proposed transportation improvements, and planned land development projects would be phased in over time. Construction noise associated with any Build Alternative action alternative components selected for implementation along with noise associated with the construction of transportation improvements and land development projects would be unlikely to combine into cumulatively significant impacts. In terms of operational impacts, the proposed transportation improvements would likely facilitate higher traffic volumes and would result in higher noise levels at locations in close proximity to US 101. Where these improvements are in close proximity to both the railroad/proposed improvements and sensitive receptors, there is the potential for railroad and highway noise to combine into a cumulatively significant impact. The Build Alternative’s action alternatives’ major noise contribution would be the noise associated with passing trains - 2 per day in the opening year and up to 4 per day in the horizon year of 2040. From any point along the railroad, train passings would be relatively short duration events - about 1 minute per train, or up to 4 minutes per day. If constructed, the Phillips 66 project could add 5 weekly oil trains (of about 80 cars in length) to the portion of the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. These passings would be longer than those of shorter passenger trains, but were not found to result in cumulative noise effects per the recirculated Draft EIR. In contrast, roadway transportation noises increases would likely occur for much longer durations - potentially several hours. Given the short duration of passing trains and associated noise, the Build Alternative’s action alternatives’ contribution would likely not be cumulatively considerable.  Similarly, train activity at the existing and proposed stations would result in changes in the noise and vibration environment at these locations. However, trains would be traveling at relatively low speeds in and out of the station areas for relatively few, short durations and would thus be unlikely to result in any cumulatively significant effect. Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures consistent with the strategies outlined in Section 3.3, Noise and Vibration would likely be incorporated in future development of any particular component of the Build Alternatives action alternatives to lessen any noise or vibration-related impacts. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to subject to CEQA and/or NEPA environmental review and would thus be expected to incorporate feasible measures to avoid or lessen any identified noise and vibration impacts. Therefore, the Build Alternative action alternatives would not contribute considerably to any cumulative impact related to noise or vibration. 3.15.2.4 Energy Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of analysis for energy cumulative effects includes Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties and the Central California region as a whole. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The Build Alternative action alternatives would result in construction energy usage for the manufacture of materials and the use of heavy equipment, construction worker travel to and from active work sites, and potential construction-related detours. The Build Alternative action alternatives would also include expansion of passenger rail service, which would require energy resources (petroleum products) for locomotive power. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could have energy impacts include any other development projects within the cumulative analysis area, where the construction or operation of which would result in the consumption of energy. Potential for Cumulative Effects: The Build Alternative action alternatives, along with existing and anticipated transportation and land development projects would result in the consumption of energy resources. Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties have planned and programmed several transportation improvement projects that would require energy resources for construction and would facilitate increased operational energy consumption through increased road VMT. Planned land use development projects would require energy resources during both construction and operation. Together, the Build Alternatives action alternatives with other transportation and land use development projects could constitute significant cumulative energy impacts. However, the Build Alternative action alternatives would ultimately reduce transportation energy consumption by increasing passenger ridership and by increasing the efficiency of the existing railroad operations. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.4, Energy would be incorporated in the design and development of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives to lessen any energy consumption impacts. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the action alternatives and would thus be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures. Therefore, the Build Alternative action alternatives would not contribute considerably to any cumulative impact related to energy usage. 3.15.2.5 Land Use and Planning Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis for effects to land use and planning includes Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties, particularly the communities in proximity to the existing railroad and the Build Alternative action alternatives (including Salinas, Chualar, Gonzales, Soledad, Greenfield, King City, San Ardo, Bradley, San Miguel, Paso Robles, Atascadero, Templeton, Santa Margarita, and San Luis Obispo). Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: Land use patterns along the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the railroad have been generally stable for several decades. Development has largely been focused within established communities. With a few notable exceptions, outside existing communities, lands are generally in agricultural/viticultural use, institutional use, or open space. Construction activities could result in temporary land use impacts and could include road closures and traffic detours, which could in turn disrupt access to public facilities, emergency vehicle access, and pose potential physical barriers to communities and business districts. All curve realignments, as well as several sidings and extensions, would require acquisition of lands outside the existing railroad ROW and the conversion of these lands to railroad use. Acquisition of adjacent agricultural, residential, and open space lands would result in an incompatible land use, and could result in environmental justice impacts. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could affect land use and planning include transportation and land development projects in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Potential for Cumulative Effects: The Build Alternative action alternatives, in combination with related transportation and land development projects could contribute to cumulative impacts to land use, communities, property, and environmental justice. In terms of land use compatibility, the Build Alternative action alternatives would help foster planned development around proposed station areas in Soledad and King City. Increased passenger rail service could also help reinforce the visitorserving land uses patterns around existing train stations in Salinas and Paso Robles. The San Luis Obispo station area is primarily residential in character, but also includes some visitor-serving mixed-use development along Osos Street, which could be reinforced by the Build Alternative the increased passenger rail activity that the action alternatives would introduce. Therefore, within established communities, the action alternatives Build Alternative would have complementary and beneficial effects to land use compatibility. Outside of established communities, curve realignments and siding improvements could result in the permanent conversion of lands from agricultural, residential, or open space uses into transportation use. Some siding improvements and the bulk of other physical components improvements would be constructed immediately along the existing rail line or within the railroad ROW. In contrast, planned land development and transportation projects are less likely to result in land use conversions. Land development projects face generally welldefined urban growth boundaries and/or local limitations on the conversion of agricultural lands. Planned transportation improvements primarily involve operational enhancements that would not require substantial additional ROW or direct conversion of residential, commercial, or agricultural land uses to transportation uses. As the extent to which the Build Alternative might The Draft Program EIS/EIR noted that the Build Alternative could result in a cumulatively significant land use impact if one or more of the curve realignments is ultimately constructed and would convert substantial residential related to the possible construction of curve realignments, particularly those that would result in substantial conversion of residential and/or agricultural lands to a transportation use. The Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County that had potential to incorporate residential and agricultural lands into transportation use. Accordingly, the Preferred Alternative would result in somewhat less potential for cumulative effects than the Build Alternative. The Preferred Alternative retains curve realignments in Monterey County. Other sections of this Final Program EIS/EIR note the potential for the Monterey County curve realignments to result in substantial effects on agricultural lands. Project-level design refinements and funding availability would determine if any of any carried forward curve realignments would ultimately result in conversion to non-agricultural use and if any cumulative impact would occur. Similarly, property impacts are unlikely for most of the anticipated land development and programmed transportation projects improvements. Land development projects generally proceed only with the consent of the property owner and would be unlikely to result in the use of private property. Programmed transportation projects are set planned to generally occur within or immediately adjacent to the area’s existing transportation facilities. As no major roadway expansion projects are included in the list of programmed improvements transportation projects, the potential for substantial conversion of private property is minimal. In contrast, certain components of the Build action alternatives have a much greater potential to require property acquisition. These components include curve realignments and other features for which only schematic plans have been developed; final plans could require acquisition of land outside the existing railroad ROW. Since the extent to which the Build action alternatives might result in property acquisition is unknown, it is assumed the Build action alternatives could result in a cumulatively significant property impact if one or more of the curve realignments are deemed necessary and property acquisition proceeds accordingly. As noted above, the Preferred Alternative omits four San Luis Obispo County curve realignments, thus substantially reducing the need for land acquisition/property impacts in San Luis Obispo County. Project-level design refinements and funding availability will determine if any of the curve realignments would ultimately result in private property acquisition and if any cumulative impact would occur. 3.15.2.6 Aesthetics and Visual Resources Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis for effects to visual resources and aesthetics includes the viewshed, or the visible environment, surrounding the Build Alternative action alternatives’ study area. The Build Alternative action alternatives entail about 130 miles of railroad and existing/proposed station areas, all in relative proximity to the US 101 corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Summary of Build Action Alternative Impacts: The visual analysis determined that construction and operation of some of the proposed physical components improvements could result in visual impacts. In general, construction impacts include the temporary visual presence of construction equipment, light and glare impacts from any nighttime construction work, and disturbed natural land cover that would recover to its original undisturbed form once construction is complete. Operational impacts include physical changes to the additional passenger and freight rail cars over time, existing land cover, particularly where new track alignments would convert existing land cover in residential and open space areas to railroad use. The Build Alternative, in combination with related transportation and land development projects could contribute to cumulative visual impacts. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could affect aesthetics and visual resources include transportation and land development projects in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Potential for Cumulative Effects: According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, future growth within Monterey County would result in intensification of existing urban land uses, as well as conversion of open space into urban land uses. The General Plan EIR concluded that the conversion of undeveloped land to urban uses, future land development projects would obstruct views of scenic areas and would result in a significant cumulative impact to visual character and quality in the County. In considering the potential of the Build Alternative action alternatives to combine with land development and transportation projects to result in cumulative visual impacts, it is important to note that proposed the transportation projects would have negligible visual impacts because the improvements would largely occur within or immediately adjacent to existing transportation corridors, resulting in relatively little overall change in visual character or quality. The Phillips 66 project could result in additional rail transport activity, but such these activities are consistent with the visual context of the rail corridor and would be unlikely to result in substantial/significant visual effects. Additionally, Build Alternative action alternative improvements components such as track and signal upgrades, new powered switches, and new sidings and siding extensions, would also largely occur within or adjacent to the existing railway ROW and would result in minimal visual effects. However, curve realignments would result in some conversion of agricultural, open space, and residential lands to rail transportation use. Such This conversion could permanently alter the visual character of affected areas. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.6, Aesthetics and Visual Resources, would be incorporated in the design and development of any particular component of the Build Alternative to lessen any visual character/quality impacts. The Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County, thereby reducing the potential of the Preferred Alternative to result in cumulative visual impacts between McKay and Santa Margarita. Since both the Build and Preferred Alternatives retain curve realignments in Monterey County, as the extent to which the Build Alternative might result in such conversion is unknown, it is assumed here that the Build Alternative action alternatives could result in a cumulatively significant visual impact if one or more of the curve realignments is ultimately constructed and would convert substantial areas of residential or agricultural land to a transportation use. Project-level design refinements and funding availability would determine if any of the curve realignments would ultimately result in such conversion and if any cumulative impact would occur. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.6, Aesthetics and Visual Resources would be incorporated in the design and development of any particular component of the action alternatives to reduce any visual character/quality impacts. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures. 3.15.2.7 Agricultural and Forest Resources Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area considered for cumulative impacts to farmlands includes Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties, as described in Section 3.7, Agricultural and Forest Resources. Summary of Build Action Alternative Impacts: Many of the components of the Build Alternative action alternatives would require construction outside the existing railroad ROW outside urban areas and, in several locations, would require the temporary use of farmland during construction and/or the permanent conversion of farmland. Summary of Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could affect agriculture and forest resources include transportation and land development projects in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties, particularly those occurring outside of urban areas. Potential for Cumulative Effects: According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, buildout of the General Plan would cumulatively contribute to conversion of Important Farmland to non-agricultural uses. Some farmland conversion is also anticipated in San Luis Obispo County, but very little Prime Farmland conversion is expected in either county, owing to strong farmland protection measures each county has adopted. The City of King identified a cumulatively considerable effect on agriculture in its EIR for the Downtown Addition Specific Plan. The City found that implementation of the Specific Plan could considerably contribute to the conversion of agricultural lands. In addition, the recirculated Draft EIR for the Phillips 66 project identifies a potential significant and unavoidable effect on agricultural lands. In the event of an oil train derailment and/or spill, the effect would occur along the UPRR mainline (including, but not limited to, the portion between Salinas and San Luis Obispo). The action alternatives would not contribute considerably to either of these effects. In the City of King, the action alternatives include a passenger station that would be located within the urbanized area of the City and would not result in any conversion of farmland. The revised draft plans for the City of King’s siding extension have the potential to indirectly affect agricultural lands north of the City, but these effects would be limited or avoided entirely if the siding extension can be located within the railroad ROW. The action alternatives contemplate expanded passenger rail service along the Coast Corridor. The risk of agricultural damage resulting from the potential derailment of a passenger train would be far less than that which could result from the derailment of an oil train. This is because an oil train would carry up to 80 rail cars of crude oil or related products; a passenger train would typically carry only enough fuel to power the locomotive. Accordingly, a passenger train derailment presents far less risk to adjacent agricultural lands than an oil train derailment or spill; the action alternatives would not contribute considerably to this cumulative impact. Proposed transportation improvements projects would largely take place within the footprint of US 101 or other adjacent roadways in the region and would be unlikely to combine with the Build Alternative action alternatives to result in any significant cumulative effect to agricultural or forest lands. Furthermore, Build Alternative the action alternatives' components, improvements such as track and signal upgrades, new powered switches, sidings and siding extensions, would also largely occur within or adjacent to the existing railway ROW and would have little effect to agricultural land. Curve realignments would result in conversion of agricultural lands to rail transportation use. The conversion would permanently alter the affected areas and could contribute to agricultural conversion effects from other land development projects in the region. The action alternatives include differing levels of curve realignments. The Preferred Alternative has four fewer curve realignments than the Build Alternative. Both action alternatives include curve realignments in Monterey County. All of the proposed curve realignments in Monterey County would be located in highly agricultural areas; the conversion of any Monterey County farmland would be considered a significant and unavoidable impact. The extent to which the Build Alternative action alternatives might result in conversion is unknown, it is assumed here that the Build Alternative action alternatives could result in a cumulatively significant impact on farmlands if one or more of the curve realignments is ultimately constructed and would convert substantial areas of agricultural land to a transportation use. Project-level design refinements and funding availability would determine if any of the curve realignments would ultimately result in such conversion and if any cumulative impact would occur. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.7, Agricultural and Forest Resources, would be incorporated in the design and development of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives to lessen any farmland related impacts. However, loss of Prime Farmland impacts cannot be mitigated to a less-than-significant level even though conservation easements and other measures may lessen the impact. 3.15.2.8 Public Utilities and Services Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area considered for cumulative effects to utilities and public services correspond to the service areas of the particular utility and public service (police and fire) providers. Natural gas providers PG&E and SCE respectively serve substantial portions of northern and southern California. Electricity is provided by PG&E, whose service area extends from Shasta County to Santa Barbara County. Water and wastewater services are provided by a combination of local special districts and private companies whose service areas extend well beyond the immediate boundaries of the project study area. Police and fire services are provided either by County agencies, whose jurisdiction spans the entirety of the affected counties, or by local agencies, who serve incorporated communities along the project corridor. Summary of Action Alternative Impacts: Utility conflicts: Proposed new and/or extended sidings, along with the proposed second mainline, have the potential to conflict with existing utility transmission facilities in and around the existing railroad ROW.  Utility usage: Some components of the Build Alternative action alternatives would require connections to public utilities such as water, electricity, and natural gas. Proposed new stations would likely be the most utility intensive Build Alternative components; powered switches and signaling mechanisms would also require electricity. Public service demand generation: The vast majority of physical components improvements comprising the Build Alternative action alternatives, such as railroad sidings/extensions or curve realignments, would have a neutral effect on increasing demand for public services like fire and police. In contrast, proposed new stations could require increased police and fire services; increased ridership at existing stations could also increase demand for public services. Present and future projects that could affect utilities and public services include transportation and land development projects not only in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties, but potentially points well beyond when considering gas and electric providers, which operate across multiple regions in the state. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could affect public utilities and services include transportation and land development projects in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties. Potential for Cumulative Effects: In terms of utility conflicts, the components of the action alternatives Build Alternative that would require construction of new linear facilities either inside or outside the railroad ROW may conflict with existing pipelines, electrical transmission lines, communication facilities, or other linear utilities. The severity of these impacts can usually be lessened substantially through a combination of careful design, avoidance, and/or protection-in-place policies, as called for in the mitigation strategies discussion presented here in discussed in Section 3.8, Public Utilities and Services. Similarly, future transportation projects may require construction/grading in or near existing transportation facilities like US 101, where similar utility conveyances can be found. As it is reasonable to expect that Because other projects would be subject to similar mitigation to avoid or minimize any utility conflicts, there would be no cumulatively significant impact regarding utility conflicts. Regarding electric and gas utilities, the Build Alternative action alternatives would, in combination with planned/anticipated land development in the Central Coast region, result in additional demand for electricity and natural gas. The Build Alternative action alternatives would require additional utilities primarily at  proposed stations and electric power specifically for signal upgrades and switching equipment. Similarly, Demand for water and wastewater services would also increase as a result of planned land development combined with the Build Alternative action alternatives. Demand for police and fire services would likely increase from both planned transportation and land development projects. Proposed transportation enhancements projects would facilitate additional vehicle travel on US 101 and adjacent roadways thus increasing. This increase in vehicle travel has the potential to result in an increased frequency of accidents on US 101 due to a heavier flow of traffic, and thus could lead to an increased demand for emergency response services. Additional railroad freight traffic as well as all and land development called for in adopted local plans would similarly increase demand for emergency response. In particular, the Phillips 66 project, per its recirculated Draft EIR, would result in significant and unavoidable project-level and cumulatively considerable effects on emergency response services in the event of an oil train derailment, spill, or similar emergency. Individual rail components improvements, such as curve realignments and the second mainline, would have no foreseeable connection to increased demand for public services. New or expanded station areas could incrementally contribute to increased demands for public services (police response, emergency services, etc.). However, the anticipated increase in station area activity would be modest, even in the two communities where new stations are planned. Neither of the environmental documents for the Soledad or King City station area/downtown plans indicated any significant effect to public services as a result of plan implementation. Anticipated increases in passenger activity at the Salinas and San Luis Obispo stations are not at such high levels that substantial public services impacts could occur. even in the two communities where new stations are planned. Neither of the environmental documents for the Soledad or King City station area/downtown plans indicated any significant effect to public services as a result of plan implementation. Anticipated increases in passenger activity at the Salinas and San Luis Obispo stations are not at such high levels that substantial public services impacts could occur. It is unlikely that implementation of the Build Alternative action alternatives in conjunction with other planned development projects would result in a cumulative impact to emergency services; however, future project-level review will include coordination with emergency service providers to ensure no significant impacts would occur.  Disruption of utility services could occur as a result of potential conflicts with electric transmission lines, natural gas pipelines, oil pipelines, wastewater and water utilities, and other utilities during construction of other roadway improvement projects (US 101 and local roads). However, measures would be taken to avoid potential conflicts in advance to the extent feasible and practical; therefore, few additional conflicts are expected from future transportation improvements. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.8, Public Utilities and Services, of this Final Program EIS/EIR would be incorporated in future development of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives to lessen impacts on utilities and public services. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative action alternatives and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures regarding for utilities and public services. Therefore, the cumulative impact related to utilities and public service providers operating in the Central Coast region would not be substantial. 3.15.2.9 Hazardous Materials and Wastes Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis considered for hazardous materials effects includes the areas identified within 1/8-mile radius around the Build Alternative study area, including major roadways between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: Overall, there is potential risk to uncover hazardous materials near roadways and agricultural areas within the entire Coast Corridor study area, because of the potential for aerially deposited lead and particulate matter deposited from vehicles (both automobiles and trains), as well as pesticide use along the railroad and along roadways. As a result, construction activities may encounter contaminated soil containing pesticide or herbicide residue, aerially deposited lead, or other soil or groundwater contaminants. Furthermore, database searches identified both active- and closedstatus hazardous sites within the study area. The Build Alternative action alternatives would not result in sustained, long-term, routine transportation of hazardous materials. However, the Phillips 66 project proposes increased use of the railroad for transport of crude oil, a potentially hazardous substance if mishandled. Since the action alternatives would not routinely transport hazardous materials, they would not contribute considerably to any related cumulative effect. Present and future projects that would cumulatively risk exposure to hazardous materials or wastes include other transportation and land use development projects. The construction of both types of projects, similar to the Build Alternative action alternatives, would require the use of materials that could be considered hazardous if used, stored, or transported improperly. Such materials are strictly regulated by federal, state, and local laws specifically to ensure they do not result in a gradual increase in toxins in the environment. Both counties reinforce these regulations by requiring that construction and operation be conducted pursuant to in accordance with applicable standards and regulations. These are implemented as part of normal development review and construction permitting procedures and typically reduce project-specific impacts to a less-than-significant level. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could have hazardous material and waste impacts include transportation and land development projects in Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties, as well as the Phillips 66 project. Potential for Cumulative Effects: Compliance with federal, state, and local regulations concerning the storage and handling of hazardous materials and waste would reduce the potential for significant public health and safety impacts from hazardous materials to occur. Therefore, future development would not affect the number of people exposed to risks of hazardous materials. Risks of encountering a recorded hazardous waste site are location-specific and would not contribute to (in an additive sense) the impacts on other sites. The present and future projects within close proximity to the study area are generally geographically disperse and it is not anticipated that they would use quantities of hazardous materials that would combine in a way that would endanger human or environmental health. However, other transportation projects may encounter contaminated soil containing pesticide or herbicide residue, aerially deposited lead, or other soil or groundwater contaminants along major roadways. The Phillips 66 project, if approved, would add up to five weekly freight trains carrying crude oil through the entirety of the Salinas to San Luis Obispo corridor. This would be in addition to existing freight traffic that includes periodic transport of oil from San Ardo south to refineries in the Los Angeles area. The action alternatives would not transport large quantities of hazardous materials by rail and would not contribute considerably to any cumulative effect. The Build Alternative would not contribute to any increase in freight rail or more specifically the transport of hazardous materials by rail. Overall, hazardous materials are regulated by state and federal laws specifically to ensure that they do not result in a gradual toxification of the environment. Recommended mitigation strategies identified in Section 3.9, Hazardous Materials and Wastes, would lessen the adverse effects to hazardous materials as a result. Similar mitigation measures would be implemented as part of the present and future projects to alleviate potential adverse effects to hazardous materials. Each individual project would be required to conduct subsequent environmental analysis to investigate and report any findings of contaminated soil or groundwater. Therefore, it is not anticipated that there would be any cumulative impact related to hazardous materials or wastes. 3.15.2.10 Cultural and Paleontological Resources Area of Cumulative Analysis: The cumulative context for cultural resources are transportation and land use development projects in both counties that could potentially affect archaeological, historical, or paleontological resources. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The Build Alternative action alternatives propose physical components improvements near potentially historic and archaeological sites, as well as some and paleontological sensitive areas. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that would cumulatively affect cultural and/or paleontological resources include other transportation and land use development projects that would affect the same cultural or paleontological sites as the Build Alternative action alternatives. Potential for Cumulative Effects: Both County General Plan EIRs concluded that build out (encompassing both land development and circulation improvements) would not result in any significant cumulative impact to cultural resources. Cumulative impacts to cultural historical resources can occur when development of an area results in the removal of a substantial number of historic structures, archaeological sites, or paleontological resources that when taken in combination could degrade the physical historical record of an area. Cultural resources - both known and unknown-- are protected by a number of federal, state, and local regulations, reinforced by goals, policies, and mitigations associated with each county’s general plan as well as the planning documents of county transportation agencies. Furthermore, recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.10, Cultural and Paleontological Resources, of this program level EIS/EIR would be incorporated in future development of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives to lessen any impacts on these resources. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would  be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative action alternatives and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures. Therefore, there would be no cumulatively significant impact to cultural resources. 3.15.2.11 Geology, Soils, and Minerals Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area considered for cumulative effects related to for geology and soils includes any proposed land development or transportation projects in the vicinity of the Build Alternative action alternatives. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: Geology and soilsrelated hazards exist within and near the Coast Corridor rail alignment, as well as where Build Alternative physical components improvements are proposed. These hazards include varying degrees of surface fault rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, corrosive and/or expansive soils, and landslides. The Build Alternative action alternatives are not expected to have any significant impacts related to geology and soils with the implementation of avoidance and minimization measures. Present and Future Projects: As environmental effects to geology and soils are located in the same geologic setting, both present and future transportation and land development projects would be exposed to similar hazards. Potential for Cumulative Effects: The respective General Plan EIRs noted that future build-out and urbanization would result in greater exposure of persons and property to geologic and soil hazards, but that adherence to goals and policies, as well as County and local building codes and other mitigation measures, would not combine to result in a cumulative impact related to geology and soils. Cumulative geology and soils impacts could occur if a significant number of people and/or a significant amount of property would be exposed to any one or more geologic/soils hazards, landslides, seismic shaking, ground failure, and many others. It is unlikely that the Build Alternative action alternatives, in combination with projected land development and transportation projects, would result in a cumulatively significant impact related to geology/soils hazards or mineral resources. This is due to the enactment of a number of federal, state, and local regulations, as well as several adopted goals, policies, and mitigations associated with in local general plans that individually and collectively aim to reduce geology and soils related impacts on all land development and transportation projects. Similarly, mineral resources are protected at the local level. Future transportation  projects are generally planned for existing transportation corridors and land use projects for urbanized areas; as such, neither type of project would be likely to result in limitation of access to important mineral resources. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.11, Geology, Soils, and Minerals, of this Final Program EIS/EIR would be incorporated in future development of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives to lessen any impacts on these resources. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would likely be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative action alternatives and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures. Therefore, there would be no cumulatively significant impact to geology, soils, or minerals. 3.15.2.12 Hydrology and Water Resources Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis for hydrology resources includes the Build Alternative action alternatives study area identified plus and nearby and related watersheds. These include the Salinas River and its tributary drainages. In addition, regional groundwater basins are also part of the cumulative study area. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The Build Alternative action alternatives could result in potential impacts to surface waters through runoff during construction activities, operation-related pollution in areas immediately adjacent to surface waters, and potential surface water crossings as further described below. The Build Alternative action alternatives would have relatively little potential to deplete groundwater resources or impede groundwater recharge. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could contribute to cumulative impacts to the identified water resources within the area of cumulative analysis include transportation and development. Potential for Cumulative Effects: According to the Monterey County General Plan EIR, general plan buildout would result in significant and unavoidable cumulative hydrological impacts related to from the loss of area available for groundwater recharge, water quality deterioration, and water supply. In contrast, the EIR for the San Luis Obispo County Conservation and Open Space Element (COSE) reduced the amount of allowable development from what had been previously allowed thereby reducing potential in order to reduce impacts related to groundwater depletion and other water quality impacts. In evaluating whether the Build Alternative action alternatives would contribute considerably to cumulative hydrological impacts, it is important to note that the Build Alternative neither action alternative would not directly result in any major new demand for water resources because they would not create any new housing units, any new maintenance facilities, or new commercial or industrial users, all of which could be substantial users of water. Moreover, the Build Alternative’s action alternatives’ effects to surface waters can be avoided or minimized through careful design. The Build Alternative action alternatives would not result in a substantial number of new stream crossings. The Preferred Alternative, in its inclusion of the revised draft plan for the City of King siding extension, reflects the proposed design. The revised draft plan would extend the siding only on the north side of the existing siding, avoiding a southern extension which would have required a stream crossing and be located within a 100-year flood plain. Recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.12, Hydrology and Water Resources, of this program level Program EIS/EIR would be incorporated in future development of any particular component of the Build Alternative action alternatives to lessen any impacts on these resources. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative action alternatives and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures. Therefore, there would be no cumulatively significant impact to hydrology and water resources. 3.15.2.13 Biological Resources and Wetlands Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area of cumulative analysis for biological resources includes the study area identified for the Build Alternative plus action alternatives and any immediately adjacent lands and waterways containing sensitive biological resources (sensitive habitats or protected plant or animal species). Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The biological resources and wetlands analysis determined that the Build Alternative action alternatives would have a heightened potential to result in temporary or permanent impacts directly proportional to the extent to which components of the Build Alternative diverge substantially from the existing railroad ROW onto lands that include sensitive vegetation, special-status species, critical habitat for protected species, wetlands, or non-jurisdictional waters. For example, one of the proposed curve realignments could the Build Alternative includes a proposed curve realignment (McKay/Wellsona) that could entail use of lands within a designated wildlife area (Big Sandy) along the Salinas River near Camp Roberts. However, if some or all of this curve realignment can be designed to avoid or minimize its intrusion into the wildlife area, the extent of potential impact would be reduced considerably. The Preferred Alternative omits this entire curve realignment and would avoid an intrusion on the wildlife area. Present and Future Projects: Present and future projects that could contribute to cumulative impacts to the identified biological resources within the area of cumulative analysis include planned transportation and development projects. Cumulative Effects: Neither County’s general plan EIR identified any significant cumulative impact related to buildout of their respective general plans. However, the Build Alternative action alternatives, in combination with other land development and transportation projects in the area, could result in significant threats to protected plant or animal species or their habitats if significant new barriers to wildlife movement were created or if substantial areas of wetlands were converted or otherwise compromised. Cumulative impacts to these resources are highly unlikely to occur in part due to a broad array of federal, state, and local regulations, as well as several adopted goals, policies, and mitigations associated with in local general plans that individually and collectively aim to protect biological resources like these from harm, degradation, or other diminishment. Moreover, the Build Alternative action alternatives and other transportation projects in the area are planned in areas that are largely previously developed - existing roadways and railroads. Land development projects are generally concentrated within urbanized areas, away from both biological and agricultural resources. The aforementioned federal, state, and local regulations would act together to avoid or minimize such effects cumulative impacts to biological resources including wetlands. Wildlife movement in the vicinity of the Build Alternative action alternatives occurs within and along the major waterways, including the Salinas River and tributaries. The Build Alternative action alternatives in combination with future transportation improvements projects would primarily affect existing linear facilities and would not create new barriers to wildlife movement. Land development projects that are concentrated in urban areas would have the least potential to interfere with wildlife movement; however, certain types of projects outside urban areas (solar farms, oil and gas fields, and other large-scale projects) could result in new barriers to wildlife movement. A review of projects in planning stages in each county indicates that some such of these facilities are being proposed but at substantial distances (at least 25 miles east) from the railroad ROW.2 Furthermore, even if these large-scale developments were to result in a significant cumulative impact, the contribution of the Build Alternative action alternatives would not be considerable for the reasons articulated herein, including because of their distance from the railroad ROW. 2 In Monterey County, the proposed California Flats Solar project would create a 280 megawatt solar energy facility on 1,900 acres in the southeastern corner of Monterey County. This project area is about 25 miles northeast of Paso Robles. Additionally, a 550 megawatt solar power plant is proposed and a 250 megawatt solar power plant has been approved in the Carrizo Plain area of San Luis Obispo County. The Carrizo Plain area is separate from the Coast Corridor rail alignment by more than 50 miles and rugged mountain terrain. As elements of the Build Alternative action alternatives move forward for further design and construction, they would be subject to the recommended mitigation and avoidance strategies outlined in Section 3.13, Biological Resources and Wetlands, of this Program EIS/EIR in the form of project-specific mitigation measures. Similarly, the construction and operation of anticipated transportation and land development projects would be required to abide by similar environmental review processes as the Build Alternative and would be expected to incorporate similar mitigation measures. Therefore, there would be no cumulatively significant impact to biological resources and wetlands. 3.15.2.14 Growth Inducement Area of Cumulative Analysis: The area for cumulative analysis of growth inducing impacts includes all three existing stations in the study area (Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo), as well as the two proposed station areas in King City and Soledad. This area is centered around existing and proposed stations insofar as stations comprise the main potential for a passenger railroad project to directly or indirectly affect population, employment, or economic growth. Summary of Build Alternative Action Alternative Impacts: The Build Alternative action alternatives would have the potential to result in minor but beneficial growth-related effects in and around the existing and proposed station areas. The proposed new stations would be located in communities that have endorsed the stations as components of larger downtown revitalization and growth plans (including Soledad’s Downtown Specific Plan and the City of King’s Downtown Addition Specific Plan, First Street Corridor Master Plan, and West Broadway Master Plan). Given the nature of existing and proposed passenger rail service, such growth is more likely to be within the realm of visitor-serving and tourism related uses. Existing and proposed passenger rail service would not have schedules suited to commuting; therefore, there would be relatively little potential for substantial transit-oriented development associated with access to major employment centers. However, increased rail activity as a result of the reintroduction of Coast Daylight service would also bring about locally-desired, visitor-serving activity and growth potential in the existing Salinas, Paso Robles, and San Luis Obispo station areas. Present and Future Projects: A project would be considered growth inducing to the extent it facilitated new population or employment growth beyond itself. For example, a single residential development would result in a larger population within a community but would be considered growth-inducing only if it included elements that had the potential to further increase population or employment growth, such as extended transportation or service infrastructure. Potential for Cumulative Effects: The proposed transportation improvements are expected to improve operations on US 101 and existing/adjacent roadways without any substantial physical expansion. Other minor roadway improvements would be similarly focused on operational enhancements. However, it is envisioned that commuter rail service (Capitol Corridor) will eventually be extended to Salinas. The advent of commuter service would have the potential to increase the attractiveness of the Salinas area to workers in the Silicon Valley area attracted to the generally lower housing prices in the Salinas valley relative to those in greater San José. The environmental review for the commuter rail extension noted that the potential growth-related effects would be beneficial insofar as growth would likely be concentrated in and around the proposed station area and the commuter rail service would help reduce area transportation related effects. Additionally, the Downtown Addition Specific Plan within the City of King projects future development near the station area to include an additional 650 housing units and over 190,000 square feet of retail. As discussed in Section 3.14, Growth Inducement, none of the project components would have a substantial direct impact to growth; therefore, no growth inducement would occur under the action alternatives. New passenger stations and the Coast Daylight service throughout the corridor would attract additional passengers and potentially attract development in and around all station areas leading to a possible indirect effect on growth. However, such growth is planned for in city documents as cities have made the proposed stations the centerpieces of adopted downtown revitalization strategies. Taking all of the above into account, there would be no significant and adverse cumulative impact related to of growth inducement. 3.16 NEXT STEPS IN PROJECT DEVELOPMENT NEPA This program-level EIS/EIR assesses environmental impacts that could potentially result from implementation of improvements to the Coast Corridor. As outlined in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, the Build Alternative proposes improvements to the existing railway and contemplates expanded passenger service (i.e., Coast Daylight between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Of these improvements, some, all, or none may eventually be constructed. As such, future project-level environmental analysis would be required for any selected improvement prior to permitting, construction, and operation. This combined Record of Decision (ROD) and Final Program EIS/EIR serves two major purposes. The Final Program EIS/EIR includes a complete program level assessment of environmental impacts that could potentially result from implementation of any of the alternatives and identifies appropriate mitigation strategies that will be refined in project-level environmental analysis. The ROD selects the Preferred Alternative. Consequently, once approved by the state and federal lead agencies, this program-level EIS/EIR would serve as an important source of corridor-wide information, particularly with regard to the potential for various components of the Build Alternative to result in substantial costs associated with the avoidance, minimization, or mitigation of environmental effects. Together, the ROD and Final Program EIS/EIR complete the programmatic NEPA review for the Coast Corridor Improvements project. Lead Agency Roles SLOCOG and FRA have mutually commenced this program-level EIS/EIR to comply with NEPA and CEQA. FRA is the NEPA lead agency; SLOCOG is the CEQA lead agency. Any future decisions related to advancing and ultimately constructing the proposed rail improvements may constitute a federal action if federal funding or other federal permits are required and may thus require additional project-level environmental review under NEPA. Other federal agencies in addition to FRA may also rely on these project-level environmental reviews to support future decision making. In preparing this environmental document, FRA has coordinated with the US EPA, USAC), the US Army, and the USFWS, among others. The preparation, circulation, and review of a draft Program EIS/EIR provides for the evaluation of the No Build Alternative and Build Alternative; the assessment of all significant/adverse environmental impacts; and the opportunity for public and agency input and comments to help inform the decision-making process. CEQA After the final Program EIS/EIR is complete, according to CEQA Guidelines § 15090, SLOCOG, as the lead CEQA agency, shall certify that: Regarding programmatic CEQA review, as CEQA lead agency, SLOCOG is anticipated to certify the following: . The Final Program EIS/EIR was completed in compliance with CEQA; . The Final Program EIS/EIR was presented to the decision-making body of the lead agency, and that the decision-making body reviewed and considered the information contained in the final EIR prior to approving the project; and . The Final Program EIS/EIR reflects the lead agency’s independent judgment and analysis. Similarly to the CEQA process, the NEPA lead agency, FRA, shall comply with FRA’s Procedures for Considering Environmental Impacts (64 FR § 28545) and may issue a Record of Decision (ROD). The ROD is the final step in the NEPA process. If SLOCOG makes the above certifications and approves the Preferred Alternative as the project, SLOCOG will issue a Notice of Determination (NOD). Issuance of the NOD would complete the programmatic CEQA process. Of the components that comprise the Preferred Alternative, some, all, or none may eventually be constructed. The partner agencies will continue to coordinate with the owner of railroad to determine the extent of components needed to allow for expanded passenger rail service. The decision to advance specific components will be prioritized by funding availability, the efficacy of the given component, and timeframe. Future Implementation Any required project-level environmental analysis under NEPA and/or CEQA will precede the permitting, construction, and operation of any individual Preferred Alternative component. Future implementation of Build Alternative improvements would require further design and potentially site-specific environmental review. At such a time, this Program EIS/EIR would support future approvals and potential financing decisions necessary to implement the proposed improvements by identifying environmental constraints that influence development techniques, construction recommendations, and mitigation strategies. Future projects would potentially include one or more of the Build Alternative components noted in this Program EIS/EIR. As indicated in the Service Development Plan, decisions to move specific components forward would be prioritized by funding availability, the efficacy of the given improvement, and timeframe. One or more improvements could constitute a project-level proposed action under NEPA if a federal action was involved and a project under CEQA. Any proposed project would require a detailed project description, construction plans, staging areas, and potential property acquisitions in advance. Once a project component begins is formalized and begins the project-level environmental review process, local agencies, resource planners, and permitting authorities would need to be will be involved to ensure that the project’s footprint impacts are adequately assessed. The applicant project proponent would also need to provide appropriate public outreach programs to provide and opportunities for input on issues, concerns, potential design refinements, and environmental impacts processes. As determined by site-specific circumstances, future project-level analysis could require consultation and involvement of USFWS, CDFW, EPA, USACE, RWQCB, the California Department of Parks and Recreation, SHPO, NAHC, and others as appropriate. According to CEQA Guidelines § 15168(e), when a law other than CEQA requires public notice when the agency later proposes to carry out or approve an activity within the program and to rely on the Program EIR for CEQA compliance, the notice for the activity shall include a statement that: . The activity is within the scope of the program approved earlier, and . The Program EIR adequately describes the activity for the purposes of CEQA.                       Page intentionally left blank 3.17 UNAVOIDABLE ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS/CEQA CONCLUSIONS This Final Program EIS/EIR represents the first conceptual planning stage of a tiered environmental evaluation that analyzes a broad range of potential railway physical components improvements and expanded passenger service. Implementation of improvements project components would require further site-specific environmental analysis. once detailed project descriptions and work plans are composed. At the conclusion of the environmental review process Following this Program EIS/EIR, SLOCOG, FRA, TAMC, and the railroad owner, Union Pacific Railroad UPRR, are expected to continue discussions and negotiations towards an agreement regarding what, if any, physical components improvements are necessary to allow for the proposed expansion of passenger rail service. Each technical chapter resource in this document identifies potential environmental impacts that could occur should one or more elements components of the Build Alternative action alternatives be constructed. The Summary describes these general findings. The Build Preferred Alternative looks at the entire comprises a program of physical and rail service components improvements. In many cases, one or more individual improvements components are the ‘trigger’ result in potential environmental impacts, with other improvements components having lesser capacity for potentially adverse/significant effects. Careful design of physical components improvements can potentially avoid/minimize the vast majority of the effects discussed in this document. Many potentially adverse/significant impacts described in this document can be avoided or minimized by selecting an alignment option a component that avoids or minimizes impacts on environmental resources through refinement to the design or specific location of various track improvements or station areas or through incorporation of mitigation measures. Overall, expanded passenger rail service may decrease regional emissions of air pollutants and GHGs greenhouse gases, while decreasing transportation-related energy use. However, construction of proposed physical components improvements would result in temporary, localized emissions and one-time energy consumption.  New passenger service stations in King City and Soledad may affect circulation on local roadways, which may increase congestion, as further discussed below. Additionally, much of the Monterey County within the study area is Prime and protected farmland, as designated by the state. Other land uses include habitat for special-status species, protected forest, or wetlands. New alignment options Certain physical improvements may traverse land use types and alter the designated use. Lastly, several of the alignment options and proposed improvements may potentially displace residences or businesses. Whether any of these potential effects will occur depends on the type, number, and timing of proposed physical or service components improvements. As these components improvements move forward for further design or other refinements, the extent to which any of them could result in substantial and/or adverse environmental effects will be analyzed through pertinent requirements of CEQA and/or NEPA. In essence, all significant effects can potentially be avoided, minimized, or mitigated depending on final design plans. CEQA and NEPA Significance Use of the term “significant” differs between NEPA and CEQA. According to CEQ, the NEPA determination of significance is based on context and intensity. The magnitude of the impact is evaluated and described in the environmental document. The Program EIS reports all impacts and discusses feasible mitigation. Under CEQA, identification on each significant effect on the environment is required, according to the CEQA Guidelines § 15126.2. The discussion should include relevant specifics of the affected area, resources involved, physical changes, significant environmental effects the project might bring, and feasible mitigation. According to CEQ, the manner in which the differences between the two processes are addressed must take into account that NEPA does not compel mandatory findings of significance, and that some impacts determined to be significant under CEQA may not be necessarily be determined significant under NEPA. As such, mitigation strategies outlined in this program-level EIS/EIR may be appropriate under NEPA, but the potential impacts they address may not be considered under CEQA. 3.17.1 UNAVOIDABLE POTENTIALLY SIGNIFICANT IMPACTS Traffic and Travel The Build Preferred Alternative contemplates two new passenger stations in King City and Soledad. As noted here and in environmental documents adopted/certified by these cities, buildout of the station areas (which includes the opening of the stations themselves, increased passenger rail activity, and buildout of surrounding planned land uses) would result in increased traffic on local streets. Land Use and Planning, Communities and Neighborhoods, Property and Environmental Justice Curve realignments and siding extensions that require substantial land conversion/acquisition outside of the railroad ROW associated with the Preferred Alternative would commit the land uses and natural resources for an expanded and realigned railway in some areas. Future implementation of components improvements outside the existing ROW and in populated areas would have the largest effect on existing land uses and communities. Some of the proposed physical components improvements would involve displacement of existing residents and businesses, many within an environmental justice community, or would convert land uses convert land uses to be incompatible with the general plan. The proposed design and engineering aspects of each improvement component are conceptual at this time and if carried forward in the future, could be refined to avoid some or all potential impacts on existing land uses and communities. Agricultural and Forest Resources Improvements Components requiring land outside of the existing railroad ROW, such as curve realignments, new sidings, and siding extensions associated with the Build Preferred Alternative would convert Prime Farmland and other protected types of farmland to nonagricultural uses. Prime Farmlands are protected by the state due to the soil quality and irrigation status of the land. In CEQA, the conversion of Prime Farmland to a non-agricultural use cannot be mitigated below a level of significance. Thus, any conversion of Prime Farmland to a non-agricultural use would be considered an unavoidable impact. If the proposed second mainline is carried forward for construction and additional ROW is needed, some or all of the additional ROW (up to 12 acres in all) could include forest land within the Los Padres National Forest . Biological and Wetland Resources As further described in Section 3.13, Biological Resources and Wetlands, certain proposed curve realignments, new sidings, and siding extensions have the potential to entail the use of lands outside the existing railroad ROW that are critical habitat areas for several protected species (including California red-legged frog and vernal pool fairy shrimp), habitat of special-status species, sensitive vegetation communities, and wetlands. The evaluation in this document is based on a review of highly conceptual plans for proposed rail improvements the project components. Design refinements may be able to avoid some or all of the aforementioned potential effects. Hydrology and Water Quality As further described in Section 3.12, Hydrology and Water Resources, certain proposed new sidings and siding extensions, curve realignments, and the second mainline have the potential to intersect surface waters, potentially resulting in hydrological and/or water quality effects. Design refinements of the conceptual plans components used in this evaluation could potentially avoid some of all of these hydrology and/or water quality impacts. Conclusion Overall, only general statements of potential impacts can be made at this programlevel of review, because since there is considerable uncertainty as to which, if any, elements components of the Build Preferred Alternative will ultimately be carried forward for further design, funding, and eventual construction and operation. As noted throughout this document, many of these elements components have only conceptual designs to date. Therefore, the analysis herein is based on a review of potential effects to considerably sized “buffer” areas, in only a small portion of which any actual physical components improvements might be constructed. 3.17.2 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SHORT-TERM USES OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND ENHANCEMENT OF LONGTERM PRODUCTIVITY Implementation of proposed rail improvements project components may result in property acquisitions, conversion of Prime Farmland, and potential disruption of biological and wetland resources during construction and operation. Future projectlevel environmental review would consider these factors in more detail if any specific components improvements are carried forward. While some of the proposed improvements project components may disrupt the existing conditions of the area, short- and long-term benefits would also result and should be considered accordingly. The Coast Corridor region is faced with transportation challenges associated with anticipated population growth, constrained travel options, aging rail infrastructure, safety issues, and a need for increased travel capacity without impacting air quality and natural resources. These challenges are likely to continue in the future as continued growth in population, employment, and tourism activity is expected to generate increased travel demand. In the short-term, construction activities would likely increase employment opportunities, as well as locally purchased materials and services. In the long-term, proposed improvements implementation of the project components would likely increase the frequency, speed, and reliability of passenger rail while fostering greater passenger connectivity to the proposed California High-Speed Rail CA HSR System and enhancing safety with minimal or no disruption to existing and proposed freight rail operations. Implementation of the Build Preferred Alternative would help to create an interconnected, multimodal solution allowing for better mobility throughout the Coast Corridor region, providing added capacity in response to increased travel demand between Los Angeles and San Francisco. 3.17.3 SIGNIFICANT UNAVOIDABLE ADVERSE EFFECTS UNDER CEQA As discussed, this Program level EIS/EIR evaluates the potential for significant effects to occur from any of the proposed Build Preferred Alternative improvements components. Additionally, if any of the proposed improvements components are carried forward, this analysis offers mitigation strategies that could potentially avoid or minimize impacts to resources through project design or other measures. Accordingly, this Program level EIS/EIR only generally identifies potentially significant unavoidable impacts as such consideration because detailed consideration would take place during project-level review. Table S-1, in the Summary of this document, describes the environmental resources and potential impacts as a result of the proposed Coast Corridor improvements. Depending on which, if any, physical proposed components improvements are carried forward, potentially significant and unavoidable impacts may occur at various locations within the corridor. Portions of land immediately adjacent to the Coast Corridor are habitat for several protected species; therefore, some of the proposed improvements components could potentially encroach into such land this habitat. Additionally, proposed project improvements project components may require property acquisition and conversion of Prime Farmland. Such occurrences This could result in future conclusions of significant and unavoidable impacts under CEQA. The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical component improvement expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of PTC along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. No specific plans have been identified, but anticipated PTC related improvements outside train-based equipment would most likely take the form of communications apparatus (e.g., antennas, signal upgrades). Such improvements are anticipated to be placed within the existing railroad ROW and would be assumed to have minimal or no effect upon adjacent areas to the railroad ROW. As a result, significant and unavoidable impacts would not likely occur under the No Build Alternative. 3.17.4 CEQA ENVIRONMENTALLY SUPERIOR ALTERNATIVE CEQA Guidelines §15126.6(e)(2) requires the selection of an environmentally superior alternative. Based on the analysis presented in the Program EIS/EIR (described in Table S-1 in the Summary), the No Build Alternative would be the environmentally superior alternative because it would have no potential to result in any substantial construction period related effects, or acquisition/incorporation of any agricultural or biologically valuable land into the railroad corridor. However, as further described below, the No Build Alternative does not offer the same potential air quality and transportation benefits as the action alternatives. CEQA Guidelines §15126.6(e)(2) states that where the No Build Alternative is considered the environmentally superior alternative, the EIR shall identify another environmentally superior alternative. Accordingly, this Program EIS/EIR also considered the Build and Preferred Alternatives. The Build and Preferred Alternatives offer similar rail operation components that would result in similar levels of reduced regional VMT and reduced emissions of air pollutants. Both would also collectively enhance rail safety and improve overall rail service reliability through a program of corridor-wide track and signal improvements. Both would foster connectivity with the CA HSR system. While the Build Alternative would potentially entail the incorporation of agricultural and/or biologically valuable land  into the railroad corridor, various components of the Build Alternative would (individually and collectively) enhance safety and enable greater reliability for both passenger and freight rail traffic. Additionally, the Build Alternative would provide increased capacity to assist in meeting mobility challenges and travel demand between San Francisco and Los Angeles. Under the No Build Alternative, current and projected future system congestion would continue to result in reduced reliability, slower travel speeds, increased travel times, and deteriorated air quality. The Build Alternative would assist in fostering improved rail connectivity to the proposed California High-Speed Rail system and would augment the highway system, creating an interconnected, multimodal solution, allowing for enhanced mobility throughout the corridor. As demonstrated in this document, the Build Alternative would offer modest but measurable improvements in regional air quality insofar as increased rail ridership would lead to fewer automotive vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in the corridor. Therefore, the Build Alternative has been identified as the environmentally superior alternative. The main difference between the Build and Preferred Alternatives is that the Preferred Alternative excludes four curve realignment areas in San Luis Obispo County. These curve realignments were not found to offer speed or travel time improvements, but the curve realignments had the potential to result in several unique and substantial physical environmental effects. Removal of these curve realignments reduces substantially the overall potential of the Preferred Alternative to result in significant environmental impacts. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative is the environmentally superior alternative.              Page Intentionally Left Blank 4.0 FINAL PROGRAMMATIC SECTION 4(F)/6(F) EVALUATION 4.1 INTRODUCTION The Coast Corridor Program EIS/EIR is the first phase of a tiered environmental review process. As discussed in the ROD, FRA is selecting the Preferred Alternative for further evaluation and consideration in future project-level environmental reviews to be prepared subsequent to this Program EIS/EIR.1 1 This section was included in the Public Draft Program EIS/EIR, but has been updated and tailored for the Preferred Alternative. Therefore, the section is not presented in a strikethrough/underline format. Section 4(f) properties are publicly owned parks, recreation areas, or wildlife and waterfowl refuges or properties of a historical site of national, state, or local significance as determined by the federal, state, regional, or local officials having jurisdiction over the resource. Under Section 4(f), an operating administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) may not approve a project that uses protected properties unless there are no prudent of feasible alternatives and the project includes all possible planning to minimize harm to such properties. Section 6(f) properties are recreation resources funded by the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (LWCFA). Land purchased with these funds cannot be converted to a non-recreation use without coordination with the National Park Service (NPS) and mitigation that includes replacement of the quality and quantity of land used. This chapter describes the existing Section 4(f) and 6(f) resources within the study area, and identifies the potential uses of and potential impacts on these resources for Preferred Alternative. Chapter 5.0, Comments and Coordination, includes all comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR and provides responses to each comment. The City of King provided several comments about the Build Alternative components discussed in this Programmatic Section 4(f)/6(f) Evaluation (see comments A-3.80 and A-3.81). Since the Build Alternative was not modified between the Draft and this Final Program EIS/EIR, none of the City of King’s comments result in the need for text revisions. However, this Final Section 4(f) Evaluation includes an assessment of the Preferred Alternative identified in the ROD; the Preferred Alternative incorporates features noted by the City of King in its above-referenced comments. 4.1.1 STUDY AREA The study area as defined below identifies the Section 4(f) and Section 6(f) properties considered in this evaluation. To identify potential Section 4(f) and 6(f) resources in the study areas, a review of the California Protected Areas Database from the GreenInfo Network (calands.org) was completed.2 Potential resources were further identified through review of aerial maps and adopted local plans, including city and county general plans and coordination with responsible federal and local agencies. Potential historic resources that might qualify as Section 4(f) properties were identified using the same methods described in Section 3.10.2 to identify resources that are listed or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Potential Section 4(f) resources include those that are listed or eligible for listing on the NRHP. 2 The California Protected Areas Database (CPAD) contains data about lands that are owned outright (“in fee”) and protected for open space purposes by over 900 public agencies or non-profit organizations. CPAD lands range from the smallest urban parks all the way to the largest wilderness areas – all told, CPAD inventories just over 49 million acres in 13,500 “parks.” Historic Sites FRA and SLOCOG initiated consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) in June 2013 and requested SHPO confirm an appropriate study area, or Area of Potential Effect (APE), for identification of cultural resources. SHPO concurred with the APE used in this Program EIS/EIR. The APE for historic resources reflects the potential for direct and constructive use as set forth by Section 4(f) and Section 6(f) implementing legislation. Study areas were developed around each of the physical components of the Preferred Alternative that would adequately capture the potential for direct use, as well as noise, vibration, or visual effects, that could result in a constructive use. Screening distances for potential direct use were defined as follows: . New Sidings and Siding Extensions: entire projected length and width. . Second mainline: entire projected ROW. . Curve realignments: entire projected length and 100 feet wide. . Powered switches, track and signal upgrades: assumed to be within existing rail alignment. . New Stations: footprints of sites as noted in previously adopted local documents. Screening distances for potential constructive use were defined as follows: . Siding extensions: entire projected length and width plus 50 feet on either side of existing ROW. . Second mainline: entire projected length and width plus 100 feet on either side of existing ROW. . Curve realignments: entire projected length and 200 feet on either side of the existing ROW, for a total of 500 feet. . Powered switches, track and signal upgrades: assumed to be within existing rail ROW, so no constructive use anticipated. . New Stations: Footprints for proposed sites and public parks within one mile. Public Park and Recreation Lands; Wildlife and Waterfowl Refuges The study area for public park and recreation lands and wildlife and waterfowl refuges includes lands within 400 feet of the existing rail corridor and the outer edges of the buffer area for each physical component. This area was intended to capture potential indirect impacts to park and recreation areas from the Preferred Alternative components. Clean Air Act Class I Areas In addition, in accordance with the Clean Air Act, all designated Class I Areas located with 100 kilometers of the existing rail corridor were identified and assessed for potential visibility impacts from air pollutant emissions. 4.1.2 LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND ORDERS This section includes the federal laws and regulations that pertain to Section 4(f) and 6(f) properties in the study area. U.S. Department of Transportation Act 49 U.S.C. 303(c) [Section 4(f)] Section 4(f) prohibits DOT, or any of its operating administrations, to approve a transportation program or project requiring the use of publicly owned land of a public park, recreation area, or wildlife and waterfowl refuge of national, state, or local significance, or land of an historic site of national, state, or local significance (as determined by the federal, state, or local officials having jurisdiction over the park, area, refuge, or site) unless: 1. There is no prudent or feasible avoidance alternative to the use of the land from the Section 4(f) property; and, 2. The program or project includes all possible planning to minimize harm to the Section 4(f) property resulting from the use. Even where there is a use of a protected resource, FRA may also determine that the impacts are de minimis. See Section 4.1.1.3 for a discussion of the requirements of a de minimis impact determination. Certain historic or archaeological sites or properties are also protected by Section 4(f). For historic properties, Section 106 of the NHPA is used to identify properties potentially protected under Section 4(f) and to identify the potential impacts to such properties. FRA uses Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) regulations 23 CFR 771.774 as guidance in applying Section 4(f), as described below. This is a Programmatic 4(f)/6(f) Evaluation and is based on the information and analysis available at Tier 1. It is anticipated that final 4(f)/6(f) evaluations and, if necessary, accompanying 4(f) approvals will occur as part of future Tier 2 environmental analysis and documentation. Section 4(f) and Section 106 Section 4(f) is applicable to programs and projects undertaken by DOT that may entail the use of publicly-owned parks, recreation areas, and wildlife refuges, or to historic sites. Section 106, in contrast, applies to any federal agency and is meant to address both direct and indirect effects of an undertaking on historic properties, including archaeological resources. In general, archaeological sites on or eligible for inclusion on the NRHP are covered under Section 4(f). The NHPA provides specific criteria to assist in making this determination. An archaeological resource that is eligible only under NHPA “Criterion D” is considered valuable only in terms of the data that can be recovered from it. For these resources (such as pottery scatters and refuse deposits), it is generally assumed that there is minimal value attributed to preserving the resources in place. Where a resource is only eligible under Criterion D, it is generally not protected by Section 4(f). Section 106 evaluates “effects” on cultural resources sites, whereas Section 4(f) evaluates whether the project or program results in a “use” of the site. Under these regulations, an “adverse effect” under Section 106 may not constitute a Section 4(f) use (permanent, temporary occupancy, or constructive). While the statutory requirements of Section 106 and Section 4(f) are similar, even if an undertaking results in an adverse effect under Section 106, there will not automatically be a Section 4(f) use absent a separate analysis and determination by FRA. Section 6(f) The LWCFA provides grants to state and local governments for the acquisition or improvement of parks and recreation areas.3 LWFCA Section 6(f) restricts any federal, state, or local agency from converting land acquired or developed under these grants to a non-recreational purpose without prior approval from the Department of the Interior (DOI). Under Section 6(f), replacement lands of equal value (monetary), location, and usefulness must typically be provided to obtain DOI approval of a conversion of Section 6(f) lands for transportation projects. 3 16 U.S.C. §§ 460-4 through 460-11, September 3, 1964, as amended 1965, 1968, 1970, 1972–1974, 1976–1981, 1983, 1986, 1987, 1990, 1991, 1993–1996 4.1.3 SECTION 4(F) USE DEFINITION A use of a Section 4(f) resource occurs in the following circumstances: Permanent Use A permanent use of a Section 4(f) resource occurs when property is permanently incorporated into a proposed transportation facility. This might occur as a result of partial or full acquisition, permanent easements, or temporary easements that exceed limits for temporary occupancy, as noted below. Temporary Use A temporary use of a Section 4(f) resource occurs when there is a temporary occupancy of property that is considered adverse in terms of the preservationist purposes of the Section 4(f) statute. A temporary occupancy of property does not constitute a use of a Section 4(f) resource when the following conditions are satisfied: . The occupancy must be of temporary duration (e.g., shorter than the period of construction) and must not involve a change in ownership of the property, . The scope of work must be minor, with only minimal changes to the protected resource, . There must be no permanent adverse physical impacts on the protected resource or temporary or permanent interference with activities or purpose of the resource, . The property being used must be fully restored to a condition that is at least as good as existed prior to the proposed project, and . There must be documented agreement of the appropriate officials having jurisdiction over the resource regarding the foregoing requirements. Constructive Use A constructive use of a Section 4(f) resource occurs when a transportation project does not permanently incorporate land from the resource, but the proximity of the project results in impacts (e.g., noise, vibration, visual, access, ecological) that are so severe that the protected activities, features, or attributes that qualify the resource for protection under Section 4(f) are substantially impaired. Substantial impairment occurs only if the protected activities, features, or attributes of the resource are substantially diminished. FRA makes this determination by considering the following: . Identifying the current activities, features, or attributes of the resource that may be sensitive to proximity impacts. . Analyzing the potential proximity impacts on the resource. . Consulting with the appropriate officials having jurisdiction over the resource. De Minimis Impact According to 49 U.S.C. 303(d), the following criteria must be met to reach a de minimis impact determination: . For parks, recreation areas, and wildlife and waterfowl refuges, a de minimis impact determination may be made if a transportation project will not adversely affect the activities, features, and attributes qualifying the property for protection under Section 4(f) after mitigation. In addition, to make a de minimis impact determination, there must be:  . Public notice and opportunity for public review and comment. . Written concurrence received from the officials with jurisdiction over the property. For a historic site, a de minimis impact determination may be made only if, in accordance with the Section 106 process of the NHPA and written concurrence from the SHPO, FRA determines that the transportation program or project will have no adverse effect on historic properties or that there are no historic properties affected. In addition, FRA will inform these officials of its intent to make a de minimis impact determination based on their concurrence in the finding of “no adverse effect” or “no historic properties affected.” Section 4(f) Applicability A park qualifies for protection under Section 4(f) if: (1) the property is publicly owned, (2) the park is open to the general public, (3) it is being used for outdoor recreation, and (4) it is considered significant by the authority with jurisdiction. The park must be publicly-owned at the point at which use occurs. A historic site on or eligible for the NRHP qualifies for protection under Section 4(f) and a use may occur if land from the site is permanently or temporarily incorporated into the project. If a project does not physically take (permanently incorporate) historic property but causes an adverse effect, FRA must evaluate the proximity impacts to determine if the proximity impacts will substantially impair the features or attributes that contribute to the NRHP eligibility of the historic site. 4.2 COORDINATION 49 U.S.C. 303(b) requires cooperation and consultation with the Secretary of the Interior (and the Secretaries of Housing and Urban Development and Agriculture, if appropriate) and the states in development of transportation plans. Throughout the Program EIS/EIR process, FRA and SLOCOG consulted with the SHPO, the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) and interested tribes. Section 4(f) determinations may be aided by coordination with the SHPO, pursuant to 36 CFR Part 800, and agencies of jurisdiction in identifying Section 4(f) properties and assessing impacts on the properties. Table 4-1 lists the FRA and SLOCOG coordination to date with these agencies. Table 4-1 Section 4(f) and 6(f) Evaluation Consultation Summary Date Form Participants General Topics June 27, 2013 Telephone Project team, SHPO Background, purpose and need, the environmental document, and key stakeholders of the project, parameters for the cultural records search, NAHC consultation July 1, 2013 Letter NAHC to project team Results of record search, coordination with tribal governments September 17, 2013 Letter FRA to tribal governments and individuals Initial consultation to determine potential impacts to cultural places October 3, 2013 Email Project consultants and SHPO SHPO acknowledged receipt of FRA letter initiating Section 106 consultation Source: Circlepoint, 2014 The project team performed a Sacred Lands File and Native American Contacts List Request through the NAHC. On July 1, 2013, the NAHC responded to the records search, noting that the search indicated the possible presence of Native American traditional cultural place(s) in the study area. The NAHC recommended that tribal governments and individuals be contacted to determine the potential impact of any cultural place(s), and follow up within two weeks of initial contact via telephone call. The NAHC provided contact information for 25 individuals from several tribal organizations traditionally affiliated with lands in the study area. In response to the NAHC’s request, and pursuant to Section 106 of the NHPA (36 CFR 800.2(c)(2)(ii)) FRA reached out to the identified individuals to advise about the project. Initial contact was made via letter, sent by certified mail on September 17, 2013. As recommended by the NAHC, the project team made follow-up phone calls to the tribal government contacts on September 24, 2013. All answered calls indicated receipt of FRA’s letter. Further coordination will occur during Tier 2 analysis as necessary to complete final 4(f) evaluations. If necessary, at Tier 2, FRA will consult with the appropriate agencies and tribal representatives regarding the effects of the project components on the features and attributes of Section 4(f) properties and provide opportunity for public comment. 4.3 PURPOSE AND NEED The project purpose is to increase the frequency, speed, and reliability of passenger rail while fostering greater passenger connectivity to the proposed California High- Speed Rail (CA HSR) System and enhancing safety with minimal disruption to existing and proposed freight rail operations. Implementation of the action alternatives would help to create an interconnected, multimodal solution allowing for better mobility throughout the Coast Corridor region, providing added capacity in response to increased travel demand between Los Angeles and San Francisco. The Coast Corridor region is faced with transportation challenges associated with projected population growth, constrained travel options, aging rail infrastructure, safety issues, and a need for increased travel capacity without impacting air quality and natural resources. These challenges are likely to continue in the future as continued growth in population, employment, and tourism activity is expected to generate increased travel demand. 4.4 ALTERNATIVES The Draft Program EIS/EIR, including its Section 4(f) evaluation, considered two alternatives: a Build Alternative and a No Build Alternative. This Final EIS/EIR identifies FRA’s Preferred Alternative, which modifies certain components of the Build Alternative in response to public comments FRA received on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. As discussed in Section 4.1 above and stated in the ROD, FRA is selecting the Preferred Alternative for further evaluation and consideration in project-level environmental reviews to be prepared in the future. The following subsections describe the No Build and Build Alternatives. However, the Preferred Alternative is the subject of the evaluation contained herein. The Build and Preferred Alternatives each include lists of physical components to the railway and the addition of the Coast Daylight passenger rail service. Some, all, or none of these components may eventually be constructed in order to facilitate the addition of up to 2 round trip Coast Daylight trains per day (4 train trips in all) between San Francisco and Los Angeles. 4.4.1 NO BUILD ALTERNATIVE The No Build Alternative represents the continuation of existing rail operations and physical components, and assumes the perpetuation of existing freight and passenger service between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The only physical component expected under the No Build Alternative would be the installation of positive train control (PTC) along the Corridor, which would provide increased safety for freight and passenger trains. For the purposes of this Program EIS/EIR whose purpose and need is limited to potential physical rail system improvements and expansion of passenger rail service, the No Build Alternative includes other planned and programmed rail improvement projects for the Coast Corridor in the vicinity of the Salinas to San Luis Obispo region. 4.4.2 BUILD ALTERNATIVE The Build Alternative includes the restoration of “Coast Daylight” passenger service, which would initially consist of 2 trains per day traveling between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, increasing to 4 trains per day by the year 2040. The Build Alternative also includes a list of physical components between Salinas and San Luis Obispo, some number of which may be necessary to accommodate Coast Daylight service. The extent of needed physical components has not been determined at this time and will likely occur through negotiations with the affected parties including Amtrak, Caltrans DOR, and UPRR. The Build Alternative looks broadly at each physical component to provide decision-makers with an understanding of the potential impacts of the improvements to help identify which, if any, conceptual physical improvements should be carried forward. . Corridor-wide Track Upgrades: Track improvements intended to improve performance are proposed along the entire rail alignment between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. Proposed corridor-wide track upgrades include replacement of existing rail with continuous welded rail (CWR), track structure realignment, track resurfacing, tie replacement, replacing or upgrading ballasting, rehabilitation of existing sidings, and replacement of existing turnouts. CWR reduces the number of joints and would enable trains to move more quickly and with less friction and noise. . Signal System Upgrades: Introduction of centralized traffic control (CTC) in two locations: 1) from Salinas to Soledad, via the extension of an existing CTC system to the north and 2) an “island” CTC over 27 miles of the railroad between San Lucas and Bradley (both unincorporated communities in southern Monterey County). . New powered switches: Powered switches are mechanical devices within a railroad track that guide trains from one track to another - such as a siding, or a second mainline. Switching mechanisms include sensors placed on rails/ties and control boxes placed immediately alongside the railroad within the railroad  ROW. Powered switches are generally considered an upgrade over manually thrown switches insofar as they facilitate the speed of transition from one track to another. . Siding extensions/new siding: A siding is a short section of track adjacent to a main track used for passing and dwelling purposes in single track systems. At present, the sidings in the Salinas to San Luis Obispo portion of the Corridor are generally one mile in length or shorter. Freight trains often exceed one mile in length and sometimes cannot be accommodated in the existing sidings. The proposed siding extensions are generally located within the railroad ROW and would lengthen existing sidings so that each would be at least 10,000 feet in length. Figure 2-5 shows a diagram of a typical siding extension. In addition to several siding extensions, the Build Alternative includes entirely new sidings at Chalone Creek near Soledad (MP 147 to MP 149), San Lucas (MP 167.2 to MP 190.4), and Wellsona (MP 205 to MP 207.6). . New second mainline: A second main track is contemplated from South Santa Margarita toward the Cuesta Grade (MP 233 to MP 235), terminating just north of the first tunnel between Cuesta Grade and San Luis Obispo. At present, train speeds through this portion of the Corridor are some of the slowest for the entire alignment - ranging between 25 and 35 mph. Slow speeds here are the result of track curvature and deficient train control systems. A second mainline at this location would significantly expand mobility. . Curve or other track realignments: The existing Coast Corridor alignment includes some sharp curves that require trains to slow down to reduce the risk of derailment. The Build Alternative contemplates several curve realignments intended to reduce track curvature. If constructed, curve realignments would allow for increased speeds, enhance safety, and reduce trip times. Realignments typically result in less wear and tear to tracks, reducing the frequency of repair or maintenance. . New passenger stations: There are currently three passenger train stations between Salinas and San Luis Obispo: 1) Salinas, 2) Paso Robles, and 3) San Luis Obispo. The Build Alternative contemplates two new passenger stations in Soledad and King City. The existing Coast Corridor alignment passes through the downtowns of each city. The proposed Coast Daylight train service may include stops in one or both of these cities. . Grade Crossing and Mobility Improvements: A curve realignment at MP 172 has the potential to create a single new at-grade crossing of an existing public,  paved road at Cattlemen Road, approximately 10 miles south of King City. The Build Alternative would install as-yet undefined signal, signage, and other related improvements at as-yet unspecified existing at-grade crossings. . Coast Daylight Service and new rolling stock: The SDP contemplates the reinstitution of Coast Daylight passenger rail service, which was discontinued in 1971. The SDP proposes initial service of one daily southbound and one daily northbound train between San Francisco and Los Angeles. Preliminary proposed schedules have trains leaving San Francisco and Los Angeles in the early morning (approximately 7 a.m.), and arriving at their respective destinations between 6:30 p.m. and 7 p.m. Future expanded service would see include one additional daily southbound and northbound departure. This expanded service would be overnight, leaving San Francisco or Los Angeles in the early evening and arriving at the respective destination early the following morning. Coast Daylight trains would stop at existing Amtrak stations in the Coast Corridor and potentially also at proposed new stations identified in the SDP (Soledad and King City). The proposed Coast Daylight service would require the acquisition of locomotives and passenger railcars. 4.4.3 PREFERRED PROGRAM ALTERNATIVE – MODIFIED BUILD ALTERNATIVE Based upon the analysis in this Program EIS/EIR and public comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, FRA, SLOCOG, and Caltrans DOR have identified the Build Alternative (with modifications) as the Preferred Alternative for potential future implementation on the Coast Corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The Preferred Alternative would result in safety and transportation capacity improvements that would not be accomplished under the No Build Alternative. In addition to better meeting the purpose and need, the Preferred Alternative would also provide environmental benefits in the form of improved travel conditions, including mobility, safety, reliability, travel times, and connectivity and accessibility; and reduced air pollutant emissions along the existing rail corridor. The Preferred Alternative modifies the Build Alternative as follows: . Modifications requested by the City of King to siding extension and station area . Exclusion of four curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County . Inclusion of “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita  4.4.3.1 Modifications Requested by City of King The City of King provided extensive written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, advising that the City had updated its draft plans for the City of King siding extension and passenger station. These updates were not known to FRA, SLOCOG, Caltrans, or TAMC until the City of King provided its comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Siding Extension Precise plans for new sidings or siding extensions were not available prior to publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Accordingly, the analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR made reasonable assumptions regarding the extension of the existing sidings. It was assumed that the sidings extensions would result in sidings of about 10,000 feet in length (generally, enough to accommodate a typical freight train) and that this length could potentially be achieved by adding all additional track to either the northern or southern end of each siding. As a result, the Draft Program EIS/EIR examined a larger total area for the sidings than would have been necessary to achieve the desired 10,000 foot length. The existing City of King siding extends from MP 159.19 to MP 160.64 and is about 1.45 miles in length (7,650 feet). The Draft Program EIS/EIR analyzed two siding extensions (between MP 158.5 and 159.19 to the north and MP 160.64 and 161.19 to the south). Either the northern or southern extension would have been sufficient to provide a 10,000 foot long siding. Since publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR and as noted in the City’s comments, the City of King engaged a railroad engineer (RailPros) to consider modifications to rail facilities in the area. The RailPros study (prepared for and endorsed by the City of King in its comment letter) proposed that the siding extension be greater than 10,000 feet in length and that the extension would most feasibly be achieved by extending the siding on the north side exclusively. The RailPros study considered extending the siding from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length. According to the Railpros study, the updated siding extension design is intended to allow passenger rail and freight rail trains to pass each other along the King City siding without limiting or disrupting the service operations for either party. The larger proposed siding length outside of the downtown area is anticipated to better accommodate freight trains. After review, FRA, SLOCOG, and Caltrans DOR concur that the City’s proposed revision to the siding extension would avoid or reduce the intensity of several potential environmental effects of the previously identified siding extension discussed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The revised siding extension would avoid the need for a new creek crossing and would also avoid including any portion of the siding extension within a 100-year flood plain. The revised siding would also be located outside of populated areas, so would have reduced potential for any community effects compared to the previously identified siding extension. Because the City’s proposed modification to the siding extension is reasonable and is likely to reduce the impacts of the project, FRA, SLOCOG, and Caltrans DOR agree that it should be included and analyzed in the Final Program EIS/EIR. Passenger Station The analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR used conceptual plans from adopted City documents that proposed a station site near the intersection of First Street and Broadway. Operating details were assumed to include a station building, parking, and bus pullout areas. However, as noted in the City’s comments, the RailPros plan shows a slightly smaller passenger station in generally the same part of downtown, with similar features, plus an area set aside for military personnel transfers. The RailPros plan also calls for the relocation of an existing at-grade crossing (at Pearl Street) to move about one block northwest to Broadway Street.4 Such plans reflect the most detailed layout and design of the station and are included in this Program EIS/EIR as the best available data. 4 Such a relocation would be subject to an approval by the California Public Utilities Commission. 4.4.3.2 Exclusion of Curve Realignments in San Luis Obispo County During the public hearing on the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR at SLOCOG’s board meeting on January 7, 2015, many comments from members of the public focused on several of curve realignments proposed for various locations in San Luis Obispo County. Commenters stated that the curve realignments had the potential to result in property acquisitions, split of parcels, and have other adverse environmental and socioeconomic effects. In response to the public comments, the SLOCOG Board adopted a motion requesting SLOCOG staff drop from further consideration the following curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County: 1. McKay/Wellsona 2. Wellsona/Paso Robles 3. Templeton/Henry 4. Henry/Santa Margarita Excluding these curve realignments would not substantially compromise future ontime performance of passenger and freight trains and would reduce the potential impacts identified by the public. As documented in the SDP, an acceptably high rate of on-time performance in near and long-term horizon years was shown to be achievable with the inclusion of island CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita -- which corresponds roughly to the same area in which the excluded curve realignments were contemplated. Excluding the curve realignments would also eliminate or substantially reduce several potential adverse environmental effects, including: . Land Use: Without these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require fewer property acquisitions than the Build Alternative. . Agricultural Lands: Without the curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would require substantially less conversion of agricultural lands than the Build Alternative. . Air Quality: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, construction-related emissions (fugitive dust, diesel equipment) would be lower in the Preferred Alternative than in the Build Alternative. . Noise and Vibration: By foregoing the construction of these curve realignments, the Preferred Alternative would generally retain the existing railroad alignment through San Luis Obispo County. In the Build Alternative, the curve realignments would have altered the railroad alignment relative to the location of sensitive receptors. 4.4.3.3 Inclusion of “Island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita In the Draft Program EIS/EIR, Build Alternative components were carried forward from the SDP. As noted above, the Build Alternative specified the extension of CTC from Salinas to Soledad, as well as installation of an “island” of CTC from San Lucas to Bradley in southern Monterey County. Analysis in the SDP contemplated an additional “island” of CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). The SDP noted that this 27-mile section of the corridor currently uses TWC, a non-automated signaling system. The four sidings in this section of the corridor using TWC were presumed to contribute substantially to delays that impair overall on time performance of both passenger and freight trains. However, this particular island CTC was not explicitly referenced in the SDP’s list of Build Alternative components. Notwithstanding, SLOCOG and Caltrans DOR have clarified that it was each agency’s intent that this island CTC area be included in the Build Alternative. Since the Draft Program EIS/EIR did not specifically include this component, this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the island CTC as part of the Preferred Alternative. 4.5 SECTION 4(F)/6(F) PROPERTIES (PARKS, WILDLIFE REFUGES, AND HISTORIC SITES) This section identifies the park, recreation, open space, and wildlife refuge properties eligible for protection as Section 4(f) resources. It also identifies where project components may impact those properties eligible for protection. Because this is a Program EIS/EIR, detailed design and the exact location of project components is not available at this stage of project development. Therefore, the discussion below identifies potential impacts and a preliminary assessment of the potential uses of Section 4(f) properties with the expectation that further design will occur to avoid impacts to all Section 4(f) properties during Tier 2 (project-level review). Section 4(f) is applicable only to actions of DOT and its operating administrations, including FRA. In the event that any one or more components move forward but would not require any DOT approval or funding no Section 4(f) evaluation would be required. Section 4.2.6, Preliminary Section 4(f) Finding, includes a summary of this preliminary Section 4(f) program-level analysis and outlines the process for future evaluations, as needed. 4.5.1 PUBLIC PARKS/RECREATION AREAS Figure 4-2 shows potential Section 4(f) resources based on the study areas defined above. These potential 4(f) resources are described below from north to south. City of Salinas Bataan Memorial Park is an urban park less than 1 acre in area located on West Market Street. The park honors the 105 Salinas and Pajaro Valley military members deployed to the Philippines in 1941. The park includes grassy areas, trees, and a soldiers’ memorial. The City of Salinas owns and maintains this park, which was renovated in 2012.5 5 City of Salinas, 2002c City of Gonzales Gonzales Cemetery is not recognized as a park by the City of Gonzales in which it is located. However, the cemetery is included in the California Protected Areas Database and for the purposes of this analysis is considered a potential Section 4(f) resource. The cemetery is managed by a local Cemetery District. 6 6 City of Gonzales, 2010 7 City of Soledad, 2014 8 Rios-Caledonia Adobe, 2013 9 City of Paso Robles, 2013b 10 City of Paso Robles, 2013a City of Soledad Bill Ramus Park is a 0.5 acre urban park near the proposed Soledad passenger station. It is a popular neighborhood picnic spot, equipped with barbeques and picnic tables. The City of Soledad owns and maintains this park. 7 Vosti Park is a 6.4 acre urban park owned and maintained by the City of Soledad. It is the largest park facility in the city, with several recreational facilities including soccer and baseball fields, volleyball courts, a playground and picnic areas. Cesar Chavez Park is a 0.1 acre green space in Soledad in between Front Street and the existing Coast Corridor railroad. It offers benches and serves as an attractive green buffer between downtown Soledad and the train tracks. The City of Soledad owns and maintains this park. San Miguel (Unincorporated San Luis Obispo County) Rios Caledonia Adobe is a unit of the San Luis Obispo County Parks Department that includes historic buildings, gardens, and a visitors’ center.8 City of El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles) Pioneer Park is a 6.8-acre park owned and maintained by the City of Paso Robles. The park includes a skate park, softball and basketball facilities, a playground, and picnic area.9 Paso Robles City Park is a 4.8-acre park in downtown Paso Robles, owned by the City. The park is a popular gathering place for community events. It has a picnic area, small playground, gazebo, and horseshoe pits.10 Robbins Field is a 2.4 acre park owned and maintained by the City of Paso Robles that includes baseball facilities.11 11 City of Paso Robles, 2013c 12 City of Paso Robles, 2013d 13 City of Atascadero, 2013 14 San Luis Obispo County Parks, 2002 15 City of San Luis Obispo, 2001, p. 16 Lawrence Moore Park is a neighborhood park owned and maintained by the City of Paso Robles on the east bank of the Salinas River. It has a small recreation area, including barbecue facilities, a playground, and a playing field. The park includes sections of the city’s trail network.12 Templeton Area (Unincorporated San Luis Obispo County) Evers Sports Park is a park managed by the Templeton Community Services District. The park offers baseball and soccer fields. Templeton Skate Park is a skateboarding facility managed by the Templeton Community Services District. City of Atascadero Area Heilmann Regional Park is a 15 acre park located within the City of Atascadero, but owned and maintained by the County of San Luis Obispo. The park has hiking trails, picnic areas, a disc-golf course, and tennis courts. Paloma Creek Park is a small park owned and maintained by the City of Atascadero with sports fields and a playground.13 Santa Margarita Area Santa Margarita Community Park is located in Santa Margarita and owned and maintained by the County of San Luis Obispo. The park has a playground and several picnic areas.14 City of San Luis Obispo Ellsford Park is a 1 acre park owned and maintained by the City of San Luis Obispo, adjacent to San Luis Obispo High School. The park has two small grassy areas separated by a stand of trees.15 Santa Rosa Park is an 11-acre park owned and maintained by the City of San Luis Obispo. The park offers horseshoe pits, softball/baseball facilities, playgrounds, basketball courts, a skate park, and picnic areas. 16 16 City of San Luis Obispo, 2001, p. 20 17 City of San Luis Obispo, 2009, pp. 5-6 Stenner Springs Open Space is a 363-acre protected area owned and maintained by the City of San Luis Obispo. The area is composed of four distinct parcels, three of which have typically been used for hiking, biking, outdoor education, and research opportunities. There are multiple trails used for hiking and mountain biking in this open space, and one popular mountain biking tail in close proximity to a portion of the existing railway that is considered Section 4(f) resources.17 4.5.2 CULTURAL RESOURCES Archaeological Sites There are a total of 27 known archaeological sites within the study area, as described in Section 3.10, Cultural Resources, and summarized in Table 3.10-2. The NRHP eligibility status of these resources has not been evaluated or determined. Resources potentially affected by various components of the Preferred Alternative may require evaluation under the NRHP criteria, and one or more of these may be found to qualify for protection under Section 4(f). Historic Resources As described in Section 3.10, Cultural Resources, the Bradley Road Bridge over the Salinas River is the only historic resource within the entire Coast Corridor study area that was previously determined eligible for the NRHP. Additionally, over 50 recorded historic resources potentially affected by various components of the Preferred Alternative may require evaluation under the NRHP criteria. One or more of these may be found to qualify for protection under Section 4(f). 4.5.3 CLASS 1 AREAS As shown in Figure 4-1, within 100 kilometers of the Coast Corridor study area, there are three Class 1 Areas: Pinnacles National Park, and two wilderness areas of the Los Padres National Forest – the Ventana Wilderness and the San Rafael Wilderness. 4.5.4 WILDLIFE AND WATERFOWL REFUGES Big Sandy Wildlife Area is composed of two parcels, together comprising 850 acres of grasslands, streams, and riparian habitats. The California Department of Fish and Wildlife administers the wildlife area, which is adjacent to the Camp Roberts Military Reservation.18 18 California Department of Fish and Wildlife, 2014 4.5.5 SECTION 6(F) RESOURCES No Section 6(f) resources were identified in the study areas. A full review of the California State Parks Land and Water Conservation Fund grants list for Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties did not find that any of the parks affected by the proposed improvements had been improved using funds from the Land and Water Conservation Fund. 4.6 PRELIMINARY 4(F) USE ASSESSMENT The estimated acreages in Table 4-2 represent potential impacts to Section 4(f) resources based on a review of aerial mapping of project features, study areas, and known Section 4(f) resources for the Preferred Alternative. These potential acreages are considered in the text evaluations below. Public Parks/Recreation Areas The existing alignment extends through a portion of the Los Padres National Forest and another portion of the alignment is located in close proximity to federallyowned land under of control of BLM. However, neither the affected portion of the Los Padres National Forest nor the BLM lands are used for recreational purposes. Therefore, neither the affected Los Padres National Forest lands nor the BLM land are considered Section 4(f) resources. Bataan Park: The only physical components contemplated in close proximity to this park are upgrades to the existing alignment, which would occur within the existing railroad ROW. Thus, no permanent or temporary uses of this park would occur. Furthermore, track upgrades in this area included in the Preferred Alternative would have minimal potential to significantly increase the noise beyond current levels, as it is located in an urban area less than 500 feet from the existing rail alignment and is exposed to existing traffic noise. If this component moves forward for construction, a project-level constructive use analysis will be conducted but a use is unlikely as the majority of impacts would be temporary and occur during the construction period and because the proximity the components would be installed within the existing railroad ROW. City of Soledad Parks (Vosti, Cesar Chavez, Bill Ramus): Because the Preferred Alternative components proposed for the existing alignment in Soledad would occur within the existing railroad ROW, they would not result in any permanent or temporary impacts to any of the parks in the City of Soledad. However, due to the proximity of the components to the park resources, before any construction activities, a project-level constructive use analysis would be conducted but a use is unlikely. Both passenger and freight trains currently travel through Soledad in proximity to these parks on the existing rail alignment. The Preferred Alternative would bring additional train activity through Soledad, but passenger trains would likely be moving at lower speeds because they would be approaching/departing the new proposed Soledad station. Therefore, a constructive use of any existing Soledad park is unlikely. Gonzales Cemetery: No temporary or permanent uses would result as the proposed upgrades in this area would occur within the existing railroad ROW. Due to the proximity of the components to this resource, before any construction activities, a project-level constructive use analysis would be conducted but a use is unlikely. Since the Preferred Alternative would add new passenger service on the railway, there is the possibility that noise would increase slightly above existing levels. However, the cemetery is exposed to substantial existing noise due to its location between US 101 and Old US 101 and less than 500 feet from the existing rail alignment. Because of the high levels of existing noise, the addition of 2 more trains by 2020 and 4 trains total by 2040 makes it highly unlikely that a constructive use would occur. Big Sandy Wildlife Area: The existing railroad ROW passes directly through this resource, which appears to have been designated a wildlife refuge well after construction of the railroad. As described in the Draft EIS/EIR, under the Build Alternative, a portion of the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment would have potentially required the acquisition and conversion of portions of the Big Sandy Wildlife Area for a transportation use. However, because the Preferred Alternative excludes the McKay/Wellsona curve realignment this potential Section 4(f) use of the Big Sandy Wildlife Area would not occur. Track upgrade work would be completed entirely within the existing railroad ROW and would not result in any new permanent intrusion within Big Sandy. There is potential for the track upgrade work to result in some temporary use of Big Sandy if property is needed for construction staging, but most construction work associated with the track upgrade can be completed within the footprint of the existing railroad ROW. Even if there is a need to use a small amount of property for construction purposes, it is likely that the temporary occupancy requirements would be met so as to avoid any temporary use under Section 4(f). Track upgrade work and increased passenger rail service through this area would have some potential to increase the noise above current levels. Since this area is not urban or developed, the noise increase could potentially result in a constructive use. If this component moves forward for construction, a project-level constructive use analysis would be conducted. Therefore, project components would be unlikely to result in any Section 4(f) use - permanent, temporary, or constructive. Rios Caledonia Adobe: The existing railroad ROW is located directly adjacent to Rios Caledonia Adobe. No temporary or permanent impacts to Rios Caledonia Adobe would result from implementation of the Preferred Alternative as the track and signal upgrades would occur entirely within the existing railroad ROW. However, due to the proximity of components to the park resources, before this component moves forward for construction, a project-level constructive use analysis would be conducted at that time. The Preferred Alternative would add new passenger service on the railway, adding up to four new train passings per day, which could increase noise above existing levels. Given the high noise levels to which this resource is already exposed as a result of the proximity to US 101 and the existing railroad ROW, additional trains are unlikely to result in a new constructive use of this resource. Parks in Paso Robles: All involved Paso Robles parks are within 500 feet of the existing railroad ROW. However, the existing railroad ROW does not directly traverse any Paso Robles parks and the existing tracks are not located immediately adjacent to any Paso Robles parks. Through Paso Robles, the Preferred Alternative contemplates track upgrades that would not be expected to result in a permanent use because the upgrades would take place entirely within the existing railroad ROW. The Preferred Alternative would also increase passenger rail service throughout the entire corridor with up to four new train passings per day, which could increase noise at Paso Robles parks above existing levels. Given the high noise levels to which this resource is already exposed as a result of the proximity to US 101 and existing rail use (both freight and passenger trains travel through Paso Robles), the additional passenger rail service is unlikely to result in a new constructive use of Section 4(f) resources in Paso Robles. Templeton Parks, Heilmann Park and Paloma Park, Atascadero; and Santa Margarita Community Park: The existing rail alignment is directly adjacent to two parks each in Templeton and Atascadero, and one park in Santa Margarita. As shown in Table 4-2, desktop analysis had indicated potential permanent use of 0.5 acres of the Evers Sports Park in Templeton from the Templeton Siding. However, a review of aerial photography shows that the sports fields within Evers Park are separated from the existing railroad (double-tracked in this vicinity) by extensive fencing and trees. Notably, the existing siding runs along the mainline track for the length of the park. The potential siding extension would be located approximately 600 feet to the north and/or about 3,000 feet to the south. Therefore, the Templeton siding has no potential to result in a permanent use of Evers Sports Park. Given the distance between Evers Sports Park and the existing northern and southern ends of the siding (at which any extension would be located), the potential for temporary or constructive use of Evers Sports Park would be negligible. Proposed components for all other Templeton, Atascadero, and Santa Margarita parks would include track upgrades within the existing railroad ROW and the addition of passenger service. These proposed components would not require relocating or expanding the railroad ROW. Moreover, track improvements would be unlikely to require temporary use of adjacent lands, as most of the work can be completed entirely within the existing footprint of the tracks. Therefore, corridorwide track and signal upgrades would have virtually no potential for permanent or temporary use of parks in Templeton, Atascadero, and Santa Margarita. City of San Luis Obispo Parks: Trains currently travel through San Luis Obispo on the existing rail alignment, passing within a quarter-mile or less of two City-owned parks protected by Section 4(f). No temporary or permanent impacts would result as the proposed track upgrades would occur entirely within existing railroad ROW. Within an urbanized area, these parks are exposed to existing traffic noise. Track upgrades and increased passenger rail service through this area would have some potential to increase the noise above current levels, but given the current urban environment, the noise increase would be unlikely to result in a constructive use. Stenner Springs Natural Reserve: The existing alignment skirts the southern edge of the Stenner Springs Natural Reserve. Track upgrade work proposed to occur near Stenner Springs would occur within the existing alignment and would not result in any temporary or permanent Section 4(f) use. Increased passenger rail service would potentially result in somewhat higher noise levels here, but given the existing presence of the railroad and proximity to urbanized areas, the noise increase would be unlikely to result in a constructive use. Table 4-2 Summary of Potential Impacts to Section 4(f) Resources – Preferred Alternative Proposed Components Preferred Alternative Type of Use (acres)  Permanent Temporary Resources Requiring Additional Constructive Use Analysis at Tier 2 Salinas Powered Switch 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #1 0 0 Bataan Memorial Park Spence Siding Extension 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #2 0 0 Bill Ramus Park Cesar Chavez Park Gonzales Cemetery Vosti Park Gonzales Powered Switch 0 0 0 Soledad Powered Switch 0 0 0 Soledad New Passenger Station 0 0 Cesar Chavez Park Harlem/Metz Curve Realignments 0 0 0 Chalone Creek New Siding 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #3 0 0 0 Coburn Curve Realignments 0 0 0 King City Siding Extension 0 0 0 King City New Passenger Station 0 0 0 King City Powered Switch 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #4 0 0 0 MP 165 Curve Realignment 0 0 0 San Lucas New Siding 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #5 0 0 0 Proposed Components Preferred Alternative Type of Use (acres)  Permanent Temporary Resources Requiring Additional Constructive Use Analysis at Tier 2 MP 172 Track Realignment 0 0 0 San Ardo Powered Switch 0 0 0 Getty/Bradley Curve Realignments 0 0 0 Bradley Siding Extension 0 0 0 Bradley Powered Switch 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #6 0 Big Sandy Wildlife Area: 2.30 Big Sandy Wildlife Area Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #7 0 Big Sandy Wildlife Area: 0.30 Big Sandy Wildlife Area Rios Caledonia Adobe McKay/Wellsona Curve Realignments 0 0 0 McKay Powered Switches 0 0 0 Wellsona New Siding 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #8 0 0 Lawrence Moore Park Paso Robles City Park Pioneer Park Robbins Field Wellsona/Paso Robles Curve Realignments 0 0 0 Templeton Siding 0 0 Evers Sports Park Templeton Skate Park Templeton/Henry Curve Realignments 0 0 0 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9 a 0 0 Heilmann Park Paloma Creek Park Open Space Santa Margarita Community Park Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment b 0 0 0 Santa Margarita Powered Switch 0 0 0 Cuesta Second Main Trackc 0 0 0 Proposed Components Preferred Alternative Type of Use (acres)  Permanent Temporary Resources Requiring Additional Constructive Use Analysis at Tier 2 Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #10 0 0 Elsford Park Los Padres National Forest Santa Rosa Park Stenner Springs Open Space Source: ICF 2013, Circlepoint 2015. Notes: a): In a review of aerial maps, BLM land was identified for potential constructive use impacts at Upgrades to Existing Alignment Section #9. Since there are no recreation facilities on this land, the lands are likely not protected by Section 4(f), so no constructive use under Section 4(f) could occur. (Personal Communication between Lily Gilbert and Harrison Friedman, August 14, 2014). b) In a review of aerial maps, BLM land was identified for potential permanent use by a portion of the Henry/Santa Margarita Curve Realignment. There are no recreation facilities in this property owned by BLM, so the lands are likely not protected by Section 4(f). (Personal Communication between Lily Gilbert and Harrison Friedman, August 14, 2014). c) In a review of aerial maps, the proposed second mainline was identified as traversing a portion of the Los Padres National Forest (LPNF) near Cuesta Grade. The affected portion of the LPNF is used for utilities and transportation purposes (including the existing railroad ROW and US 101) and is not identified or used for recreational purposes. As this portion of the LPNF is not used for recreational purposes, the lands would not be covered by Section 4(f). d) The Draft Program EIS/EIR previously noted potential Section 4(f) uses from Upgrades to Existing Alignment Sections # 6 and 7 as a “permanent” use. As discussed, no permanent Section 4(f) uses would occur in these areas because components only constitute track and signaling upgrades within the railroad ROW. The Final Program EIS/EIR was modified to show only a potential “temporary” Section 4(f) use. Proposed components under the Preferred Alternative and Build Alternative for Upgrades to Existing Alignment Sections #6 and EA 7 are the same, thus the temporary Section 4(f) use is carried forward as well. e) The City of King has plans to eventually carry the Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail near the proposed station area. However, the existing trail corridor is located more than a mile away from the station area and does not constitute a Section 4(f) resource at this time. Therefore, any prospective Section 4(f) use would be unlikely. Both passenger and freight trains currently travel through Soledad in proximity to these parks on the existing rail alignment. The Preferred Alternative would bring additional train activity through Soledad, but passenger trains would likely be moving at lower speeds because they would be approaching/departing the new proposed Soledad station. Therefore, a constructive use of any existing Soledad park is unlikely.  Island CTC: The Preferred Alternative would include the installation of a 27-mile “island” CTC between McKay and Santa Margarita (between MP 202.3 and MP 229.6). As described for the Build Alternative, CTC requires the installation of railway signaling poles of about 10-12 feet in height at periodic intervals within the railroad ROW. Section 4(f) properties in this stretch of the alignment include: the Rios Caledonia Adobe, Pioneer Park, Paso Robles City Park, Robbins Field, Lawrence Moore Park, Evers Park, Templeton Skate Park, Heilmann Park/Chalk Mountain Golf Course, and Paloma Creek Park. Because island CTC would consist of physical improvements (signals) limited to the railroad ROW, no Section 4(f) use would occur of any of these rail-adjacent properties. Because the improvements would occur within an active and existing railroad, the CTC equipment within this area would be unlikely to result in any constructive use of the Section 4(f) properties. Cultural Resources Archaeological Sites Archaeologically sensitive areas have been identified within the study area; these areas are described in Section 3.10, Cultural Resources. Given the programmatic nature of this evaluation, FRA has not conducted intensive archaeological surveys of the study area. Consequently, FRA has not identified properties eligible for listing on the NRHP or determined potential effects on eligible properties. However, previously undocumented archaeological materials may be present on documented significant sites and sensitive landforms, and could be inadvertently discovered or damaged during ground-disturbing activities. Section 3.10, Cultural Resources, describes measures to address unidentified archaeological resources. In Monterey County, four archaeological sites were recorded within existing alignment section #6, but the eligibility status has not been evaluated or determined.19 Preferred Alternative components in this area include upgrades to the existing tracks. Improvements to the existing alignment would occur within the railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would be unlikely to affect recorded archaeological sites within section #6 of the existing alignment in Monterey County. 19 Resources at these four archaeological sites are considered to be highly disturbed prehistoric lithic scatter along the Salinas River floodplain. Lithic scatters in these areas include pieces of eroded cryptocrystalline debitage, core tools, chert flakes, and one fragment of burned bone. Three archaeological sites were recorded within the Getty/Bradley curve realignment areas.20 Proposed curve realignments would have a larger potential impact because the footprint of the required work would require conversion of land outside the existing railroad ROW. Therefore, construction of this curve realignment would have a high potential to disturb and/or uncover archaeological sites. 20 These recorded sites are also prehistoric lithic scatters and chert flakes along the Salinas River. 21 The cultural resources found at these sites include mostly lithic scatters and chipped stone debris, similar to archaeological sites recorded in Monterey County. An isolated burial site was recorded as well as a temporary village (recorded three times between 1971 and 1999). 22 The Wellsona siding site was recorded as a lithic scatter and the Templeton siding was recorded as bedrock mortar.22 In San Luis Obispo County, archaeological sites were recorded in various locations within the existing alignment and in physical improvement areas. There are a total of 12 archaeological sites located within existing alignments section #7, section #8, section #9, and section #10 in San Luis Obispo County.21 Both of these sites were recorded, but eligibility for the NRHP and CRHR was not determined. In section #10 of the existing alignment, two concrete foundations were recorded and evaluated in 2006, but deemed not eligible for the NRHP and CRHR. Most notably, the Mission San Miguel Arcangel is located within the study area in the northern portions of San Luis Obispo County and is considered a California Historical Landmark, but eligibility for the NRHP and CRHR was not determined. The Rios-Caledonia Adobe is located near the Mission San Miguel Arcangel and is listed on the NRHP and is also a California Historical Landmark. No physical components outside of the railroad ROW would occur in these areas because the Preferred Alternative only entails system-wide components including track tie and ballast upgrades. As a result, these historic archaeological resources would not likely be affected. However, appropriate measures consistent with Section 106 may be required to avoid, minimize, or mitigate potential adverse effects to such resources. A total of two archaeological sites were recorded within the buffer areas of the new Wellsona siding and the Templeton siding extension.22 These sites were recorded but their eligibility was not determined. Both of these proposed sidings would occur within the existing railroad ROW and would be limited to already disturbed areas. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would not likely affect recorded archaeological sites within these sidings’ permanent and temporary impact areas. In the event any one or more components move forward for further design, funding, and implementation, appropriate surveys would be conducted to determine NRHP eligibility. Any final Section 4(f) use determinations that would be included in subsequent, project-level NEPA review will be dependent upon the results of NRHP eligibility determinations and an analysis of the potential effects of the components to eligible resources. FRA will evaluate design modifications to avoid ground disturbance at the location of any archaeologically sensitive areas. If the areas cannot be avoided, FRA will conduct archaeological data recovery for the purposes of site identification and significance evaluation. If they are determined eligible for the NRHP, FRA will determine, in consultation with the appropriate parties, whether the component will adversely affect an eligible resource. If FRA determines that an adverse effect would result from the component, FRA will mitigate impacts as appropriate including through archaeological data recovery as described in Section 3.10, Cultural Resources. If archaeological resources are encountered inadvertently during construction and are determined to be eligible for the NRHP and warrant preservation in place, FRA will expedite preparation of separate Section 4(f) evaluations for such resources in any project-level NEPA review that may be required. Historic Resources Based on the analysis conducted for Cultural Resources (see Section 3.10), there is only one historic architectural resource that has been determined eligible for NRHP listing, the Bradley Road Bridge. The Bradley Road Bridge is located west of the existing alignment in southern Monterey County. The only physical component potentially occurring outside the railroad ROW near the Bradley Road Bridge is the proposed Bradley siding extension. The siding currently ends about 0.75 miles the southeast of the Bradley Road Bridge. If the siding is extended to the south, the siding extension would be about 0.8 miles to the southeast of the Bradley Road Bridge - in other words, farther away from the Bradley Road Bridge than the current siding. Therefore, it is unlikely that a use of the Bradley Road Bridge would occur. If the Bradley Siding moves forward into construction, project-level of review would be conducted to formally determine the potential for the Preferred Alternative component to affect the bridge’s previously established eligibility. Additionally, over 50 recorded historic resources potentially affected by various components of the Preferred Alternative may require evaluation under the NRHP criteria. One or more of these may be found to qualify for protection under Section 4(f). If such resources are determined to be eligible for the NRHP and warrant protection, FRA would prepare Section 4(f) evaluations. The Preferred Alternative reflects the City of King’s revised draft station area plans, which retain the general downtown location assumed for the Build Alternative in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative more specifically encompasses the parcels envisioned by the City for its future passenger station. Two structures are located within the footprint of the City of King passenger station analyzed as part of the Preferred Alternative. While the structures appear to be older than 45 years in age, the actual year of their construction is not recorded in County or City records. The structures appear to be utilitarian storage buildings, with metal exteriors and are located within the railroad ROW. In its preliminary design work for the proposed station, the City of King did not call out these structures as potentially historic resources. While it is highly unlikely that these structures possess historic value, without a more formal evaluation, there is not enough evidence to conclusively determine in this Program EIS/EIR whether one or both are eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places and also protected by Section 4(f). Therefore, any future project-level environmental review of the proposed City of King station would require a site-specific analysis of potential cultural resources. If any federal approval or funding were to be involved, this environmental review would need to include an evaluation of potential Section 4(f) uses. Regarding the siding extension, the Draft Program EIS/EIR found no Section 4(f) resources within the study area of the Build Alternative siding extension. However, as discussed in the Section 3.10, Cultural Resources, the revised siding extension buffer assumptions included under the Preferred Alternative would extend to be within proximity of a portion of the Southern Pacific Railroad, which was identified as potentially historic resource within Existing Alignment #3 of the Build Alternative, but was not evaluated. Physical components would be unlikely to alter historical values or eligibility as the components would be consistent with existing railroad use. However, future project-level environmental review would be necessary to formally determine the potential to affect cultural resources in this location. Class I Areas The Preferred Alternative would add up to four new train trips each day; therefore, it is possible that a slight increase in pollutant emissions could affect visibility in the identified areas. However, as detailed in Section 3.2, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, the Preferred Alternative could have a minor positive effect on regional air pollutant emissions. Given these factors, the Preferred Alternative would not be expected to cause substantial degradation in visibility in Class I areas.  4.7 PRELIMINARY SECTION 4(F) FINDING Based on this program-level analysis and as described above, certain components of the Preferred Alternative could result in impacts to resources protected by Section 4(f). Further analysis will be completed during project-level environmental process(es) to make final determinations regarding a resource’s eligibility for protection under Section 4(f) (e.g., two potentially historic properties near the passenger station in the City of King), as well as whether the project component(s) would result in a use of any of those resources eligible for protection. If the projectlevel environmental analysis finds a use of a 4(f) property, it would also include the identification of all feasible and prudent avoidance alternatives and all possible measures to minimize harm. As discussed above, at this stage in the environmental review process, design is still at a conceptual level. Furthermore, final Section 106 eligibility and effects determinations have not been completed. However, all components of the Preferred Alternative would include the following avoidance, minimization and mitigation strategies. Future evaluations could include the following analyses: . Detailed physical descriptions of the plan area for the component (including plans and profiles). Complete descriptions of the potential impacts on Section 4(f) resources in light of refined designs. Specific potential impacts on each resource would be identified, including any impacts that could affect ambient noise, air quality, transportation, and visual resources. In particular, a reevaluation of the potential noise effects of the proposed curve realignments and second mainline on Section 4(f) resources would be completed. Applicability of the de minimis finding would be evaluated for proposed uses and potential impacts on Section 4(f) resources. . If necessary, the identification of feasible and prudent alternatives that avoid the use of a Section 4(f) property. . Identification and evaluation of strategies to avoid or minimize proposed use of and impacts on Section 4(f) resources by narrowing ROW/disturbance limits, realigning/relocating project features, and developing other alignment adjustments. The accompanying analysis would evaluate the technical feasibility of each mitigation measure, including cost estimates with figures showing percentage differences in total project costs, possibility of community or ecosystem disruption, and other potential significant adverse environmental impacts of each alternative. The financial, social, or ecological costs or potential adverse environmental impacts of each alternative would also be addressed, as well as unique problems and extraordinary magnitudes of impacts. . Documentation of consultation with the affected local jurisdictions and owners/operators of each of the identified Section 4(f) resources. Required documentation includes proof of concurrence or efforts to obtain concurrence from the public official or officials having jurisdiction over the Section 4(f) resources and documentation of the planning that took place to minimize harm to the affected resources. Input from the public, or documentation of efforts to obtain input from the public, must be included. The public would be consulted on proposed effects to recreational or wildlife refuge resources and historic resources. In addition to these analyses, mitigation measures would be identified. Mitigation measures for natural, cultural, aesthetic and recreational impacts could include, but would not be limited to, the following: . Compensation for temporary and loss of park and recreation use. . Where necessary, provide alternative transit service to park visitors. . Restore directly impacted park lands to a natural state after construction. . Planning studies for relocated facilities, including measures for design and appropriate replacement with minimal impact on park use. . Inventory and document affected historic structures. Identify appropriate mitigation to address adverse effects to historic structures. . Use local native plants for revegetation. . Employ best management practices during construction and maintenance to protect wetland resources. . Construct wildlife under- or over-crossings as necessary. . Incorporate construction best practices to protect critical wildlife corridors and visitor use areas within any impacted public park.  4.8 PRELIMINARY SECTION 6(F) FINDING The Program EIS/EIR analyzed the California State Parks Land and Water Conservation Fund grants list for Monterey and San Luis Obispo counties and did not identify any Section 6(f) resources that would be affected by the Selected Alternative. Like Section 4(f) , to the extent any individual components of the Selected Alternative advance toward construction, project-level evaluations and findings under Section 6(f) would be prepared as part of project-level environmental reviews. 5.0 COMMENTS AND COORDINATION 5.1 SCOPING PROCESS FRA initiated the scoping process by publishing a NOI to prepare a Program EIS/EIR in the Federal Register on August 17, 2012. FRA is the lead federal agency, working jointly with SLOCOG as the lead state agency. The two agencies have prepared this Program EIS/EIR pursuant to the requirements of NEPA and CEQA. SLOCOG held two scoping meetings as a part of the scoping process, as shown in Table 5-1. Table 5-1 Scoping Meetings Salinas San Luis Obispo Transportation Agency for Monterey County San Luis Obispo City/County Library 55-B Plaza Circle 995 Palm Street August 28, 2012, 3:30 p.m. – 6:00 p.m. August 29, 2012, 3:30 p.m. – 6:00 p.m. These meetings provided an opportunity for the public and agencies to comment on the scope of environmental topics that are analyzed in this Program EIS/EIR. Approximately 25 people attended the scoping meetings and/or submitted comments during the scoping period. Sign in sheets were provided for attendees with the option of including a mailing/email address so that they could be added to the project mailing list. This list will be used to update the public and appropriate agencies on further public outreach/involvement opportunities, and to provide further information concerning the proposed project. Scoping meeting attendees were provided with comment cards to submit their comments on the project, and copies of the presentation given were made available for interested parties. Representatives from SLOCOG, TAMC, and the consultant team presented an overview of the Coast Corridor Rail project, its components, and its purpose and need. They also described the environmental process and the issues to be studied in the Program EIS/EIR. Preceding and following the presentation, attendees were  welcomed to take part in an open house informal discussion of the project and review process with team members at various information stations with exhibit boards and aerial overview maps. 5.2 OTHER SCOPING MEETING NOTIFICATION Federal Register/Notice of Intent FRA published a notice of intent in the Federal Register on August 17, 2012. Newspaper Notices to the public briefly describing the proposed project and listing the dates and locations of the scoping meetings were published in local newspapers. These publications included the Salinas Californian (August 21, 2012), the San Luis Obispo Tribune (August 22, 2012) and El Sol (August 25, 2012). El Sol is a Spanish-language newspaper published in Salinas that covers Salinas and Monterey County. Mailing Over 6,000 postcard meeting notifications in both English and Spanish were distributed to residents within 500 feet of the corridor and 1,000 feet of the proposed new railroad stations (Soledad and King City). These mailers gave a brief explanation of the project and provided details on the dates, times, and locations of the Scoping Meetings. 5.3 FORMAL COMMENT SUMMARY Scoping Meeting attendees were provided with comment sheets at the meeting and were asked to submit them that day or mail them to SLOCOG (1114 Marsh Street, San Luis Obispo, CA 93401) or via email to coastcorridorscopingcomments@circlepoint.com by close of business September 10, 2012. All comments and questions, including those delivered orally at one of the scoping meetings and those provided in writing, are summarized and responded to below (Tables 5-2 and 5-3).  Table 5-2 August 28th – Salinas Questions/Comments Disposition Response Is this a real project? Has funding been identified? Project attributes components and anticipated potential funding strategies will be discussed in the EIS/EIR - see discussion of Build Alternative, Chapter 2.0, Alternatives Does the Federal government have some minimum level of projects that need to be approved? The EIS/EIR will discuss all pertinent regulatory requirements. There is no minimum level of improvements that must be implemented. How much will the ticket be from Salinas to San Francisco? San Francisco to Los Angeles? Estimated fare information was not available as of the drafting of this EIS/EIR.  August 29th Table 5-3 – San Luis Obispo Questions/Comments Disposition Response Would you consider re-instituting the use of sidings—currently many are used for excess rail car storage. This is unsightly, and being used as a parking lot. The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all project components and how they were developed. Besides the Cuesta Grade, what other curves are we looking at? The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all project components and how they were developed. Several other curve corrections are noted; the Cuesta area is the only segment where substantial second track is programmed. Do we have the authority to take property via eminent domain? The EIS/EIR will discuss the subsequent analyses and permits anticipated to be necessary for project implementation, including any needed land acquisition. As described in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, the extent of actual physical improvements components to be implemented is not yet known, so the need for any specific property acquisition has not yet been determined. Will the fiber optic cable that was laid a number of years ago be considered or disturbed? The EIS/EIR will consider effects to existing utilities in the rail corridor, including communications infrastructure. See Section 3.8, Public Utilities and Services Is the April 2015 service date firm? The EIS/EIR will clarify anticipated project timeframes. The Final EIS/EIR is likely to be published in early 2015. Updated projections on service dates will be provided, as feasible. Questions/Comments Disposition Response What is the status of implementing positive train control? Will it be required? The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all of the anticipated physical improvements components. What website will you use to provide updates? www.slocog.org Does the train own an easement next to the tracks? The EIS/EIR will discuss the subsequent analyses and permits anticipated to be necessary for project implementation, including any needed land acquisition. I would like to see a parallel bike path and trail. The comment is noted. Amtrak & UPRR—since UPRR is such a disinterested partner, why force the issue? Highway 101 has a good amount of Right of Way for an elevated train up the middle of the highway. The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all of the physical anticipated improvements components and their anticipated locations. This section will also discuss alternatives briefly considered but ultimately rejected from further analysis. There is much to accomplish in terms of planning and actual work on the Coast Corridor. Eagerly awaiting the start of the Coast Daylight. The comment is noted. Pleased to see that much needed improvements will be made. These will serve residents and tourists. The comment is noted. This project is much needed, and adding stations between SLO and Salinas would be okay, but there should be at least one daily express run up and down the coast each way that skips most other stops. The comment is noted. 5.4 STAKEHOLDER OUTREACH As part of the public involvement and outreach process for the Coast Corridor Rail project environmental review, consultants assisting SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR made efforts to conduct project briefings with agencies and other stakeholders prioritized by SLOCOG and its partners. Below is a summary of briefings conducted between August 2012, and November 2012, and May 2015. Also identified are agencies that were contacted and did not wish to receive a briefing, or did not respond to inquiries.  City of Soledad The project team (SLOCOG, TAMC, Caltrans DOR, and assisting consultants) held a briefing with the Community and Economic Development Director of the City of Soledad was held in-person on August 28, 2012. Discussion topics included: the City of Soledad Downtown Specific Plan, station location, potential agriculture impacts if any access across the tracks is eliminated. City of King The project team held a briefing with the Community Development Director and staff was conducted in-person on August 29, 2012. Discussion topics included: purpose/result of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, coordination with Fort Hunter-Liggett, coordination with existing downtown planning efforts, coordination with UPRR, existing RailPro study. King City staff indicated concerns about the following topics: GHG emissions, multi-modal element, and the potential impact on commute patterns. King City staff also encouraged making the Draft Program EIS/EIR accessible to Spanish speakers, if feasible. Additionally, the project team met with the City of King in May 2015 to discuss the city’s comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Monterey County Farm Bureau The project team held a briefing was held via teleconference and webinar with the Monterey County Farm Bureau on October 17, 2012. Discussion topics included impacts to station locations, alignments, the environmental process schedule and impacts to agricultural land. The Farm Bureau reported at the end of the briefing that this information about the project was “not as alarming” as they had expected. They look forward to continued involvement in the project moving forward. U.S. Army/Fort Hunter Liggett The project team held a briefing was conducted via teleconference/webinar with command staff at Fort Hunter Liggett on November 13, 2012. Fort Hunter Liggett was not on the initial list of stakeholders, given its distance (20+ miles) from the corridor and the proposed King City station. However, staff at the City of King strongly urged outreach to Fort command staff. Discussion topics included train schedules and the location of the train station in San Francisco, and the potential for Coast Corridor service to connect with airports in San Jose and Burbank as a means of expanding access to and from the Fort. The stakeholders are supportive of the project and look forward to receiving project updates. San Luis Obispo Farm Bureau Contact attempts were made to the San Luis Obispo Farm Bureau, but were not returned. Others Contacted but Declined Briefings We Consultants assisting SLOCOG, TAMC, and Caltrans DOR have reached out to the following groups and found out that they were not interested in obtaining more information about the Coast Corridor Rail Project: . Salinas Valley Chamber . San Luis Obispo Chamber of Commerce . San Luis Obispo County Agricultural Commissioner No Response We Consultants also reached out to the following agencies to offer a briefing on the project, but did not receive a response: . California Department of Fish and Wildlife . United States Forest Service: Santa Lucia unit of Los Padres National Forest1 1 As noted in Chapter 4, in August 2014 the consultant team preparing this document sought and obtained information from a ranger within US Forest Service regarding land uses in the vicinity of the Cuesta Grade/proposed second main line. 5.5 TRIBAL OUTREACH The project team performed a Sacred Lands File and Native American Contacts List Request through the NAHC. On July 1, 2013, the NAHC responded to the records search, noting that the search indicated the possible presence of Native American traditional cultural place(s) in the proposed project area. NAHC recommended that tribal governments and individuals be contacted to determine potential impact of any cultural place(s), and follow up within two weeks of initial contact via telephone call. NAHC provided contact information for 25 individuals from several tribal organizations traditionally affiliated with lands in the project area. In response to NAHC’s request, and pursuant to Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (36 CFR 800.2(c)(2)(ii)) FRA reached out to the identified individuals to advise about the project. Initial contact was made via letter, sent certified mail on September 17, 2013. As recommended by NAHC, the project team made follow up phone calls to the tribal government contacts on September 24, 2013. All answered calls indicated receipt of FRA’s letter. 5.6 OTHER AGENCY OUTREACH The project team has worked closely with the California State Historical Preservation Officer (SHPO) to ensure that all necessary outreach processes occur to ensure to mitigate any potential disruption of historic properties. Agency Conference Calls and Correspondence . Conference Call with FRA and Circlepoint, November 7, 2013 . Delivered updated outreach efforts report per SHPO’s June recommendations. . Email Correspondence with between SHPO and Circlepoint: October 3, 2013 . SHPO acknowledged receipt of 9/3/2013 FRA letter initiating Section 106 consultation. . Conference Call with Circlepoint, June 27, 2013 . Discussed the background, purpose & need, and key stakeholders of the project, as well as the Tier 1 EIS/EIR. . Project team requested SHPO feedback on appropriate parameters for the Cultural Records search; SHPO supported . mile buffer zone around project alignment as appropriate boundary for cultural resources analysis. . SHPO expressed importance of conducting NAHC consultation as early as possible. 5.7 DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR DISTRIBUTION LIST A Draft Program EIS/EIR was circulated to the public to provide an opportunity to review the EIR/EIS and provide comments. The comment period began November 14, 2014 and closed January 7, 2015. As previously described, scoping meetings were held to provide an opportunity for the public and agencies to comment on the scope of environmental topics that are analyzed in this Program EIS/EIR. Approximately 25 people attended the scoping meetings and/or submitted comments during the scoping period. Sign in sheets were provided for attendees with the option of including a mailing/email address so that they could be added to the project mailing list. All persons, agencies, and organizations listed below were informed of the availability of and locations to obtain the Draft Program EIS/EIR, as well as the timing of the public review period. Libraries listed below have received both hardcopy and electronic copies of the Draft Program EIS/EIR document and appendices. Federal, state, and local agencies and other officials and organizations listed below have received a hard copy of the Summary and electronic copies of the document and appendices. All other people (approximately 6,000 addresses along the Corridor) have been mailed a notification that includes information on how to obtain a copy of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, the timing for the public comment period, and notice on public hearing dates, times, and locations. This information was also conveyed in both English and Spanish language newspapers in the Corridor (the Salinas Californian, El Sol, and the San Luis Obispo Tribune). The project team held four public meetings, in the cities of Salinas and Soledad on December 3, 2014, in the City of King on December 8, 2014, and in San Luis Obispo on January 7, 2015. The meetings began with a presentation by the team covering the project’s purpose and need, the various project components, the project timeline, and next steps in the environmental review. Following the presentation, the public was invited to provide oral public comments, which are transcribed and included herein. 5.7.1 LIBRARY LOCATIONS Monterey County Salinas Public Library, 350 Lincoln Avenue, Salinas, CA 93901 Gonzales Branch Library, 851 5th Street, Gonzales, CA 93926 Soledad Branch Library, 401 Gabilan Drive, Soledad, CA 93960 Greenfield Branch Library, 315 El Camino Real, Greenfield, CA 93927 San Luis Obispo County Paso Robles City Library, 1000 Spring Street, Paso Robles, CA 93446 Atascadero Public Library, 6850 Morro Road, Atascadero, CA 93422 San Luis Obispo City/County Library, 995 Palm Street, San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 5.7.2 FEDERAL AGENCIES U.S. Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Region, Vallejo U.S Department of Army, Corps of Engineers, Regulatory Branch, Los Angeles U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9, San Francisco & Washington, D.C. 5.7.3 STATE AGENCIES California Department of Transportation, Chief Deputy Director, Sacramento California Department of Transportation, District 5, San Luis Obispo California Environmental Protection Agency, Secretary for Environmental Protection, Sacramento California Department of Fish and Wildlife California State Parks California State Water Resources Control Board 5.7.4 ELECTED OFFICIALS Federal Elected Officials The Honorable Barbara Boxer, U.S. Senator for California The Honorable Dianne Feinstein, U.S. Senator for California The Honorable Sam Farr, 20th Congressional District The Honorable Lois Capps, 24th Congressional District State Elected Officials The Honorable Edmund G. Brown, Jr., Governor The Honorable Bill Monning, 17th Senate District The Honorable Luis Alejo, 30th Assembly District The Honorable Katcho Achadjian, 35th Assembly District County and Local Officials Mr. Louis Calcagno, Chair, Monterey County Board of Supervisors Mr. Bruce Gibson, Chair, San Luis Obispo County Board of Supervisors Mayors of Corridor Cities The Honorable Mayor Joe Gunter, Salinas The Honorable Mayor John Huerta, Greenfield The Honorable Mayor Maria Orozco, Gonzales The Honorable Mayor Fred Ledesma, Soledad The Honorable Mayor Robert Cullen, King City The Honorable Mayor Duane Picanco, Paso Robles The Honorable Mayor Tom O’Malley, Atascadero The Honorable Mayor Jan Howell Marx, San Luis Obispo  5.7.5 REGIONAL AND LOCAL AGENCIES Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments (AMBAG) Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District Monterey-Salinas Transit (MST) San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District (SLO APCD) San Luis Obispo Regional Transit Authority Coast Rail Coordinating Council 5.7.6 ORGANIZATIONS Amtrak, Public and Governmental Affairs, Oakland Planning and Conservation League, Sacramento Rail Passenger Association of California, San Francisco Train Riders Association of California, Sacramento Union Pacific Railroad, Sacramento 5.8 RESPONSE TO COMMENTS ON THE DRAFT PROGRAM EIS/EIR FRA and SLOCOG, as the lead federal and state agencies, received comments from elected officials, agencies and organizations, and individuals (Table 5-5) including comments received at four public meetings held in the cities of Salinas, Soledad, City of King, San Luis Obispo. The public was invited to provide oral public comments at these meetings, which are transcribed and included herein. Many of the comments received were on the same topic or expressed similar concerns. Rather than repeat the same response to each of those comments, the lead agencies prepared the following “Master Responses,” each of which addresses broad issue areas or topics. The comment letters are included as Appendix 2 of the Final Program EIS/EIR. If a Master Response was used to respond to an individual’s comment, the commenter is directed to that Master Response in the response section corresponding to their comment letter.2 2 Although not presented in an underline format, all text in this chapter after Section 5.8 is new text since publication of the Public Draft Program EIS/EIR and includes the responses to public comments.  Table 5-4 Index of Master Responses Number Topic 1 Curve Realignments and Atascadero Water Resources in San Luis Obispo County 2 City of King Passenger Station; Siding Extension 3 Conceptual Nature of Proposed Components 4 Outreach Efforts 5 Coast Starlight Ridership 5.8.1 MASTER RESPONSES Master Response 1: Curve Realignments in San Luis Obispo County SLOCOG held a public hearing on the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR as part of its board meeting on January 7, 2015. The main focus of the public comments was curve realignments proposed for various locations in San Luis Obispo County. Commenters stated that the curve realignments have the potential to result in property acquisitions, split parcels, and other adverse environmental and socioeconomic effects. While SLOCOG retains discretion as to which, if any, rail improvement projects it will fund (including the curve realignments), the Board adopted a motion requesting SLOCOG staff drop from further consideration curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. These are: 1. McKay/Wellsona 2. Wellsona/Paso Robles 3. Templeton/Henry 4. Henry/Santa Margarita As reflected in the Preferred Alternative identified by FRA, SLOCOG, and Caltrans DOR, the Preferred Alternative does not include any of these San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. Therefore, these curve realignments are not eligible for FRA funding unless and until the curve realignments undergo separate NEPA review. It is further anticipated that SLOCOG as CEQA lead agency will adopt the Preferred Alternative as the approved project, thus depriving the curve realignments (outside the Preferred Alternative) from any CEQA clearance as a result of the Draft and Final Program EIS/EIR. Exclusion of these curve realignments from the Preferred Alternative would not substantially compromise future on-time performance of passenger and freight trains as other improvements modeled by Caltrans were found to result in satisfactory performance. In its own modeling, UPRR identified a number of other improvements it deemed necessary to expand passenger service, which did not include these curve realignments. Excluding the curve realignments would eliminate or substantially reduce several potential adverse environmental effects s, including: . Land Use: The Preferred Alternative would require fewer property acquisitions than the Build Alternative. . Agricultural Lands: The Preferred Alternative would require substantially less conversion of agricultural lands to non-agricultural use than the Build Alternative. . Air Quality: Construction-period emissions (fugitive dust, diesel equipment) would be lower under the Preferred Alternative than under the Build Alternative. . Noise and Vibration: The Preferred Alternative would generally retain the existing railroad alignment through San Luis Obispo County. In the Build Alternative, the curve realignments would alter the railroad alignment closer to the location of sensitive receptors. Additionally, several individual commenters and the Atascadero Mutual Water Company (AMWC) noted that two AMWC water wells in Atascadero were within the area surveyed for potential implementation of the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment. Exclusion of the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment from the Preferred Alternative would eliminate the need to acquire the land that includes these wells. Therefore, the Preferred Alternative would have no adverse effect on these wells. See Section 3.8 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a detailed discussion. SLOCOG as CEQA lead agency is anticipated to certify this EIR and follow by approving the Preferred Alternative as the proposed project. CEQA does not require SLOCOG to recirculate the Draft EIR in order to effect this change. Per CEQA Guidelines Section 15088.5, a recirculation of an EIR prior to certification would only be required if a new significant impact were to be identified, the severity of a significant impact were to increase substantially, or a new mitigation measure is added.3 As noted above, these changes would substantially reduce potential environmental effects of the Preferred Alternative when compared to the Build Alternative. For the purposes of this programmatic review, no new avoidance, minimization, or mitigation strategy is required as exclusion of the curve realignments because it serves to reduce potentially significant environmental impacts. Therefore, recirculation is not warranted. 3 Similarly to CEQA Guidelines, the FRA Environmental Procedures (for NEPA) Section 13 (17)(e) states that if a significant change is made which would alter (worsen) environmental impacts, or where significant new information becomes available regarding an environmental impact, a supplement to the original Draft or Final EIS would be prepared. FRA determined that the removal of the curve realignments would not trigger a need to supplement the original Draft EIS. Master Response 2: Changes Requested by the City of King following publication of the Draft EIS/EIR The City of King provided extensive written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR, advising that the City had updated its draft plans for the City of King passenger station and the related siding extension since the publication of the Draft EIS/EIR. Siding Extension Draft EIS/EIR Analysis: As noted on page 2-9 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, no precise plans for new sidings or siding extensions had been identified when analysis for the Draft Program EIS/EIR commenced. Accordingly, the analysis in the Draft EIS/EIR made assumptions regarding existing sidings proposed to be extended. It was understood that sidings extension would result in sidings of 10,000 feet in length. The analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR assumed that this desired length could potentially be achieved by adding all needed track to either the northern or southern end of the siding. In effect, the Draft Program EIS/EIR examined a larger total area for the sidings than would have been necessary to achieve the desired 10,000 foot length. The existing King City siding extends from MP 159.19 to MP 160.64, about 1.45 miles in length. The Draft Program EIS/EIR analyzed siding extensions between MP 158.5 and 159.19, and 160.64 and 161.19. Either the northern or southern extension would have been sufficient to result in a 10,000-foot-long siding. Revised Draft Plans from City of King: As noted in the City’s comments, the City of King engaged a railroad engineer (RailPros) to consider modifications to rail facilities in the area. The RailPros study prepared for and endorsed by the City of King proposed that the siding extension be greater than 10,000 feet in length and that the extension would most feasibly be achieved by extending the siding on the north side. The RailPros study considered extending the siding from MP 156.38 to 159.19, resulting in a siding 2.81 miles or about 14,800 feet in length. Passenger Station Draft Program EIS/EIR: As noted on page 2-11 of the Draft EIS/EIR, the analysis in the Draft EIS/EIR used conceptual plans from adopted City documents that proposed a station site near the intersection of First Street and Broadway. Operating details were assumed to include a station building, parking, and bus pull out areas. Revised Draft Plans from City of King: As noted in the City’s comments, the RailPros plan shows a similarly sized (slightly smaller) passenger station in generally the same part of downtown, with similar features, as well as an area set aside for military personnel transfers. The RailPros plan also calls for the relocation of an existing atgrade crossing (at Pearl Street) to move about one block to Broadway.4 4 Such a relocation would be subject to an approval by the California Public Utilities Commission. The revised draft plans would have similar or lesser environmental effects as the plans analyzed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR and would not introduce any entirely new impacts or the need for new mitigation strategies. Based on the foregoing and the City of King’s expressed interest in moving forward the revised draft plans (as expressed through several of the City’s comments), the Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR reflects the relocated King City siding extension and the revised passenger station. The siding extension and the station area as analyzed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR as part of the Build Alternative are retained as part of the Build Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR. Technical sections of the Final Program EIS/EIR include analysis of the Preferred Alternative and discuss the comparative effects of the No Build, Build, and Preferred Alternatives. FRA has determined that no supplemental environmental documentation is required to effect these modifications. These modifications were requested by the local jurisdiction in which the improvements would be implemented and reduce potentially adverse environmental effects compared to that which was disclosed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. In addition, avoidance, minimization, and mitigation  strategies included in the Draft Program EIS/EIR remain relevant without modification to the Preferred Alternative and are incorporated in the Final Program EIS/EIR. In terms of CEQA review, SLOCOG as the CEQA lead agency is anticipated to certify this EIR and follow by approving the Preferred Alternative as the proposed project. CEQA does not require SLOCOG to recirculate the Draft EIR in order to effect this change. Per CEQA Guidelines Section 15088.5, recirculation of an EIR prior to certification would only be required if a new significant impact were to be identified, the severity of a significant impact were to increase substantially, or a new mitigation measure were to be added. As noted above, the changes requested by the City of King would substantially reduce several potential environmental impacts identified in the Draft Program EIS/EIR as part of the Build Alternative. No new significant impact has been identified. Existing avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies included in the Draft Program EIS/EIR and carried forward without modification into the Final Program EIS/EIR remain adequate to guide future project-level environmental review of any specific components of the Preferred Alternative. Therefore, recirculation is not warranted. Master Response 3: Conceptual Nature of Build Alternative Components Several individual commenters expressed concern that certification and approval of the Draft Program EIS/EIR would lead to immediate construction and operation of physical components and the associated environmental effects noted in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. As discussed throughout the Draft Program EIS/EIR, the document represents a program level of environmental review. A Program environmental document is used to analyze broad conceptual alternatives to accomplish the goals of a project. In this case, the overall goals of the Coast Corridor Improvements Project are to enhance the existing rail corridor with safety improvements, increase rail capacity, increase on-time performance, etc. (see page 1-4 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR). As noted in the Draft Program EIS/EIR, there is substantial disagreement between the parties preparing this analysis and UPRR, the owner of the railroad, as to the extent of physical components needed to initiate expanded passenger rail service (Coast Daylight) amidst existing and projected future freight rail traffic. Additional environmental review will be conducted at the project-level when specific project components are chosen to move forward. At that point, detailed plans for each component would be known and a project-level analysis would be completed. Construction of the project components ultimately chosen to move forward will not begin until the certification and approval of the appropriate project-level environmental review. The Coast Corridor Program EIS/EIR does not attempt to resolve the question of which components are needed. Rather, the action alternatives considered in the Program EIS/EIR include a wide variety of conceptual components promulgated over the last 15 years by a number of different parties (Amtrak, Caltrans, UPRR). This Program EIS/EIR provides an initial assessment of the types and magnitude of potential environmental effects that would likely occur from implementation of the physical components, and identifies a number of strategies to avoid, minimize, or mitigate significant impacts. Since the proposed components are conceptual, by necessity, the Program EIS/EIR made informed assumptions regarding the size, location, and other elements of most components of the action alternatives. To this end, the Draft Program EIS/EIR assumed generous “buffer” or envelope areas into which project components could ultimately occur. Buffers were up to 500 feet in some circumstances, although a typical railroad ROW area is 50 feet or less. For many components, the buffer “envelope” examined in the Draft Program EIS/EIR included up to many times more land than would ultimately need to be used to implement any specific components. The Program EIS/EIR analyzed potential impacts within these conservative envelopes in order to conduct a conservative or “worst-case” assessment and to allow for flexibility if the components location (identified only conceptually) were to shift as a result of future design studies/refinement efforts. Buffer areas should not be considered equal to the amount of land that would ultimately be used to implement a particular rail component. Many commenters expressed concerns that their respective properties are located within these buffer areas and their property valuations have already or will decrease because the information in the Draft Program EIS/EIR purports a “pending” acquisition. As noted above, none of the components evaluated at the programlevel include exact design/engineering plans and there is considerable uncertainty as to which if any components will ultimately be deemed necessary to implement. Additionally, the amount of land needed for any specific components will be far less than the “buffer” areas identified in the Program EIS/EIR for the purposes of the impact analysis. These comments regarding potential decreases in property valuations were made by property owners in the vicinity of curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. As discussed in Master Response 2 above, these curve realignments were not carried forward into the Preferred Alternative. Assuming that SLOCOG similarly selects the Preferred Alternative as the approved project under CEQA, there would be no CEQA clearance for the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. The SDP was similarly revised to eliminate the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. They are no longer among the list of physical components to initiate and maintain passenger rail service (Coast Daylight). Master Response 4: Outreach Efforts Several commenters expressed concern and confusion about public notification of the project and the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Section 5.1 through 5.7 of this chapter summarizes the notification and outreach efforts that occurred for the project. Master Response 5: Coast Starlight Ridership A number of commenters asserted or questioned the level of ridership on the existing Coast Starlight trains in considering the merits of potential increases to passenger service in the corridor. The existing Coast Starlight train service provides one daily round trip between Seattle and Los Angeles. Table 3.1-6 in the Program EIS/EIR, Section 3.1 (Traffic and Travel) describes existing Coast Starlight ridership, as provided below. In 2012, the Coast Starlight carried just over 454,000 passengers. Table 3.1-6 Coast Starlight Ridership: Existing and Forecast Service Existing Year 2012 (Seattle to Los Angeles) Forecast Year 2020 (San Jose to San Luis Obispo) Forecast Year 2040 (San Jose to San Luis Obispo) Annual Ridership Coast Daylight N/A 124,000 274,000 Coast Starlight 454,4431 105,000 150,000 SUBTOTAL 454,443 229,000 424,000 1 Ridership forecasts are available for the segment from San Jose to San Luis Obispo, existing ridership for the Coast Starlight is only reported for the entirety of the Coast Corridor (Seattle to Los Angeles). Source: Caltrans Division of Rail, 2013b, Chapter 8; Amtrak, 2012b. As described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR, Chapter 1.0 (Purpose and Need) the existing Coast Starlight is often fully booked during peak travel periods. 5.8.2 RESPONSES TO INDIVIDUAL COMMENTS This section provides responses to individual comments received during the public review period for the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Table 5-5 lists the public agencies, private organizations and individuals who provided comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Additionally, this section provides copies of written comments received, and responds to those comments. As discussed, multiple comments received on the Draft Program EIS/EIR raised the same topic or concern. Rather than repeat responses to duplicative comments, a comprehensive master response is provided in Section 5.8.1, Master Responses, and the commenter is referred to the applicable master response As required by California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), these responses to comments address significant environmental issues raised by commenters during the review period (PRC Section 21091[d]; CEQA Guidelines §15088[a and 15132). The lead agencies have addressed concerns and suggestions regarding the adequacy and accuracy of the Draft Program EIS/EIR that were raised by commenters after the review period closed (PRC §21091[d]) and provided responses to all commenters prior to consideration of the Final EIR for certification (PRC §21092.5). List of Commenters Table 5-5 lists comments by elected officials, agencies and organizations, and individual members of the public. Comment letters are organized in the following order: state agencies, local agencies, and members of the public (individuals). An alpha-numeric indicator was assigned to each comment letter. The alpha indicator describes the commenter’s organization (i.e., E = elected official, A = agencies/organizations, and I = individual) and the numeric indicator reflects the order the comment letter was received. Each individual comment (within a comment letter) is numbered to correspond to the alpha-numeric indicator (i.e., E- 1.1, E-1.2, E-1.3, etc.). Accordingly, each response within this chapter corresponds to comment letter’s alpha-numeric indicator. For example, Letter E-1, Comment E- 1.1 is addressed in response E-1.1. Table 5-5 Index of Comments Number Commenter Elected Officials - Oral Discussions at Public Hearings on the Draft Program EIS/EIR E-1 City of King City Council E-2 San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) Board of Directors Number Commenter E-3 City of Soledad City Council E-4 Transportation Agency of Monterey County (TAMC) Board of Directors Agencies/Organizations A-1 Atascadero Mutual Water Company A-2 California State Clearinghouse A-3 City of King A-4 San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District A-5 Santa Maria Valley Railroad Company A-6 U.S. Department of Interior A-7 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Individuals I-1 Bauke, John (oral comment – City of King, CA public hearing) I-2 Bradley, Myrna (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-3 Brooks, Leanne (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-4 Claire, Paulette (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-5 Edgecombe, Anne I-6 Edgecombe, Anne (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-7 Edgecombe, John I-8 Edgecombe, John (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-9 Evans, Ellen I-10 Giueici, Francis (oral comment – City of King, CA public hearing) I-11 Gomes, Val (oral comment – Soledad, CA public hearing) I-12 Greening, Eric (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-13 Hayden, Celine I-14 Jensen, Ross (oral comment – Salinas, CA public hearing) I-15 Kemp, Christine Number Commenter I-16 Kemp, Christine (oral comment – Salinas, CA public hearing) I-17 Kirkland, Gary (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-18 Lyon, Christopher (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-19 May, Rachel I-20 McLoughlin, Arthur (oral comment – Salinas, CA public hearing) I-21 Melendrez, Chantal Georis I-22 Salter, Bettina (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) I-23 Schneiderhan, Barbara I-24 Thompson, Nancy I-25 Veek, Edward (oral comment – Atascadero, CA public hearing) Note: Notes from public hearings are included as Appendix 2. Comments that are not noted as oral comments, were written comments. Transcripts/summaries of oral comments are included in this chapter. Source: Circlepoint, 2015  Responses to Comment E-1: City of King City Council (oral discussion) E-1.1 As reflected in the transcription of the December 8 public hearing (refer to Appendix 2), members of the City of King City Council public asked factual questions about the project and the environmental review process. Staff from TAMC and SLOCOG responded directly to these questions at the same public hearing, as reflected in the transcript. The Councilmembers asked that these discussions be included in the record. None of the questions or comments addressed the adequacy of the environmental document or the characterization of any specific potential effect. No further response is required.  Responses to Letter E-2: San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) Board of Directors (oral discussion) E-2.1 As reflected in the transcription of the January 7 public hearing (refer to Appendix 2), members of the SLOCOG Board asked factual questions about the project and the environmental review process. The main focus of the discussion was on curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County. As reflected in the minutes, this culminated in a motion to ask staff to remove the curve realignments from the document. As discussed in this Final Program EIS/EIR, the Preferred Alternative does not include any of the curve realignments in San Luis Obispo County that were part of the Build Alternative. None of the questions or comments addressed the adequacy of the environmental document or the characterization of any specific potential effect. No further response is required.  Responses to Comment E-3: City of Soledad City Council (oral discussion) E-3.1 As reflected in the transcription of the December 3 public hearing (refer to Appendix 2), members of the City of Soledad City Council asked factual questions about the project, including existing Coast Starlight ridership and the potential benefits of the project. Staff from TAMC responded directly to all of these questions at the same public hearing, as reflected in the transcript. Master Response 5 provides regarding response to Coast Starlight ridership. None of the questions or comments addressed the adequacy of the environmental document or the characterization of any specific potential effect. No further response is required.  Responses to Comment E-4: Transportation Agency of Monterey County (TAMC) Board of Directors (oral discussion) E-4.1 As reflected in the transcription of the December 3 public hearing (refer to Appendix 2), members of the TAMC Board asked factual questions about the project and the environmental review process. Staff from TAMC and SLOCOG responded directly to all questions at the same public hearing, as reflected in the transcript. Master Response 5 provides regarding response to Coast Starlight ridership. None of the questions or comments addressed the adequacy of the environmental document or the characterization of any specific potential effect. No further response is required.  Response to Comment Letter A-1: Atascadero Mutual Water Company A-1.1 The commenter asserts that the proposed Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment could potentially affect two existing water well resources that serve 488 properties within the nearby area. See Master Response 1 regarding proposed curve realignments within San Luis Obispo County. The Preferred Alternative does not include the Henry/Santa Margarita curve realignment. Accordingly, the Preferred Alternative would have no effect on these two existing wells.  Response to Comment Letter A-2: California State Clearinghouse A-2.1 The commenter acknowledges that the lead CEQA agency has complied with the State Clearinghouse review requirements for the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR. No further response is necessary.  Responses to Comment Letter A-3: City of King, California A-3.i See Master Response 2. A-3.ii The City states “Participation by Fort Hunter-Liggett in the King City Station is not mentioned in the document.” Please refer to pages 5-4 through 5-5 (Stakeholder Outreach). These sections describe SLOCOG/TAMC’s meetings with the City of King and Fort Hunter-Liggett. The summary of the meetings reflects Fort Hunter-Liggett’s support for the project and potential use of City of King passenger station for troop movement. This comment does not result in any need to modify the text of the document nor does it identify any new environmental effects not previously disclosed. Also see Master Response 2. A-3.iii The description of the Preferred Alternative included in Section 2.2.4.1, page 2-18 in this Final Program EIS/EIR describes the relocation of the at-grade crossing at Pearl Street to Broadway Street to implement the City of King passenger station. Also see Master Response 2. A-3.iv See Master Response 2. A-3.1 See Master Response 2. A-3.2 The City notes the presence of fiber optic cables along the rail alignment within Monterey County and possible plans for a utility hub to be located in the City of King. Certain text in the Draft Program EIS/EIR was unclear on the full extent of existing fiber-optic cables alongside the rail corridor. Section 3.8 of this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the text modifications in response to the comment. A-3.3 FRA and SLOCOG note the City’s preferred nomenclature. However, FRA and SLOCOG also acknowledge that among the general public the name “King City” is widely used and widely understood as the City’s name. To this end, several of the documents provided to FRA and SLOCOG by the City along with its comments use a mix of “King City” and “City of King” depending on circumstances (see comment A- 3.4, A-3.22, etc.). Since the nomenclature has no bearing on any of the conclusions of the environmental document, FRA and SLOCOG see no need to make individual text revisions. However, this Final Program EIS/EIR uses the preferred term (“City of King”) where feasible.  A-3.4 See Master Response 2, the Preferred Alternative identified in this Final Program EIS/EIR includes siding extension and station area plans reflecting the City of King’s latest draft plans. Chapter 2.0 of this Final Program EIS/EIR describes the Preferred Alternative; analysis in the individual sections of Chapter 3.0 discusses impacts of the Preferred Alternative in comparison to the No Build and Build Alternatives. A-3.5 The City recites comments from a member of the public recorded during the scoping period for the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The City appears to interpret this scoping comment as a component of the Build Alternative. The action alternatives do not include any plan for long-term parking or storage of train cars at any location between Salinas and San Luis Obispo. The commenter is referred to a minimization strategy drafted specifically to reduce the potential for visual effects from sidings/siding extensions (see page 3.6-18 of the Final Program EIS/EIR). A-3.6 The City notes the need for an editorial clarification to text that summarizes the description of the No Build Alternative. Chapter 2.0 of the Final Program EIS/EIR includes clarifying text that the No Build Alternative does not include any of the physical components associated with the Build or Preferred Alternatives. This clarifying text does not alter any of the conclusions of the environmental document. A-3.7 See response to comment A-3.ii. A-3.8 As reflected in Master Response 2, the Preferred Alternative identified in this Final Program EIS/EIR includes the City of King’s latest draft passenger station and siding extension plans. See Master Response 2 for a more complete discussion of changes to the document resulting from FRA and SLOCOG’s inclusion of the revised City of King siding extension. A-3.9 See Master Response 2 and the response to comment A-3.7. A-3.10 See Master Response 2. A-3.11 The City is correct that the existing Spreckels Road at-grade crossing is not located within the corporate limits of the City of King. The at-grade crossing is located approximately 3 miles north of the City of King. The City also states that the “Lyons Street” grade crossing should be named Bitterwater Road. Chapter 2.0 and Section 3.1, Traffic and Travel, of this Final Program EIS/EIR reflects these modifications. These editorial clarifications do not have any bearing on any conclusion of the Program EIS/EIR.  A-3.12 See Master Response 2. A-3.13 See Master Response 2. A-3.14 The comment refers to page 3.1-13 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR; the full comment reads “Pearl Street/Broadway Street Crossing even without train station.” The City appears to imply that the description of the No Build Alternative in the traffic and transportation analysis should be revised. As discussed in Chapter 2.0, the RailPros plan also calls for the relocation of an existing at-grade crossing (at Pearl Street) to move about one block northwest to Broadway Street under the Preferred Alternative. However, the No Build Alternative in this Program EIS/EIR represents the continuation of existing passenger service, PTC systems, and signaling improvements. Therefore, implementation of the proposed passenger station and modifications to the at-grade crossings are not analyzed under the No Build Alternative. A-3.15 and A-3.16  The City asks for confirmation of screening distances for noise and vibration analysis shown in Tables 3.3-1 and 3.3-2 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. As stated in Master Response 2 and A-3.8 and A-3.11 above, FRA and SLOCOG did not receive the City of King’s revised draft siding or station area plans until presented as a comment on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. As reflected in Master Response 2, the Preferred Alternative incorporates the City’s revised draft plans for the siding and station area. As noted in Master Response 2, the revised draft plans for the siding extension call for the extension to occur entirely to the north of the existing siding, including an area beyond the study area analyzed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Section 3.3 of this Final Program EIS/EIR includes analysis of the Preferred Alternative, including a discussion of how the relocated siding extension reduces environmental effects compared to the Build Alternative in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. A-3.17 The City appears to state that “at-grade crossings” should be added to a partial list of project components that could result in construction-period noise effects. The cited list was not intended to be exhaustive but to merely list types of components that could result in noise or vibration during construction. FRA finds that the text’s discussion of potential construction period noise effects of the Build Alternative is adequate. No modification to the text is necessary, and none of the environmental conclusions in the Draft Program EIS/EIR require modification. A-3.18 See response to comment A-3.15. A-3.19 See response to comment A-3.15.  A-3.20 The City is referred to Section 3.10, Cultural and Paleontological Resources, Table 3.10-2, which lists potential historic architectural resources by element of the Build Alternative. This list of resources was developed from searches of relevant cultural resource databases. Page 3.10-14 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR states that these resources have not necessarily been deemed eligible for listing on any federal, state, or local register of historic resources, but are identified in this screening analysis as potentially eligible and appropriate for formal evaluation as warranted in one or more future project-level environmental reviews. The second part of this comment about the Coast Starlight appears to be an unrelated and possibly erroneous comment. Coast Starlight trains do not stop in the City of King nor is there any plan for those trains to stop there. No further response is necessary. A-3.21 The City asserts that Caltrans’s projections of ridership for the Coast Daylight “fail to include Fort Hunter-Liggett ridership demands.” Ridership estimates for the Coast Daylight were based on the SDP for the Coast Corridor. FRA and SLOCOG’s outreach to Fort Hunter-Liggett as part of the preparation of the Draft Program EIS/EIR found that the base primarily transports troops by bus from the Mineta San José International Airport (SJC) to the Fort. During the outreach meeting, Fort personnel expressed interest in moving troops via train, but the comment does not present evidence to FRA and SLOCOG with actual numbers of troops that might be transported by train. In the absence of data or other information that Caltrans’s ridership projections in the SDP Plan are in error, no modification to the energy analysis conclusions in the Draft Program EIS/EIR are warranted. Even accepting the proposition that the ridership estimates are understated, this would mean that potential energy benefits of the action alternatives are understated. Should more troops be transported by train instead of van, the region would see a greater the reduction in VMT and the corresponding reduction in energy use. A-3.22 While FRA and SLOCOG agree that it is laudable that the City of King has advanced its draft plans for its station area to include multi-model transit connections, there is no need to modify Minimization Measure TRA-6 in response to the comment. See Master Response 2. A-3.23 See Master Response 2 and the discussion of the environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative in Section 3.5 of the Final Program EIS/EIR. A-3.24 See Master Response 2 and response A-3.23 above. A-3.25 The City asserts that avoidance strategy LU-1 is “not factual” because the City of King has advanced its draft plans for the passenger station and siding extension beyond a schematic stage (and provided those plans to FRA and SLOCOG after publication of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, as noted in Master Response 2). However, avoidance strategy LU-1 is broadly applicable to all elements of the action alternatives. The strategy suggests the need for careful planning to minimize the need for property acquisition and land use displacement. The City of King’s revised draft plans for its passenger station and siding extension follow the spirit of this measure. While the “more than conceptual” status of the City’s draft plans is acknowledged, FRA and SLOCOG note that the avoidance strategy remains applicable to the numerous other elements of the action alternatives and that this document remains a program-level evaluation. No modification to the text is warranted. A-3.26 The City notes that its revised draft plans for the passenger station (incorporated into the Preferred Alternative as noted in Master Response 2) reflect the intent of minimization strategy LU-4. FRA and SLOCOG appreciate that the City’s revised draft station area plans reflect a high degree of sensitivity to potential community barrier impacts. FRA and SLOCOG note that the minimization strategy remains applicable to numerous other elements of the action alternatives and that this document remains a program-level evaluation. Because the minimization strategy applies to all of the components in the action alternatives, no modification to the minimization strategy is warranted by the comment. A-3.27 and A-3.28  The City asserts a number of errors in Figures 3.5-1c and 3.5-2c of the Program EIS/EIR. The asserted errors are entirely related to differences in the revised draft station area and siding extension plans that the City furnished to FRA and SLOCOG as a comment on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. See Master Response 2, the revised draft siding and station area plans have been incorporated into the Preferred Alternative, including analysis of these revised features, which is evaluated in this Final Program EIS/EIR. There is no change to the Build Alternative described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Therefore, no revisions to Figure 3.5-1c and 3.5-2c are warranted. A-3.29 See Master Response 2. A-3.30 See Master Response 2, and responses to comments A-3.15 and A-3.16, and the environmental consequences discussions of the Preferred Alternative in the Final Program EIS/EIR, which addresses the revised draft siding extension plans described in the comment. The cited text remains applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Therefore, no modifications are warranted. A-3.31 See Master Response 2, which reflects that the Preferred Alternative incorporates the revised station area plan cited by the commenter. Section 3.6 of the Final Program EIS/EIR includes analysis of the Preferred Alternative as a whole, which includes the revised station and siding extension plans prepared by the City of King. It should be noted that the Final Program EIS/EIR remains programmatic in nature (see Master Response 3) and that future project-level environmental review of detailed plans is required prior to construction and operation of the components. The inclusion of the City of King’s revised draft station area and siding extension plans is programmatic. NEPA and CEQA decisions for the Preferred Alternative will not eliminate the requirements for project-level analysis of the City of King station area and siding extension. A-3.32 The City appears to address text on page 3.3-16 (not 3.13-16 as cited) about noise. See the response to comments A-3.15 and A-3.16 above. A-3.33 The City appears to address text on page 3.5-16 (not 3.15.16 as cited) about environmental justice impacts. See Master Response 2 and Section 3.5 of this Final Program EIS/EIR, in which the discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. A-3.34 The City appears to note a City of King policy regarding trains on sidings with respect to minimization strategy VIS-3. The comment refers to Chapter 10.28 of the City of King Municipal Code, which seeks to prohibit any train from blocking any City of King street for more than 10 minutes. FRA notes that railroad operations are under the jurisdiction of federal law, not local ordinances. A-3.35 The City states that the photo on page 3.6-2 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR is “not representative of location of station.” While the comment is acknowledged, the photo was not presented in the Draft Program EIS/EIR as a depiction of the station area; it is used to depict the visual landscape. As described in Master Response 3, the Program EIS/EIR evaluates a range of potential physical components at a conceptual level and future project-level analysis of specific project components will be conducted prior to construction and operation of these components. A-3.36 through A-3.38  See Master Response 2 and Section 3.7 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. The discussion and  figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. A-3.39 and A-3.40  The City states that information about existing water and wastewater services for the City of King is “out of date.” The comment does not provide any updated information nor does the comment identify any specific deficiency in in description of the affected environment or environmental consequences. No further response is warranted. A-3.41 through A-3.43  See Master Response 2 and Section 3.8 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. The discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. A-3.44 See Master Response 2 and Section 3.9 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. The discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. A-3.45 As noted in Master Response 2, the revised draft plans for the City of King passenger station were not provided to FRA, SLOCOG, Caltrans DOR or TAMC until accompanied by this and other written comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The comment notes that one of the changes inherent in the City’s revised draft plans would entail building demolition at a specific location. Page 3.9-6 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR expressly identifies the potential for Build Alternative components to “require the demolition of existing facilities or structures” and the potential to encounter “asbestos or lead-based paint materials.” The discussion goes on to note that subsequent project-level environmental analysis would determine the level of  risk and appropriate management/remediation efforts for any specific components carried forward. This is reinforced in minimization strategies HAZ-1 and HAZ-2, both of which are applicable to the Preferred Alternative, which includes the modified City of King station area plan. A-3.46 and A-3.47  See the response to comment A-3.44. A-3.48 through A-3.50 See Master Response 2 and Section 3.10 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft station area and siding plans cited by the commenter. The Draft Program EIS/EIR discussion cited in the comment is applicable to the Build Alternative as described in the Chapter 2.0 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. As noted in the comment, the revised draft station area plan may require the acquisition/demolition of a building. The Draft Program EIS/EIR acknowledged the possibility of any station area requiring the potential demolition/relocation of historic buildings. The avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies included in this Program EIS/EIR will inform subsequent project-level review of any components selected to move forward for implementation. A-3.51 The City states that one of the avoidance strategies for cultural resources does not include a determination of historical significance. However, Section 3.10.6 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR and Section 3.10.4 of the Final Program EIS/EIR discuss the anticipated approach for project-level review of individual components of the action alternatives. See Master Response 3 explaining the program-level analysis in this environmental review. A-3.52 and A-3.53  See Master Response 2 and Section 3.11 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. The discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King.  A-3.54 through A3.58 See Master Response 2 and Section 3.12 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. The discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. As noted in the comment and as reflected in Section 3.12 of the Final Program EIS/EIR, the revised siding extension included in the Preferred Alternative would generally result in fewer hydrology and water resources impacts than the siding extension studied as part of the Build Alternative. A-3.59 through A-3.63 See Master Response 2 and Section 3.13 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft siding extension plans cited by the commenter. The discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. As noted in the comment and as reflected in Section 3.13 of the Final Program EIS/EIR, the revised siding extension included in the Preferred Alternative would generally result in fewer impacts to biological resources than the siding extension studied as part of the Build Alternative. A-3.64 through A-3.66 See Master Response 2 and Section 3.14 of this Final Program EIS/EIR for a discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative, which includes the revised draft station area plan cited by the commenter. The discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR cited in the comment remain applicable to the discussion of the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Preferred Alternative incorporates the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King. As noted in the comment and as reflected in Section 3.14 of the Final Program EIS/EIR, the revised station area plan included in the Preferred Alternative would generally result in no difference in growth effects compared to the station area that was studied as part of the Build Alternative.  A-3.67 The City states that the cumulative analysis did not specifically reference or incorporate an EIR certified by the City of King for the Downtown Addition Specific Plan Final EIR. FRA and SLOCOG modified the Final Program EIS/EIR to include this specific plan as part of the discussion of the potential cumulative impacts of the Preferred Alternative (see Section 3.15 of this Final Program EIS/EIR). As noted in the comment, the Downtown Addition Specific Plan was contemplated with the assumption of the future implementation of a City of King passenger station. It calls for transit-oriented development to be constructed in proximity to the proposed passenger station. The Preferred Alternative in this Final Program EIS/EIR would be consistent with the adopted Downtown Addition Specific Plan.  See Master Response 2 about the characteristics of the Preferred Alternative. A-3.68 The comment is acknowledged and Section 3.15 of this Final Program EIS/EIR reflects the comment. The comment provides helpful additional information to readers, but does not identify any new or worsened environmental impact. A-3.69 The City states that the discussion of cumulative transportation/traffic effects “fails to include any discussion of the King City station.” The King City station is mentioned on page 3.15-9 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR as part of the suite of Build Alternative components. In addition, Section 3.15 of the Final Program EIS/EIR includes a discussion of potential cumulative effects of the Preferred Alternative. The station is part of the larger project being evaluated for potential cumulative effects. No further response is warranted. A-3.70 See Master Response 2 and the responses to comments A-3.54 through A-3.58 above. As reflected in the discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative in Section 3.12 of this Final Program EIS/EIR, the revised draft siding extension would avoid many of the hydrology/water resources impacts identified for the Build Alternative. Section 3.15 of the Final Program EIS/EIR includes a discussion of potential cumulative impacts of the Preferred Alternative. A-3.71 See Master Response 2 and the responses to comments A-3.59 through A-3.63. As reflected in the discussion of environmental consequences of the Preferred Alternative in Section 3.13 in this Final Program EIS/EIR, the revised draft siding extension would avoid many of the biological resources impacts identified for the Build Alternative. Section 3.15 of the Final Program EIS/EIR includes a discussion of potential cumulative effects of the Preferred Alternative. A-3.72 The City asserts incorrectly that the discussion of cumulative Build Alternative growth impacts in the Draft Program EIS/EIR “fails to include any discussion” of the City of King station area. The discussion on page 3.15-29 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR considers potential growth and transit-oriented development that could occur as a result of the “proposed new stations” - referring to the Soledad and City of King components of the Build Alternative. The commenter asserts that greater beneficial impacts of the City of King passenger station may be realized. The Government Accountability Office study cited in the comment is notable for examining transit-oriented development in several major metropolitan areas of the US, including greater San Francisco, Washington D.C., Houston, Charlotte, and Baltimore, among others. The study notes that one of the key elements of successful transit-oriented development is “efficient access to jobs and centers of activity.” While FRA and SLOCOG applaud the City of King’s efforts to encourage transit-oriented development, the distance of the City of King from major job and activity centers are likely to limit the potential for substantial amounts of transitoriented development in the vicinity. However, as noted on page 3.15-29 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, there is potential for more visitor-serving growth to occur around the station area. Notwithstanding all of the foregoing, project-level environmental review will evaluate the potential for any component of the Preferred Alternative carried forward to result in adverse or beneficial growth effects. A-3.73 through A-3.76  The discussion in Section 3.17 of this Final Program EIS/EIR has been expanded to include a summary discussion of the Preferred Alternative. Consistent with the comment’s assertion, the additional discussion in Section 3.17 concludes that the Preferred Alternative would result in fewer unavoidable adverse impacts than were identified for the Build Alternative.  Because the Final Program EIS/EIR remains a program-level review (see Master Response 3), subsequent project-level environmental review of any specific components carried forward for construction is assumed. Moreover, text on page 3.17-1 of this Final Program EIS/EIR states that at the program level, it is assumed that any potential impacts identified may be avoided or minimized through design refinements. FRA and SLOCOG understand that the revised draft plans submitted by the City of King with its comments on the Draft Program EIS/EIR are just that - revised draft plans, potentially subject to further refinement and then, as appropriate, project-level review under CEQA and/or NEPA. A-3.77 through A-3.79  The City restates comments made in several previous comments, including A-3.73 and A-3.54 through A-3.58. See responses to those comments and Master Responses 2 and 3.  A-3.80 and A-3.81  The City refers to summary descriptions of the Build Alternative included in the Section 4(f) evaluation as part of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. This Final Program EIS/EIR expands the Section 4(f) evaluation to include a discussion of potential effects of the Preferred Alternative (see Master Response 2). The cited discussion and figures from the Draft Program EIS/EIR remain applicable to the Build Alternative as described in the Draft Program EIS/EIR.  Responses to Comment Letter A-4: San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District A-4.1 The commenter refers to potential beneficial impact of the Build Alternative as noted in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. FRA and SLOCOG note that the Preferred Alternative would result in similar beneficial impacts. No further response is warranted. A-4.2 The commenter recommends that future implementation of the project consider promoting services like the SLO Car Free program as a further means to reduce regional (VMT and emissions of air pollution. The comment is noted. A-4.3 The commenter suggests inclusion of additional information about construction emissions. As noted in Section 3.2.2 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, the extent of physical components that may actually move forward to construction is unknown. Moreover, the Build Alternative components are generally conceptual in nature, and precise estimates of construction period emissions separately as well as collectively would be speculative. Section 3.2.2 of the Draft EIS/EIR states that project-level analysis will be necessary to evaluate any specific components, consistent with the APCD’s procedures as set forth in its CEQA Handbook and potentially also with General Conformity Requirements under the Federal Clean Air Act. FRA and SLOCOG agree that any project-level review should incorporate on-site mitigation to the greatest extent feasible. Avoidance, Minimization, and Mitigation strategies included in Section 3.2.5 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR are generally consistent with the APCD construction phase mitigation measures and can serve as the basis for project-level avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures in subsequent environmental documentation. See Master Response 3 explaining the programmatic nature of this environmental review. A-4.4 The commenter suggests the potential need for future project-level review of diesel particulate matter emissions and the incorporation of appropriate mitigation measures. As noted in Section 3.2.6, the Draft EIS/EIR identifies a health risk assessment as a likely element of future project-level environmental reviews. A-4.5 See the response to comment A-4.3.  A-4.6 The commenter cites state regulations about naturally occurring asbestos. FRA and SLOCOG understand that any components of the Preferred Alternative that may be carried forward for construction will be subject to these and all other pertinent regulatory requirements. Project-level environmental review will be necessary to determine if adherence to these requirements would be sufficient in controlling potential exposure to naturally occurring asbestos or if additional, project-specific mitigation would be necessary. A-4.7 The commenter cites federal regulations about demolition activities that could expose asbestos containing material. FRA and SLOCOG agree with the commenter that this is a pertinent regulation to which components of the action alternatives would be subject as any one or more moves forward for construction. The avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies in Section 3.9.3 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR also require surveys of structures prior to demolition, grading, or construction. A-4.8 The commenter asserts that construction can generate fugitive dust and suggests inclusion of additional information regarding construction emissions mitigation strategies. Both the Draft and Final Program EIS/EIR disclose potential constructionperiod impacts, including fugitive dust emissions, exhaust emissions, and evaporative emissions. As discussed in response to comment A-4.3, the extent of components that will actually move forward to construction is unknown; therefore, it is premature at the program level to calculate construction period emissions. FRA and SLOCOG agree that any project-level review should incorporate on-site mitigation to the greatest extent feasible. A-4.9 The commenter asserts that idling limitations for diesel engines could help reduce the emissions impact of diesel locomotives. Accordingly, idling control techniques could be implemented to help reduce impacts, especially within 1,000 feet of sensitive receptors. It should be noted that a key objective of the action alternatives is to reduce emissions and increase overall operational efficiency, as discussed on page 3.2-18 of the Final Program EIS/EIR. Therefore, proposed siding extensions and new sidings and other components included in the action alternatives would help to reduce idling time of trains in some areas. A-4.10 The commenter cites minor factual errors regarding ambient air quality standards for ozone within San Luis Obispo County shown in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. These errors do not affect the analysis in the Draft Program EIS/EIR, but merely clarify that the eastern portion of the County (which does not include the Coast Corridor) is in non-attainment for certain air pollutants. Please see Section 3.2.1 of the Final Program EIS/EIR where these modifications have been implemented. Responses to Comment Letter A-5: Santa Maria Valley Railroad Company A-5.1 The commenter asserts that the Draft Program EIS/EIR does not accurately capture the investment UPRR has made to maintain safety and reliability within the past several decades. FRA and SLOCOG agree that UPRR has made steady improvements to the rail infrastructure and acknowledge these efforts in Chapter 2.0, Alternatives, page 2-7 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR: “The UPRR has made and continues to make infrastructure upgrades consistent with FRA Standards.”  However, the existing Coast Corridor continues to be characterized by single-track operations with short (or limited) sidings, manually-thrown switches, and inefficient automatic block system (ABS) signaling system. Collectively, these conditions contribute to lower speeds and safety concerns. A-5.2 The commenter takes issue with an assertion that freight rail volume in the project area (Salinas to San Luis Obispo) is relatively low since the Coast Corridor is considered a “secondary” or “relief” line to UPRR’s Central Valley line. The commenter further notes that the Santa Maria Valley Railroad interchanges only with the Coast Corridor (about 25 miles south of San Luis Obispo) and that requests to UPRR for Santa Maria Valley Railroad to receive railcars from the north have been denied.  The Draft Program EIS/EIR considered freight rail traffic as reported in the SDP. The SDP reported on and analyzed freight traffic north of San Luis Obispo. Moreover, as acknowledged on page 1-1 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, the portion of the Coast Corridor south of San Luis Obispo is part of the Pacific Surfliner or “LOSSAN” corridor, with different patterns of train traffic than points north of San Luis Obispo.  The Draft Program EIS/EIR considered the potential for cumulative effects to occur from projected future growth in freight rail traffic, including the Phillips 66 rail spur project that the commenter cites. Please see Section 3.15 of this Final Program EIS/EIR (Cumulative Analysis) for an updated discussion, including potential cumulative impacts of the Preferred Alternative.   A-5.3 FRA and SLOCOG acknowledge the commenter’s statement that Santa Maria Valley Railroad hopes to expand its operations and facilities along its ROW. The commenter cites one project that would rebuild part of the San Luis Obispo rail yard to create a facility that would include a maintenance facility and a private passenger car storage area, among other components. The commenter asserts that if created this project would have a direct and positive impact on passenger rail ridership. Given the programmatic level of analysis in this environmental document, FRA and SLOCOG included Santa Maria Valley Railroad expansion within the cumulative projects list shown in this Final Program EIS/EIR to ensure that any future, projectlevel environmental reviews take into consideration as appropriate any specific expansion projects undertaken by the Santa Maria Valley Railroad that could increase rail traffic on the Coast Corridor. A-5.4 The commenter states that it would like to see adequate capacity built into the line to accommodate rising freight traffic. See Chapter 1.0, Purpose and Need, of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. While the project is expressly focused on expanding passenger rail service, the Program EIS/EIR and the SDP acknowledge potential growth in freight traffic along the Coast Corridor by the year 2040. Freight rail traffic growth has been considered in the analyses in both this Program EIS/EIR and the SDP. Future project-level environmental reviews will revisit freight rail growth projections.   Responses to Comment Letter A-6: U.S. Department of Interior A-6.1 The comment affirms that the Department of the Interior has reviewed the Coast Corridor Draft Program EIS/EIR and has no comments. No response is necessary.  Responses to Comment Letter A-7: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency A-7.1 The commenter requests that a copy of the Coast Corridor Final Program EIS/EIR and associated future project-level environmental documents. A copy of the Coast Corridor Final Program EIS/EIR will be distributed to this address (and all other agency/organizations that commented on the Draft Program EIS/EIR). A-7.2 The commenter recommends that FRA and SLOCOG use the existing memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the National Environmental Policy Act/Clean Water Act Section 404/408 Integration Process for the California High-Speed Train Program Memorandum of Understanding) between EPA, USACE, FRA, and the Authority as a model for project-level coordination for the Section 404 permitting process.  Future project-level environmental review will include the consideration of required mitigation to offset impacts to jurisdictional Waters of the United States. FRA and SLOCOG will reference the Final Regional Compensatory Mitigation and Monitoring Guidelines established by the USACE South Pacific Division (December 31, 2014), as EPA notes. A-7.3 The commenter recommends that FRA and SLOCOG commit to meeting or exceeding the EPA Tier IV non-road engine emissions standard for construction of any of the physical components. As the commenter previously states, the physical components analyzed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR are conceptual. Therefore, the construction equipment that would be used is not known at this time. Future project-level environmental documentation will include more detailed construction information and design plans. At that time, it will be possible to evaluate the feasibility of using Tier IV standards based on the type of physical component, intensity of construction activities, and location. FRA and SLOCOG note this recommendation and will take the EPA Tier IV non-road engine emissions standard into consideration during future environmental documentation.  Additionally, the commenter recommends that FRA and SLOCOG explore the possibility of electrifying the Coast Corridor rail alignment. Chapter 2.0 includes a brief description of alternatives that were considered but dismissed from further analysis due to cost, likely significant environmental impacts, or overall feasibility. Electrification of the Corridor, along with express buses, increased air travel, and other passenger stations, were among the alternatives considered. A-7.4 The commenter cites the rail spur extension to the Philips 66 Nipomo Mesa oil refinery proposed in San Luis Obispo County, as discussed on page 1-3 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. This project would potentially allow for the transport of 5 trains of 80 cars of crude oil per week. The commenter recommends that the environmental document describe how physical components of the Build Alternative will increase public safety with respect to transportation of hazardous materials along the Coast Corridor. Additionally, the commenter requests a discussion of the Build Alternative and No Build Alternative would enhance public safety within the Corridor. Public safety considerations for both the No Build and action alternatives are discussed in Section 1.2.2, Need.  The commenter cites two NTSB safety recommendations regarding rail transport. FRA notes that the two cited recommendations call for a variety of actions pertinent to the movement of oil or other hazardous materials by rail. These recommendations include consideration of the rerouting of trains carrying flammable materials away from populated and sensitive areas; auditing the response plans of rail carriers of petroleum products to ensure adequate safety and security plans are in place. These recommendations are targeted at rail carriers of oil products or other hazardous materials; they do not include any specific recommendations about the physical components of the rail system.  Chapter 1.0, Purpose and Need, of the Draft Program EIS/EIR discusses the main challenges on the Coast Corridor. Page 1-7 describes the necessity for safety components. Moreover, one of the express purposes of the project is to allow for expanded passenger service without substantial disruption to existing and projected future freight operations. FRA and SLOCOG concur that any freight moved on the Coast Corridor is subject to a variety of regulations regarding transport and emergency response. However, none of the physical components being considered are being considered for the purpose of transport of crude oil and other substances. Neither FRA nor SLOCOG can speak to freight provider’s consistency with the referenced safety and spill response rules other than to say they freight railroads are expected to comply with all applicable regulations. For the Philips 66 rail spur project, the consistency analysis would be provided in its project-level environmental documentation. A-7.5 The commenter encourages proposed new passenger stations to incorporate multimodal connections and livability. As the commenter notes, both cities have included plans for these stations in city planning documents and support rail, bus, bicycle, and passenger connections. In particular, the proposed City of King station is adjacent to the Downtown Addition Specific Plan area that is being planned by the City to capitalize on its proximity to the rail station. The City of King station would provide a transit link for US Army members to the Fort Hunter-Liggett base.  Responses to Comment I-1: Baucke, John (oral comment) I-1.1 In oral comments at the December 9, 2015 public hearing, the commenter cites City of King efforts to advance conceptual plans for its station and that these efforts were not accurately portrayed in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. As reflected in the meeting transcript, SLOCOG staff addressed the commenter’s points during the same public hearing. Notably, the commenter raises several points similar to those in the City of King’s written comment letter (which is A-3 of this response to comments document). Responses to the City’s comments are included in this Chapter, as well in Master Response 2.  Responses to Comment I-2: Bradley, Myrna (oral comment) I-2.1 The commenter expresses concern that the Build Alternative would require acquisition of private property. As reflected in Master Responses 1 and 3, the component of concern to the commenter (a curve realignment in San Luis Obispo County) is not part of the Preferred Alternative.  Responses to Comment I-3: Brooks, Leanne (oral comment) I-3.1 The commenter expresses concern that the Build Alternative would require the acquisition of private property. As reflected in Master Responses 1 and 3, the component of concern to the commenter (a curve realignment in San Luis Obispo County) is not part of the Preferred Alternative.  Responses to Comment I-4: Claire, Paulette (oral comment) I-4.1 See Master Response 4 about public outreach efforts undertaken since August 2012 as part of the NEPA/CEQA review. I-4.2 The commenter expresses concern that the Build Alternative would require the acquisition of private property. As reflected in Master Responses 1 and 3, the component of concern to the commenter (a curve realignment in San Luis Obispo County) is not part of the Preferred Alternative.  Responses to Comment I-5: Edgecombe, Anne I-5.1 The commenter questions the public comment period and efforts to notify the public. See Master Response 4 for clarification about public outreach efforts conducted pursuant to CEQA and NEPA. I-5.2 The commenter expresses concern that the Build Alternative to require the acquisition of private property. As reflected in Master Responses 1 and 3, the component of concern to the commenter (a curve realignment in San Luis Obispo County) is not part of the Preferred Alternative.  Responses to Comment I-6: Edgecombe, Anne (oral comments) I-6.1 The commenter questions the public comment period and efforts to notify the public. See Master Response 4 about public outreach efforts conducted pursuant to CEQA and NEPA. I-6.2 The commenter asserts that the Draft Program EIS/EIR has resulted in or will result in lowering assessed values of properties in the vicinity of certain components of the Build Alternative. See Master Response 3.  Responses to Comment I-7: Edgecombe, John I-7.1 See Master Response 3. I-7.2 and I-7.3 The commenter states that a portion of the buffer area identified as a potential location for part of the multiple-segmented Henry-Santa Margarita curve realignment is located within a flood hazard zone. This statement is consistent with conclusions of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, as reflected in Table 3.12-2. The commenter further asserts that some of the buffer area includes wells operated by the Atascadero Mutual Water Company. As noted in Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments including the referenced curve realignment at Henry-Santa Margarita. The Preferred Alternative would not result in any of the adverse impacts identified by the commenter. I-7.3 The commenter notes that the Henry-Santa Margarita curve realignment was not projected to substantially increase the range of top train speeds through this area. As noted in Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA and SLOCOG excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments, including the referenced one at Henry-Santa Margarita. I-7.4 The commenter questions the top train speeds made in the SDP, the Amtrak 20- Year Plan, and UPRR’s 2011 recommendations for improvements to the Corridor. The commenter asserts that certain excerpts from the SDP about speeds and railroad classifications are erroneous.  FRA and SLOCOG appreciate these detailed remarks. The commenter does not have a specific comment on the adequacy of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The Draft Program EIS/EIR provides a screening-level evaluation of the conceptual physical components identified in the Amtrak 20-Year Plan and in UPRR’s 2011 recommendations. It should also be noted that the Amtrak 20-Year Plan (prepared in 2001) assumed higher top speeds in the Coast Corridor than are now planned as part of the SDP. Specifically, the SDP assumes components to maintain the Coast Corridor as an FRA Class IV railroad, which establishes a top speed of 90 mph for passenger trains. As correctly asserted by the commenter, potential increases in allowable top speeds throughout the Corridor would require substantial railroad  modifications and specialized train equipment. As discussed throughout the Draft Program EIS/EIR, there is uncertainty regarding which (if any) of the identified physical components will accommodate additional passenger rail service without resulting in delays to freight rail operations. I-7.5 The commenter notes that proposed curve realignments would be of limited benefit to freight rail operations. See the response to comment I-7.4 above and Master Response 1. I-7.6 The commenter notes that the potential for increased rail movement of oil from North Dakota would not necessarily influence UPRR towards the construction of curve realignments. See the responses to comments I-7.4 and I-7.5 above. I-7.7 The commenter questions the need for rail service components along the Coast Corridor in light of the ongoing CA HSR project under construction in the Central Valley. See Section 1.4 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR, which describes the relationship between Coast Corridor and the CA HSR system. I-7.8 The commenter notes that sales of electric cars are increasing so it is possible in the future that train travel (assuming diesel locomotives) might not produce the air quality and/or energy savings benefits identified in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. The assertions are noted but are based s on speculation about the percentage of fleet vehicles that would need to change from gasoline-powered to electric-powered in order to reduce mobile-source (tailpipe) emissions. Moreover, while electricpowered vehicles do not have tailpipe emissions, these vehicles require electric charging; electricity generation requires consumption of fossil fuels whose combustion results in air pollutant emissions. In California as of 2013, about 52 percent of all electricity generated was from natural gas and coal-fired power plants.5 5 California Energy Almanac, 2014, accessed January 27, 2015 at http://energyalmanac.ca.gov/electricity/total_system_power.html I-7.9 See the response to comment I-7.7 above. I-7.10 The commenter refers to existing conditions along the railroad near property the commenter owns. The comment is noted. It does not address the adequacy of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. No response is required. The information offered is noted for the record.  Responses to Comment I-8: Edgecombe, John (oral comment) I-8.1 The commenter orally restated several of the comments he provided in written form (comment I-7 above). See Master Responses 1 and 3 and the responses to comments I-7.1 through I-7.10 above.  Responses to Comment I-9: Evans, Ellen I-9.1 The commenter asserts that the Draft Program EIS/EIR has resulted in or will result in lowering assessed values of properties in the vicinity of a curve realignment that, if constructed, could require property acquisition outside the railroad ROW. As noted in Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. See also Master Response 3.   Responses to Comment I-10: Giueici, Francis (oral comment) I-10.1 The commenter states that his company owns a property that may be potentially impacted by one of the physical components included as part of the Build Alternative. See Master Response 3. Additionally, the commenter wishes to be contacted directly as more specific project-level information becomes available. Per conversation outlined in the City of King public hearing transcript (refer to Appendix 2), the commenter’s contact information was collected.  Responses to Comment I-11: Gomes, Val (oral comment) I-11.1 It appears that the commenter would like more information about the financing for the project. Chapter 11 of the Coast Corridor SDP (Appendix C) includes more information about funding. The SDP makes some general assumptions about relative capital costs, operating costs, and costs for different project components. None of the mid- and long-range components have been funded at this time. Approximately $25 million in funding from the STIP and Proposition 1B is programmed to fund corridor-wide track and signaling upgrades. The financial status of the physical components has no bearing on the conclusions presented in the Draft Program EIS/EIR. I-11.2 It appears that the commenter would like to know if a cost/benefit analysis will be conducted for the project. Similarly to response to comment I-11.1, the requested financial information has no bearing on the conclusions presented in the Draft Program EIS/EIR; however, the SDP makes some general assumptions about relative capital costs, operating costs, and costs for different project components.   Responses to Comment I-12: Greening, Eric (oral comment) I-12.1 The commenter asserts that property acquisitions would be required to implement the curve realignments that were included in the Build Alternative. The commenter further asserts that other alternatives, including tilt train technology and restoring previous sidings, would be less disruptive and would still accomplish more efficient rail service. With regard to safety, the commenter notes that geological conditions are unstable in some areas.  As noted in Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA and SLOCOG excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. Therefore, the cited property acquisitions would not occur in San Luis Obispo County. Chapter 2.0 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR (Alternatives) includes FRA and SLOCOG’s rationale for identifying the components that are evaluated in the environmental document.  Section 3.11, Geology, Soils, and Minerals, of the Draft Program EIS/EIR analyzes the geological environment with study area for the physical components. While susceptibility to geological hazards varies throughout the Corridor, it is important to note that the Coast Corridor already exists and operates passenger and freight rail service on a daily basis. Project components do not deviate far from the existing alignment, and are located within the same geologic setting. Avoidance, minimization, and mitigation strategies are proposed to lessen potential impacts.  Responses to Comment I-13: Hayden, Celine I-13.1 FRA and SLOCOG appreciate the commenter’s support for expanding passenger service on the Coast Corridor with the proposed Coast Daylight. The commenter asserts that the engine noise from the existing Coast Corridor service (via Coast Starlight) is loud when it idles in an existing siding near the commenter’s property on Leff Street in San Luis Obispo. Likewise, the commenter requests that FRA include sound mitigation measures within this area to reduce the noise. The commenter appears to be expressing concern about existing operations rather than one the adequacy of the analysis of project. FRA and SLOCOG will take this comment into consideration. To the extent project-level environmental review is needed for any physical components in the area, FRA and SLOCOG will consider possible noise reduction measures to address any significant impacts.  Responses to Comment I-14: Jensen, Ross (oral comment) I-14.1 FRA and SLOCOG acknowledge the commenter’s concern. See Master Response 3.  Responses to Comment I-15: Kemp, Christine I-15.1 The commenter asked specific questions regarding the digitized aerial mapping (Google Earth) depicting the proposed alignment (available online). The specific questions were addressed via correspondence with Christina Watson at TAMC (a responsible agency of the project). See Appendix 2 for more details. No further response is required. See Master Response 3 regarding the conceptual nature of physical components. I-15.2 Similarly to response to comment I-15.1, the commenter’s specific question regarding proposed components between Salinas and Soledad was addressed via separate correspondence with Ms. Watson.  Responses to Comment I-16: Kemp, Christine (oral comment) I-16.1 The commenter expresses concern regarding loss of agricultural land. Additionally, the commenter asserts concern about the public notification process. See Master Responses 3 and 4.  FRA has selected a Preferred Alternative consistent with its responsibility as the lead federal agency under NEPA. SLOCOG may, after certification of the EIR, choose to adopt the Preferred Alternative as the project under CEQA. These actions would provide program-level environmental clearance at both federal and state levels. As discussed in Master Response 3, if particular projects are carried forward and proposed for construction, project-level environmental review would need to be conducted at that time. The various components comprising the Build Alternative would require different approvals or permits to construct from a variety of federal, state, and local entities, as well as various federal and/or state permits. Local funding of many of the physical components would most likely be incorporated into the regional transportation plans prepared by TAMC and SLOCOG.  Responses to Comment I-17: Kirkland, Gary (oral comment) I-17.1 In response to the commenter’s question of who owns the railroad, the UPRR owns the railroad tracks between San Jose and San Luis Obispo, as discussed in Chapter 1.0 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR (Purpose and Need). See Master Response 3 for clarification on the conceptual nature of Build and Preferred Alternative components. The commenter also speaks to the merits of the project, but does not have a specific comment on the adequacy of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. No further response can be provided due to the non-specific nature of the comments.  Responses to Comment I-18: Lyon, Christopher (oral comments) I-18.1 See Master Response 3 for clarification on the conceptual nature of the proposed components and railroad ROW. I-18.2 See Master Response 4 for more information on public outreach efforts. See Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments.  Responses to Comment I-19: May, Rachel I-19.1 See Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. See also Master Responses 3 and 5 regarding the conceptual nature of the environmental document and existing Coast Starlight ridership. I-19.2 See Master Response 1 regarding the Atascadero Municipal Water District resources.  Responses to Comment I-20: McLoughlin, Arthur (oral comment) I-20.1 FRA and SLOCOG appreciate the commenter’s support for the project. The comment is noted.  Responses to Comment I-21: Melendrez, Chantal Georis I-21.1 FRA and SLOCOG appreciate the commenter’s support for the project. The comment is noted.  Responses to Comment Letter I-22: Salter, Bettina (oral comment) I-22.1 See Master Response 1 and Master Response 4.   Responses to Comment I-23: Schneiderhan, Barbara I-23.1 See Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. I-23.2 FRA and SLOCOG agree with the commenter that short siding areas can contribute to delays and congestion when passenger trains have for freight trains to pass, as discussed on page 1-6 of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. Passengers traveling on the existing Coast Starlight can often experience significant delays, owing to a largely single-track railroad with few sidings of the length necessary to accommodate the longer freight trains. As a result, the Build and Preferred Alternative components include potential siding extensions and switching/signaling components that if implemented would help reduce delays. I-23.3 See Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments.  Responses to Comment I-24: Thompson, Nancy I-24.1 See Master Response 4 regarding public outreach efforts. I-24.2 See Master Response 1, the Preferred Alternative selected by FRA excludes all of the San Luis Obispo County curve realignments. I-24.3 This comment is noted. See Master Response 4 regarding public outreach efforts. Responses to Comment I-25: Veek, Edward (oral comment) I-25.1 The commenter speaks to the merits of the project, but does not have a specific comment on the adequacy of the Draft Program EIS/EIR. No response is required.                 Page intentionally left blank 6.0 REFERENCES *CITED GLOBALLY The following references were cited more than once throughout the environmental document; therefore, are listed below. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials Standing Committee on the Environment. 2009. Guidelines on the Use of Tiered Environmental Impact Statements for Transportation Projects. Prepared by PB Americas, Inc. and Perkins Coie LLP. Caltrans Division of Rail. 2013a. California State Rail Plan. Prepared by AECOM. Available: http://dot.ca.gov/hq/tpp/offices/ocp/nalb/state_rail_plan/CSRP_Executive_Summary.p df. Accessed July 28, 2014. Caltrans Division of Rail. 2013b. Coast Corridor Service Development Plan. Prepared by AECOM. Available: http://californiastaterailplan.dot.ca.gov/docs/Final_2013_Coast_Daylight_SDP.pdf. Accessed: July 28, 2014. City of El Paso de Robles. 2003. General Plan. Prepared by Rincon Consultants. City of King. 1998a. General Plan. City of King. 1998b. General Plan Update Final Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by Perspective Planning. City of King. 2011. Downtown Addition Specific Plan. Prepared by HDR Inc. City of King. 2013. First Street Corridor Master Plan. City of King. 2014. Multi-Modal transportation Center – Conceptual Design. Prepared by RailPros, Inc. City of Salinas. 2002a. General Plan. Prepared by Cotton/Bridges/Associates. City of Salinas. 2002b. General Plan Final Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by Cotton/Bridges/Associates. City of San Luis Obispo. 2010. General Plan. City of Soledad. 2005a. General Plan. Prepared by Crawford Multari & Clark Associates. City of Soledad. 2005b. General Plan and Wastewaster Treatment and Disposal Master Plan Final Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by Crawford Multari & Clark Associates. City of Soledad. 2012a. Downtown Specific Plan. City of Soledad. 2012b. Downtown Specific Plan Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by SWCA Environmental Consultants. County of Monterey. 2006. General Plan Draft Program Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by Michael Brandman Associates. County of San Luis Obispo. 1993. Salinas River Area Plan Update Environmental Impact Report. County of Monterey. 2007. Draft General Plan. County of Monterey. 2010. General Plan County of San Luis Obispo. 2010. General Plan. County of San Luis Obispo. 2013. Phillips 66 Company Rail Spur Extension Project Public Draft EIR and Vertical Coastal Access Project Assessment. Prepared by Marine Research Specialists (MRS). Federal Railroad Administration. February 2014. Safety Fact Sheet. Federal Railroad Administration. 2010. National Rail Plan Progress Report. ICF International. 2013. Coast Corridor Analysis. Appendix D. ALTERNATIVES National Railroad Passenger Corporation. 2001. California Passenger Rail System 20-Year Improvement Plan Technical Report. Available: http://149.136.20.80/rail/dor/assets/File/Amtrak_20_yr_Plan_Technical.pdf. Accessed: July 29, 2014. TRAFFIC AND TRAVEL Amtrak. 2012a. Amtrak Fact Sheet, Fiscal Year 2012: State of California. Available: http://www.amtrak.com/pdf/factsheets/CALIFORNIA12.pdf. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Amtrak. 2012b. Amtrak Sets New Ridership Record. News Release, Amtrak Media Relations. Available: http://www.amtrak.com/ccurl/730/658/FY13-Record-Ridership-ATK-13- 122.pdf. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Amtrak. 2014. California Stations. Available: http://www.amtrak.com/servlet/ContentServer?pagename=am/am2Station/Station_Pa ge&code=SLO. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Caltrans Traffic Operations Division. 2013. Traffic and Vehicle Data Systems Unit: 2012 All Traffic Volumes on CHSH. Available: http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/traffops/saferesr/trafdata/2012all/Route101.html. Accessed: July 28, 2014. City of El Paso de Robles. 2009. Master Bike Plan. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/commdev/planning/pdf/BikeMaster Plan.pdf. Accessed: July 28, 14. City of San Luis Obispo. 2006. General Plan Circulation Element. Available: http://www.slocity.org/communitydevelopment/download/unifiedgeneralplan/Chapter 2-Circulation%20(Web).pdf. Accessed: July 28, 2014.City of El Paso de Robles. 2006. City of El Paso de Robles Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by Rincon Consultants, Inc. Transportation Agency for Monterey County. 2006. Caltrain Extension to Monterey County Passenger Rail Stations Traffic Impact Analysis. Available: http://www.tamcmonterey.org/programs/rail/pdf/traffic_impact_report.pdf. Accessed: August 1, 2014. Transportation Agency for Monterey County. 2004. Salinas Rail Extension. Available: http://www.tamcmonterey.org/programs/rail/salinas_rail.html. Accessed: July 28, 2014. AIR QUALITY AND GREEHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS Air Pollution Control District: San Luis Obispo County. 2012a. CEQA Air Quality Handbook: A Guide for Assessing the Air Quality Impacts for Projects Subject to CEQA Review. Available: http://www.slocleanair.org/images/cms/upload/files/CEQA_Handbook_2012_v1.pdf. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Air Pollution Control District: San Luis Obispo County. 2012b. Greenhouse Gas Thresholds and Supporting Evidence. Available: http://slocleanair.org/images/cms/upload/files/GHG_Thresholds_and_Supporting_Evid ence_3-28-12.pdf. Accessed: July 28, 2014. California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2009. California Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS). Last Revised: November 24, 2009. Available: http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/aaqs/caaqs/caaqs.htm#table. Accessed: January 24, 2013. California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2012. Area Designations for State Ambient Air Quality Standards, LEAD. Available: http://www.arb.ca.gov/desig/adm/2012/state_lead.pdf. Accessed: January 24, 2013. Caltrans. 2014. California Transportation Plan 2040. Available: http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/tpp/californiatransportationplan2040/index.shtml. Accessed: July 30, 2014. Council on Environmental Quality. 2014. Draft Guidance for Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Climate Change Impacts. Available: http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ceq/initiatives/nepa/ghg-guidance. Accessed: August 8, 2014. Federal Highway Administration. 2014. Interim Guidance Update on Mobile Source Air Toxic Analysis in NEPA. Available: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/air_quality/air_toxics/policy_and_guidance/aqi ntguidmem.cfm. Accessed August 13, 2014. Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District. 2008. CEQA Air Quality Guidelines. Available: http://www.mbuapcd.org/mbuapcd/pdf/mbuapcd/pdf/CEQA_full.pdf. Accessed July 28, 2014. Monterey County Planning Department. 2013. Monterey County Municipal Climate Action Plan. Available: http://www.co.monterey.ca.us/planning/major/REF120044_DRAFT_MONTEREY_MCAP _APRIL_2013_COMPLETE.pdf. Accessed: August 8, 2014. Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality Management District. CEQA Guide. 2014. Last Revised: June, 2014. Available: http://www.airquality.org/ceqa/cequguideupdate/Ch3Construction- GeneratedCAPsFINAL.pdf. Accessed: August 11, 2014. US EPA. 2012. National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). Last Revised: December 14, 2012. Available: http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html. Accessed: January 24, 2013. US EPA. 2013a. Regulatory Initiatives. Last Revised: September 24, 2013. Available: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/regulatory-initiatives.html. Accessed: December 30, 2013. US EPA. 2013b. Voluntary Energy and Climate Programs. Last Revised: September 9, 2013. Available: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/voluntaryprograms.html. Accessed: December 30, 2013. US EPA. 2013c. What is EPA Doing about Climate Change? Last Revised: September 24, 2013. Available: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities.html. Accessed: December 30, 2013. US EPA. 2014. De Minimis Levels. Last Revised: January 31, 2014. Available: http://www.epa.gov/air/genconform/deminimis.html. Accessed: August 7, 2014. NOISE AND VIBRATION County of San Luis Obispo. 1992. San Luis Obispo General Plan Noise Element. Prepared by Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc. Federal Transit Administration. 2006. Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment. Federal Highway Administration. 2006. Roadway Construction Noise Model User’s Guide. ENERGY California Energy Commission. 2010. Transportation Forecasts and Analyses for the 2009 Integrated Energy Policy Report. Available: http://www.energy.ca.gov/2010publications/CEC-600-2010-002/CEC-600-2010-002- SF.PDF. Accessed: July 28, 2014. California Energy Commission. 2014. Building Energy Efficiency Standards. Available: http://www.energy.ca.gov/title24/2013standards/. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Pacific Gas and Electric. 2013. Company Profile. Available: http://www.pge.com/en/about/company/profile/index.page. Accessed: September 29, 2013. US Department of Energy. 2013. Transportation and Energy Data Book: Edition 32. Available: http://cta.ornl.gov/data/tedb32/Edition32_Chapter02.pdf. Accessed: September 19, 2013. LAND USE AND PLANNING City of Atascadero. 2002. General Plan Circulation Element: Railroads. City of El Paso de Robles. 2011. General Plan Circulation Element. Prepared by Fehr & Peers. Executive Order No. 12898. 1994. Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority and Low-Income Populations. Gardner, Orlando. Realty Officer. Army Corps of Engineers. March 13, 2013 - phone communication. Stafford, Bob. Wildlife Biologist. California Department of Fish and Wildlife. March 8, 2013 – phone communication. VISUAL RESOURCES Caltrans. 2012. California Scenic Highway Program. Available: http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LandArch/scenic_highways/scenic_hwy.htm. Accessed: July 28, 2014. AGRICULTURAL AND FOREST RESOURCES City of Atascadero. 2002. General Plan Chapter II. County of San Luis Obispo Department of Agriculture Weights and Measures. 2011. Annual Report. United States Department of Agriculture. 2005. Land Management Plan Part 2: Los Padres National Forest Strategy. PUBLIC UTILITIES AND SERVICES Atascardero Mutual Water Company. 2014. Nacimiento Water Project. Available: http://www.amwc.us/Nacimiento.asp. Accessed: September 9, 2013. City of Paso Robles. 2014a. Wastewater. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/publicworks/wastewater/. Accessed: August 22, 2013. City of Paso Robles. 2014b. Water. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/publicworks/water/about-water.asp. Accessed: August 22, 2013. Federal Communications Commission. 2014. What We Do. Available: http://www.fcc.gov/whatwe-do. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 2014. What FERC Does. Last updated June 24, 2014. Available: https://www.ferc.gov/about/ferc-does.asp. Accessed: July 28, 2014. California Office of the State Fire Marshal. 2013. Pipeline Safety Division. Available: http://osfm.fire.ca.gov/pipeline/pipeline.php. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Savage, Guy. County of San Luis Obispo Fiber Optics. 2012. Prepared for the County of San Luis Obispo Board of Supervisors, San Luis Obispo, CA. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTES California EPA. 2014. Division of Water Quality – Underground Storage Tank Program. Last updated: June 30, 2014. Available: http://www.swrcb.ca.gov/ust/. Accessed July 28, 2014. California Office of the State Fire Marshal. 2013. Certified Unified Program Agency. Available: http://osfm.fire.ca.gov/cupa/cupa.php. Accessed: December 30, 2013. CalRecycle. 2014. Solid Waste Information System (SWIS). Last updated: April 18, 2014. Available: http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/swfacilities/Directory/. Accessed: July 28, 2014. Caltrans. 2013. Aerially Deposited Lead. Late updated: June 30, 2014. Available: http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/env/haz/hw_adl.htm. Accessed: September 27, 2013. County of San Luis Obispo. 1999a. General Plan Safety Element. County of San Luis Obispo. 1999b. Safety Element Technical Background Report. US EPA. 2014a. Envirofact Multisearch System. Last updated: July 10, 2014. Available: http://www.epa.gov/enviro/facts/multisystem.html. Accessed: July 28, 2014. US EPA. 2014b. Oil Spills – Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure (SPCC) Rule. Last updated June 9, 2014. Available: http://www.epa.gov/emergencies/content/spcc/index.htm. Accessed: July 28, 2014. CULTURAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES Allen, Lon. 2013. Atascadero History is More than E.G. Lewis. The Tribune. Available: http://www.sanluisobispo.com/2013/03/18/2434669/atascadero-history-eg-lewisfounder.html. Accessed: September 20, 2013. Atascardero Chamber of Commerce. 2014. History of Atascardero. Available: http://www.atascaderochamber.org/visitor-center/history.php. Accessed: September 20, 2013. California Highways. 2014. California Highways, Trails, and Roads: El Camino Real. Last updated: July 29, 2014. Available: http://www.cahighways.org/elcamino.html . Accessed: September 3, 2013. California State Assembly. 2014. Assembly Bill (AB) 52 Native Americans: California Environmental Quality Act City of King. 2011. Historic Corridor Revitalization Plan and Form-Based Code. Available: http://www.kingcity.com/images/stories/HCRP/kc_hcrp_finaldraft_english%26%236147 4%3Bspanish_small_2-8-11.pdf. Accessed July 28, 2014. University of California Museum of Paleontology. 2014. The Paleontology Portal: California, US. Available: http://www.paleoportal.org/index.php?globalnav=time_space&sectionnav=state&state _id=10. Accessed September 18, 2013. Valenstein, David. Chief, Environment & Systems Planning Division. Federal Railroad Administration. September 9, 2013 – letter communication. GEOLOGY AND SOILS California Geological Survey. 2006. Simplified Geologic Map of California. Available: http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/information/publications/ms/Documents/MS057. pdf. Accessed: August 19, 2013. County of San Luis Obispo. 1999. Safety Element Technical Background Report. Rosenberg, L.I., and Bryant, W.A. 2003. Fault number 63a, Rinconada fault zone, Espinosa section, in Quaternary fault and fold database of the United States. U.S. Geological Survey website. Available: http://earthquakes.usgs.gov/hazards/qfaults. Accessed: August 19, 2013. HYDROLOGY AND WATER RESOURCES California American Water. 2015. California Drought Update. Available: http://www.amwater.com/caaw/page22725.html#Monterey. Accessed: March 19, 2015. California EPA. 2013. Impaired Water Bodies: 303(d) List. Available: http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/tmdl/integrated2010.shtml. Accessed August 20, 2013. Christian Science Monitor. 2015. California’s New Water Restrictions: If Drought Lingers, Are They Enough? Available: http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/2015/0319/California-s-newwater-restrictions-If-drought-lingers-are-they-enough. Accessed: March 19, 2015. City of Paso Robles. 2014. About Paso Robles Water. Available at: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/publicworks/water/about-water.asp. Accessed: January 2, 2014. County of San Luis Obispo. 2009. Conservation and Open Space Element Draft Environmental Impact Report. Prepared by PMC. United States Department of Agriculture, National Drought Mitigation Center. 2015. U.S. Drought Monitor. Available: http://droughtmonitor.unl.edu/. Accessed: March 19, 2015. BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES AND WETLANDS Cal Poly Land. n.d. Plant Communities: Coastal Live Oak Woodlands. Available: http://polyland.calpoly.edu/overview/archives/derome/woodlands.html. Accessed: September 9, 2013. Caltrans. 2007. Los Angeles to San Diego Proposed Rail Corridor Improvements Final Program Environmental Impact Report/Environmental Impact Statement. County of San Luis Obispo. North San Luis Obispo County Habitat Conservation Strategy (NSLOC). 2011. Available: http://www.slocounty.ca.gov/Assets/PL/environmental/nsloc.pdf. Accessed: September 6, 2013. Cowardin, L. M., V. Carter, F. Golet, and E. T. LaRoe. 1979. Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States. US Fish and Wildlife Service. Available: http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Documents/Classification-of-Wetlands-and-Deepwater- Habitats-of-the-United-States.pdf. Accessed: September 9, 2013. Grenfell, W. E. 1988a. California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System: Lacustrine. California Department of Fish and Game. Available: https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=67398. Accessed: September 9, 2013. Grenfell, W. E. 1988b. California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System: Riverine. California Department of Fish and Game. Available: https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=67396. Accessed: September 9, 2013. Grenfell, W. E. 1988c. California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System: Valley Foothill Riparian. California Department of Fish and Game. Available: https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=67396. Accessed: September 9, 2013. Mayer, K. E. and W. F. Laudenslayer. 1988. A Guide to Wildlife Habitats of California. California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. Available: http://www.co.monterey.ca.us/planning/gpu/2007_GPU_DEIR_Sept_2008/Text/Refere nces/Mayer-Laudenslayer-1988-1.pdf. Accessed: September 9, 2013. National Marine Fisheries Southwest Regional Office. 2007. 2007 Federal Recovery Outline for the Distinct Population Segment of Southern California Coast Steelhead. Ritter, L. V. 1998. California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System: Blue Oak Woodland. California Department of Fish and Game. Available: https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=67340. Accessed: September 6, 2013. US Forest Service. 2009. South Coast and Montane Ecological Province: Calveg Zone 7. Available: http://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/fsbdev3_045405.pdf. Accessed: September 6, 2013. Stafford, Bob. Wildlife Biologist. California Department of Fish and Wildlife. March 8, 2013 – phone communication. GROWTH INDUCEMENT City of El Paso de Robles. 2011a. General Plan Circulation Element. Prepared by Fehr & Peers. City of El Paso de Robles. 2011b. General Plan Housing Element. Prepared by Fehr & Peers. City of San Luis Obispo. 2006. General Plan Circulation Element. Ryan, M. E. and G. S. Breschini. 2010. Railroads of the Central Coast - An Overview. Available: http://mchsmuseum.com/railroads.html. Accessed: December 16, 2013. San Luis Obispo Council of Governments. 2013. 2013 Federal Transportation Improvement Program. Transportation Agency for Monterey County. 2010. Monterey County Regional Transportation Plan. Available: http://www.tamcmonterey.org/programs/rtp/. Accessed July 29, 2014. UNAVOIDABLE IMPACTS Council on Environmental Quality and California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. 2013. NEPA and CEQA: Integrating State and Federal Environmental Reviews. Available: http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/nepa_and_ceqa_draft_handbook.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2013. SECTION 4(F) AND 6(F) California Department of Fish and Wildlife. 2014. Big Sandy Wildlife Area – Monterey and San Luis Obispo Counties. Available: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/lands/wa/region4/bigsandy.html. Accessed: August 13, 2013 City of Atascadero. 2013. City Parks. http://www.atascadero.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=670&Ite mid=584. Accessed: August 12, 2013. City of Gonzales. 2010. General Plan Land Use Diagram. Available: http://www.ci.gonzales.ca.us/Documents/Planning/General%20Plan/Land_Use_Map_C ompiled_Display_Size.pdf. Accessed: July 30, 2013. City of Paso Robles. 2013a. Facilities – City Park. Paso Robles. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/recreation/facilities/city-park.asp. Accessed: August 12, 2013. City of Paso Robles. 2013b. Facilities – Pioneer Park and Skate Park. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/recreation/facilities/city-park.asp. Accessed: August 12, 2013. City of Paso Robles. 2013c. Facilities – Robbins Field. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/recreation/facilities/robbins.asp. Accessed: August 12, 2013. City of Paso Robles. 2013d. Neighborhood Parks. Paso Robles. Available: http://www.prcity.com/government/departments/recreation/facilities/neighborhood.a sp. Accessed: August 12, 2013. City of Salinas. 2002.General Plan Land Use & Circulation Policy Map. Prepared by P&D Consultants. Available: http://www.ci.salinas.ca.us/services/commdev/ generalplan/GP_Land_Use_Circulation_Policy_Map.pdf. Accessed: July 30, 2013. City of San Luis Obispo. 2001. Parks and Recreation Element and Master Plan. Available: http://cdm16255.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/singleitem/collection/p266301ccp2/id/589/r ec/1. Accessed July 29, 2014. City of San Luis Obispo. 2009. Stenner Springs Natural Reserve Draft Conservation Plan. Available: http://www.slocity.org/naturalresources/download/ssnrcondraft.pdf. Accessed: July 29, 2014. City of Soledad. 2014. Vosti Park. Available: http://casoledad.civicplus.com/facilities/Facility/Details/1. Accessed: August 13, 2013. Personal Communication between Lily Gilbert and Harrison Friedman, August 14, 2014. Rios-Caledonia Adobe. 2013. The Rios-Caledonia Adobe. Available: http://www.rioscaledoniaadobe.org. Accessed: September 17, 2013. San Luis Obispo County Parks. 2002. Community Parks. Available: http://www.slocountyparks.com/facilities/communityparks.htm. Accessed: August 12, 2013. US Forest Service, 2008. Los Padres National Forest, Monterey and Santa Lucia Ranger Districts map. US Forest Service. n.d. About the Los Padres National Forest. Available: http://www.fs.usda.gov/detailfull/lpnf/about-forest/?cid=stelprdb5104688&width=full. Accessed August 13, 2013. COMMENTS AND COORDINATION California Energy Almanac, 2014, accessed January 27, 2015 at http://energyalmanac.ca.gov/electricity/total_system_power.html               7.0 LIST OF PREPARERS Table 7-1 presents the organizations and individuals involved in the preparation of this Program EIS/EIR. Table 7-1 List of Preparers of the Program EIS/EIR Agency/Organization Contact Federal Railroad Administration Melissa Hatcher, Environmental Protection Specialist Stephanie Perez, Environmental Protection Specialist Christopher Van Nostrand, Attorney Advisor San Luis Obispo Council of Governments Peter Rodgers, Administrative Director Caltrans Division of Rail and Mass Transportation Joseph Valdez, Transportation Engineer Transportation Agency for Monterey County Christina Watson, Senior Transportation Planner Virginia Murillo, Transportation Planner Consultant Team Contact Circlepoint Scott Steinwert, President/CEO John Cook, Director of Environmental Services Caitlin Chase, Environmental Planner Lily Gilbert, Environmental Planner Danae Hall, Environmental Planner Kyra Engelberg, Environmental Planner  ICF International David Freytag, Principal in Charge Eric Link, GIS Specialist Cross Spectrum Acoustics Lance Meister, Partner                This page intentionally left blank                Appendix A Scoping Summary           Summary Report Public Scoping Meetings August 28 & 29, 2012     Prepared by: Circlepoint September 2012  Table of Contents 1.1 Introduction………………………………………..……………………………2 1.2 Key Issues Summary………………………………………..…………………..3 1.3 Stakeholder Briefings…………………………………………………………..6  Appendices  Appendix 1 Sign-In Sheets  Appendix 2 Meeting Materials  Appendix 3 Exhibit Boards  Appendix 4 Federal Register Notice of Intent  Appendix 5 Proofs of Advertisement Publication  Appendix 6 Public Information Mailer  Appendix 7 Comments   1.1 Introduction Project Overview The proposed Coast Daylight, operated by Amtrak, and jointly funded by Amtrak and Caltrans, would follow the route of the existing Amtrak Coast Starlight service that currently provides passenger service along the rail corridor from Los Angeles to San José, and connect service to San Francisco. The Coast Corridor Project proposes improvements to the existing 130-mile-long rail corridor between Salinas and San Luis Obispo in order to meet the demands of a growing highly mobile population, alleviate travel congestion, and extend passenger rail service down the coast from San José to Los Angeles. The project considers rail siding extensions, double tracking, signaling improvements, and curve realignments. Additional stations are proposed in Soledad and King City with improvements to the station in Salinas.  Public Participation Program The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) initiated the formal scoping process by publishing a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare a Program EIS/EIR in the Federal Register on August 17, 2012. The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) is the lead federal agency, working jointly with Caltrans as the lead state agency, and will be preparing the program-level (Tier 1) Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) pursuant to National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) guidelines. Two public scoping meetings were held as a part of the public scoping process: Salinas San Luis Obispo Transportation Agency for Monterey County San Luis Obispo City/County Library 55-B Plaza Circle 995 Palm Street August 28, 2012, 3:30 p.m. – 6:00 p.m. August 29, 2012, 3:30 p.m. – 6:00 p.m.  These meetings provided an opportunity for the public and agencies to comment on the scope of environmental topics that will be analyzed in the Program EIS/EIR. Approximately 25 people attended the Public Scoping Meetings, not including project team members. Sign in sheets (Appendix 1) were provided for attendees with the option of including a mailing/email address so that they could be added to the project mailing list. This list will be used to update the public and appropriate agencies on further public outreach/involvement opportunities, and to provide further information concerning the proposed project. Scoping meeting attendees were provided with comment cards (Appendix 2) to submit their thoughts on the project, and copies of the presentation given were made available for interested parties. John Cook (Circlepoint) as well as a representative from the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) at the San Luis Obispo meeting and Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) at the Salinas meeting presented an overview of the Coast Corridor project, its components, and its purpose and need. They also discussed the environmental process and the issues to be studied in the EIR/EIS. Preceding and following the presentation, attendees were welcomed to take part in an open house informal discussion of the project and review process with team members at various information stations with exhibit boards and aerial overview maps (Appendix 3). Formal Scoping Meeting Notification Federal Register/Notice of Intent The NOI was printed in the Federal Register on August 17, 2012 (Appendix 4). Newspaper Notices to the public briefly describing the proposed project and listing the dates and locations of the scoping meetings were published in local newspapers. These publications included the Salinas Californian (August 21, 2012), the San Luis Obispo Tribune (August 22, 2012) and El Sol (August 25, 2012). Proof of publishing can be found in Appendix 5. Mailing 6,000 plus postcard meeting notifications in both English and Spanish were distributed to residents within 500 feet of the corridor and 1,000 feet of the stations. These mailers gave a brief explanation of the project and provided details on the dates, times, and locations of the Public Scoping Meetings. A copy can be found in Appendix 6. 1.2 Key Issues Summary Method of Receiving Comments Public Scoping Meeting attendees were provided with comment sheets at the meeting and were asked to submit them that day or mail them to 1114 Marsh Street, San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 or coastcorridorscopingcomments@circlepoint.com by close of business September 10, 2012. Two comment letters were received from meeting attendees, and two were sent in after the meetings. Appendix 7 contains copies of these comments. Comments Summary and Disposition August 28th—Salinas Questions/Comments Disposition Is this a real project? Has funding been identified? Project attributes and anticipated potential funding strategies will be discussed in the EIS/EIR. Does the Federal government have some minimum level of projects that need to be approved? The EIS/EIR will discuss all pertinent regulatory requirements. How much will the ticket be from Salinas to San Francisco? San Francisco to Los Angeles? If known, estimated fare information will be discussed in the EIS/EIR.  August 29th—San Luis Obispo Questions/Comments Disposition Would you consider re-instituting the use of sidings—currently many are used for excess rail car storage. This is unsightly, and being used as a parking lot. The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all project components and how they were developed. Besides the Cuesta Grade, what other curves are we looking at? The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all project components and how they were developed. Several other curve corrections are noted; the Cuesta area is the only segment where substantial second track is programmed. Do we have the authority to take property via eminent domain? The EIS/EIR will discuss the subsequent analyses and permits anticipated to be necessary for project implementation, including any needed land acquisition. Will the fiber optic cable that was laid a number of years ago be considered or disturbed? The EIS/EIR will consider effects to existing utilities in the rail corridor, including communications infrastructure. Is the April 2015 service date firm? The EIS/EIR will clarify anticipated project timeframes. What is the status of implementing positive train control? Will it be required? The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all of the anticipated improvements. What website will you use to provide updates? www.slocog.org Does the train own an easement next to the tracks? The EIS/EIR will discuss the subsequent analyses and permits anticipated to be necessary for project implementation, including any needed land acquisition. I would like to see a parallel bike path and trail. The comment is noted. Amtrak & UPRR—since UPRR is such a disinterested partner, why force the issue? Highway 101 has a good amount of Right of Way for an elevated train up the middle of the highway. The Alternatives section of the EIS/EIR will describe all of the anticipated improvements and their anticipated locations. This section will also discuss alternatives briefly considered but ultimately rejected from further analysis. There is much to accomplish in terms of planning and actual work on the Coast Corridor. Eagerly awaiting the start of the Coast Daylight. The comment is noted. Pleased to see that much needed improvements will be made. These will serve residents and tourists. The comment is noted. This project is much needed, and adding stations between SLO and Salinas would be okay, but there should be at least one daily express run up and down the coast each way that skips most other stops. The comment is noted.    1.3 Stakeholder Briefings Prior to the scoping meetings two stakeholder briefings were conducted. A brief summary of each follows. Soledad A briefing with the Community and Economic Development Director of the City of Soledad was held prior to the Salinas scoping meeting. A brief overview of the project was provided and then a discussion about the project took place. Discussion topics include: the City of Soledad Downtown Specific Plan, station location, potential agriculture impacts if any access across the tracks is eliminated. King City A briefing with the Community Development Director and staff was conducted prior to the San Luis Obispo scoping meeting. A brief overview of the project was provided and then a discussion about the project took place. Discussion topics include: purpose/result of the draft EIS/R, coordination with Fort Hunter-Liggett, coordination with existing downtown planning efforts, coordination with UPRR, existing RailPro study. King City staff indicated concerns about the following topics: Greenhouse Gas emissions, multi-modal element, the potential impact on commute patterns. King City staff also encouraged making the EIS/R accessible to Spanish speakers.       Appendix 1 Sign-In Sheets    Salinas.jpg SLO1_Page_1.jpgSLO1_Page_2.jpgSLO1_Page_3.jpg      Appendix 2 Meeting Materials    commentcard_Page_1.jpg commentcard_Page_2.jpg    Appendix 3 Exhibit Boards    \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Exhibits\For Printing\Final Boards\3871_CCP_boards_0823_final_Page_1.jpg   \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Exhibits\For Printing\Final Boards\3871_CCP_boards_0823_final_Page_2.jpg   \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Exhibits\For Printing\Final Boards\3871_CCP_boards_0823_final_Page_3.jpg     C:\Documents and Settings\s.demello\Desktop\3871_CCP_maps_0823_final_Page_1.jpg         Appendix 4 Federal Register Notice of Intent    \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Document\NOI\08172012 FR posting of NOI_Page_1.jpg\\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Document\NOI\08172012 FR posting of NOI_Page_2.jpg        Appendix 5 Proofs of Advertisement Publication  \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Ad Information\Tearsheets\Salinas Californian 082112 Tearsheet.jpg\\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Ad Information\Tearsheets\SLO Tribune 082212 Tearsheet.jpg\\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Ad Information\Tearsheets\El Sol 082512 Tearsheet.jpg     Appendix 6 Public Information Mailer    \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Notifications\Final Postcard\CCP_postcard_0809_2_Page_1.jpg\\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Notifications\Final Postcard\CCP_postcard_0809_2_Page_2.jpg        Appendix 7 Comments     \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Public Comments\RichardAlberts_082912.jpg \\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Public Comments\AnnMayhre_082912.jpg\\mabel\e\Projects\Consulting Services\3871 Coast Daylight Tier 1 Analysis\Outreach\Scoping2012\Public Comments\KathyLongaore_083112.jpgC:\Documents and Settings\s.demello\Desktop\LillianJewell_100112.jpg      Appendix B Union Pacific Railroad Recommendations Coast Daylight Service Add Daily LA- San Francisco Train Pair (Replaces pair of LA-San Luis Obispo Surfliners) January 2011 Coast Daylight Service Coast & Santa Barbara Subdivisions Caltrain Metrolink Gilroy Preliminary Findings: . Currently proposed schedule is unrealistic and unattainable . 1.5 hours faster S/B and 0.8 hours faster N/B than Coast Starlight with 15 more stops . Coast Route remains a strategic line for freight operations . Needs to be able to handle growing local volumes and be available for detour / overflow traffic from Tehachapi route Preliminary Requirements: . Raise to minimum passenger standard track structure: Full CTC, welded rail, robust rail and tie condition (6-inch base, low defect), crossing protection, PTC . Construct one new siding (Ortega) and extend five sidings . Power all sidings 5000 feet or longer . Major constraints need to be addressed due to commuter operations at San Jose and between Montalvo and LAUPT . Additional infrastructure to facilitate local operations not yet identified Coast Sub201 miCoast Daylight Service Daily Traffic Volumes in Simulation Segment NB SB Total Surfliners: San Luis Obispo - LA 2 2 4 Surfliners: Goleta - LA 3 3 6 Amtrak: Coast Starlight 1 1 2 Capital Corridor: San Jose – Sacramento 7 7 14 ACE (M – F) San Jose – Stockton 3 3 6 Caltrain (M - F) San Francisco – San Jose 42 42 84 Caltrain (M - F) San Francisco – Gilroy 3 3 6 Metrolink (M - F) Montalvo - LA 27 27 54 Total 88 88 176 Current Passenger Trains Proposed Change - Replace pair of daily Surfliners with Coast Daylights Segment NB SB Total Surfliners: San Luis Obispo – LA -1 -1 -2 Amtrak: Coast Daylight  1  1  2 Total 88 88 176 Daily Freight Trains 3rd Quarter 07 Both Directions Auto 1 Intermodal 1.7 Bulk .4 Manifest 1.8 Locals 12.4 Total 17.3 Adds 489 daily passenger train miles Alternative Freight Routing scenario includes three additional daily freight trains (each way) representing variability and need to accommodate shift from Tehachapi route for detour or overflow. Coast Daylight Service Proposed schedules Proposed Daylight Schedule.jpgProposed 8:15 AM Dpt Modeled Proposed 9:20 AM Dpt Modeled Coast Daylight Service Train Performance – Schedule Comparison RTC 3.jpgRTC 2.jpgSan Jose - LA SB, 423 mi. (471 mi. SF- LA)  - Proposed Daylight 22 stops, 9’ 20” (TPC 9’ 19”)  - Current Starlight 7 stops 10’ 53” LA - San Jose NB, 423 mi. (471 LA – SF)  - Proposed Daylight 22 stops, 9’ 22” (TPC 9’ 18”)  - Current Starlight 7 stops 10’ 12” Coast Daylight Service 24 hr Stringline with Coast Daylight original schedule Daylight SB Daylight NB Starlight NBStarlight SBCoast Daylight Service 24 hr Stringline with Coast Daylight revised schedule Daylight SB Daylight NB Starlight NBStarlight SBCoast Daylight Service SCRRA Weekday Passenger Trains/day Metro subs.jpgUP Santa Barbara Sub SCRRA Ventura Sub SCRRA Valley Sub 54 Metrolink (12 Burbank, 24 Valley, 18 Ventura) 10 Surfliner’s  2 Starlight’s 66 Total 18 Metrolink 10 Surfliner’s  2 Starlight’s 30 Total 14 Metrolink 10 Surfliner’s  2 Starlight’s 26 Total  6 Metrolink 10 Surfliner’s  2 Starlight’s 18 Total  24 Metrolink Coast Sub 236.2 mi: 32.2 mi. DT, 87.2 mi CTC, 149 mi ABS coast1.jpgSANATA MARGARITA 19,015’ N. PWR SW Proposed Improvements: CTC 134 mi., power 20 switches @ 3 DT turnouts, 8.5 current sidings  extend to 10,000 ft Bradley & King City Sidings 10,529’ 3,248’ 4,700’ 5,750’ Proposed 10,000 ft. 5,100’  5,000’ PWR SW’s 5,150’ PWR SW’s 5,780’ PWR SW’s 6,300’ PWR SW’s 7,450’ PWR SW’s 7,475’ PWR SW’s 9,895’ PWR SW’s 6,300’ PWR SW’s 7.7 mi. DT PWR SW’s 4.6 mi. DT PWR SW Proposed 10,000 ft. East Santa Barbara Sub 174.6 mi: 16.2 mi. DT, 79.7 mi CTC, 94.9 mi ABS santa barbara.jpgProposed Improvements: CTC 94.9 mi., power 22 switches @ 11 current sidings, new Ortega siding extend to 10,000 ft Seacliff, Concepcion, & Narlon Sidings  Ortega New 10,000, Sdg MP 375 Controlled SDG Controlled SDG 4,267’ 4,035’ 3,500’ 3,747’ 3,747’ 10,470’ 5,701’ 9,997’ HSR 2 NEPA Application Seacliff 4,960’ PWR SW’s Proposed 10,000 ft. 9,369’ PWR SW’s 4,964’ PWR SW’s 5,850’ PWR SW’s 6,000’ PWR SW’s Proposed 10,000 ft. 6,218’ PWR SW’s 5,511’ PWR SW’s 5,550’ PWR SW’s 6,725’ PWR SW’s 5,818’ PWR SW’s 6,128’ PWR SW’s Proposed 10,000 ft. Coast Route Lollipop Recommended Siding Improvements 4446..74 59.9 68.1 79.7 83.1 89.7 106.8 114.9 131.2 140.2 160.3 179.5 192.5 200.5 218.4 229.6 238.8 242.7 248.4 251.6 260.9 267 273.2 277.4 283.2 289.9 293.9 299.4 304.6 314 321.4 335.4 346.5 355.8 336675.4 385.3 394.8 404 412.5 423.1 CP Coast 2MT CP Stockton 2MT Coyote 2MT Morgan Hill 10529 Luchessa 2MT Corporal 2MT Logan 2MT Watsonville Jct 2MT Castroville 6300 Salinas 9895 Gonzales 7475 Soledad 7450 King City 10000 San Ardo 5780 Bradley 10000 McKay 5000 Templeton 4700 Santa Margarita 19015 Serrano 5750 Chorro 5100 North San Luis Obispo 2MT South San Luis Obispo 2MT Grover 6000 Callender 5850 Guadalupe 3500 Waldorf 4035 Devon 4267 Narlon 10000 Tangair 5511 Surf 5550 Honda 6725 Sudden 5818 Concepcion 10000 Gaviota 3747 Capitan 4964 Ellwood 9369 North Santa Barbara 2MT South Santa Barbara 2MT Ventura 10470 Oxnard 5701 Camarillo 9997 Las Posas 2MT3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 11,000 12,000 13,000 14,000 15,000 Coast Route Siding Length Siding Length (FT) Seacliff 10000 Ortega (new) 10000’ 375.0 Ortega plus five siding extensions shown will facilitate passenger performance and freight fluidity. Coast Daylight Service Proposed 6.3 miles DT SCRRA Ventura Sub Ventura T table.jpgNeed to close key single track bottleneck Coast Daylight Service Simulation Results Coast Daylight Service RTC Results Coast & Santa Barbara Sub’s 470 mi., 7 Day Simulation Coast 1Dec10 .jpgCoast Daylight Service Issues • Schedule extremely close to unopposed, ideal run times; no recovery allowance – Unopposed TPC run time within one to four minutes of proposed schedule • Multiple proposed station stops consume track network capacity and give service a “Milk Run” local feel • Must address any costs not covered by Amtrak Reimbursement Agreement  Coast Daylight Service Recommendations • Rationalize Coast Daylight schedule (number of stops, adequate run time) • Complete 229 mi. CTC, install power switches • Add new siding at Ortega • Extend King City, Bradley, Narlon, Concepcion and Seacliff sidings • Upgrade rail & ties -- rail: all CWR, low defect, 6-inch base • Address PTC requirements and crossing protection needs (greater frequency, passenger speeds) • Address remaining bottlenecks at San Jose and south of Santa Barbara and ensure availability of adequate freight slots       Appendix C Coast Corridor Service Development Plan       Appendix D Technical Data       Appendix D-1 Agriculture and Forest Resources Data  FMMP Impacts Sum of Acres Realignment Coburn  137.32 Permanent 27.46 Farmland of Statewide Importance 3 .62 Grazing Land 1 .27 Prime Farmland 21.71 Unique Farmland 0 .86 Temporary 109.86 Farmland of Statewide Importance 10.48 Grazing Land 21.47 Prime Farmland 66.94 Unique Farmland 10.97 Getty/Bradley 91.15 Permanent 18.23 Grazing Land 18.23 Temporary 72.92 Grazing Land 72.92 Harlem/Metz 200.63 Permanent 40.89 Farmland of Statewide Importance 3 .98 Grazing Land 6 .34 Prime Farmland 28.23 Unique Farmland 2 .34 Temporary 159.74 Farmland of Statewide Importance 14.41 Grazing Land 39.67 Prime Farmland 96.43 Unique Farmland 9 .23 Henry/Santa Margarita 60.41 Permanent 12.39 Farmland of Local Importance 4 .50 Farmland of Local Potential 7 .05 Grazing Land 0 .83 Temporary 48.02 Farmland of Local Importance 16.38 Farmland of Local Potential 23.72 Grazing Land 7 .92 McKay/Wellsona 117.63 Permanent 24.58 Farmland of Local Potential 19.77 Grazing Land 4 .80 Temporary 93.05 Farmland of Local Potential 69.03 Grazing Land 24.02 Realign Tracks at MP 165  53.96 Permanent 10.42 Grazing Land 1 .79 Prime Farmland 7 .19 Unique Farmland 1 .44 Temporary 43.54 Grazing Land 15.36 Prime Farmland 22.85 Unique Farmland 5 .32 Realign Tracks at MP 172 121.06 Permanent 24.98 Grazing Land 4 .16 Prime Farmland 19.83 Unique Farmland 0 .98 Temporary 96.09 Grazing Land 14.18 Prime Farmland 78.87 Unique Farmland 3 .03 Wellsona/Paso Robles 23.61 Permanent 5 .19 Farmland of Local Potential 1 .79 Farmland of Statewide Importance 2 .12 Prime Farmland 1 .28 Temporary 18.42 Farmland of Local Potential 7 .51 Farmland of Statewide Importance 7 .09 Prime Farmland 3 .82 Siding 264.56 2nd Mainline 2nd Mainline 39.19 Permanent 13.87 Farmland of Local Potential 2 .75 Grazing Land 11.12 Temporary 25.32 Farmland of Local Potential 5 .37 Grazing Land 19.96 Grand Total 1,109.52 Row Labels Sum of Acreage 2nd Mainline 2nd Mainline 32.23 Permanent Privately Owned Lands 11.81 Temporary Privately Owned Lands 20.42 Ex. Alignment EA-10 11.02 Existing Rail Improvements (Track/Signal Upgrades) Privately Owned Lands 10.81 Forest Service Owned Lands 0.22 Grand Total 43.26      Appendix D-2 Biological Resources Data  Row Labels Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area (acres) Sum of Permanent Impacts (acres) Sum of Temporary Impacts (acres) Realignment Coburn Annual Grassland 108.2 5.5 32.2 Barren 15.0 3.6 8.2 Coastal Scrub 0.2 0.0 0.0 Cropland 163.8 18.0 64.7 Riverine 0.4 0.0 0.1 Urban 7.6 0.5 4.6 Coburn Total 295.1 27.5 109.9 Getty/Bradley Annual Grassland 154.1 16.2 54.3 Blue Oak Woodland 6.3 0.0 1.3 Coastal Scrub 3.3 0.0 0.9 Cropland 3.1 0.2 2.0 Freshwater Pond 1.4 0.0 0.7 Riverine 15.3 0.3 3.5 Valley Foothill Riparian 31.7 3.8 11.7 Getty/Bradley Total 215.2 20.4 74.5 Harlem/Metz Annual Grassland 153.3 15.0 52.8 Barren 5.0 0.0 0.3 Blue Oak Woodland 0.1 0.0 0.0 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 1.1 0.0 0.0 Freshwater Pond 0.1 0.0 0.0 Riverine 1.0 0.0 0.1 Urban 3.8 0.3 2.7 Valley Foothill Riparian 4.2 0.3 1.0 Harlem/Metz Total 168.6 15.6 56.9 Henry/Santa Margarita Annual Grassland 113.7 13.3 44.5 Blue Oak-Foothill Pine 56.5 6.1 25.1 Coastal Oak Woodland 4.8 0.0 1.6 Coastal Scrub 23.7 2.7 10.1 Cropland 17.1 0.8 4.8 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 11.2 1.4 3.4 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 14.0 0.4 3.3 Freshwater Pond 2.6 0.1 1.1 Riverine 15.2 0.1 4.8 Unknown Shrub Type 1.6 0.0 0.0 Urban 31.8 1.7 6.5 Valley Oak Woodland 4.0 0.0 0.9 Henry/Santa Margarita Total 296.2 26.5 106.2 McKay/Wellsona Blue Oak Woodland 19.1 2.4 6.0 Coastal Oak Woodland 29.7 4.6 12.4 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 22.9 7.2 12.6 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 2.6 0.7 1.2 Riverine 11.0 0.0 0.1 Urban 89.6 6.7 31.5 McKay/Wellsona Total 175.0 21.6 63.8 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Annual Grassland 51.1 6.3 21.8 Cropland 85.8 6.2 28.7 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 0.7 0.1 0.2 Freshwater Pond 0.9 0.2 0.5 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Total 138.5 12.8 51.3 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Annual Grassland 25.7 1.4 8.5 Cropland 229.6 23.7 90.8 Riverine 0.1 0.0 0.0 Valley Foothill Riparian 5.1 0.0 0.8 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Total 260.6 25.0 100.1 Templeton/Henry Annual Grassland 2.5 0.6 1.7 Blue Oak Woodland 6.9 0.6 2.5 Blue Oak-Foothill Pine 2.0 0.0 0.1 Coastal Oak Woodland 14.9 2.1 6.2 Cropland 17.0 0.2 3.7 Unknown Shrub Type 4.9 0.7 3.3 Urban 18.8 1.4 5.2 Templeton/Henry Total 67.0 5.7 22.7 Wellsona/Paso Robles Annual Grassland 14.7 3.8 8.8 Blue Oak Woodland 12.6 0.0 2.3 Coastal Oak Woodland 2.6 0.0 1.0 Cropland 6.8 0.0 0.2 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.6 0.0 0.0 Urban 24.9 1.4 8.5 Wellsona/Paso Robles Total 62.2 5.2 20.8 Realignment Total 1,678.3 160.4 606.2 Siding King City Siding Annual Grassland 16.8 3.5 4.0 Cropland 102.4 7.7 11.5 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.7 0.0 0.1 King City Siding Total 119.8 11.2 15.6 San Lucas Siding Annual Grassland 70.9 7.7 8.9 Cropland 55.5 8.5 8.5 Urban 38.5 5.8 4.9 Valley Foothill Riparian 3.8 0.9 0.8 San Lucas Siding Total 168.6 22.9 23.0 Spence Siding Barren 91.0 19.0 21.2 Coastal Scrub 2.2 0.0 0.0 Cropland 68.7 0.3 1.6 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.7 0.0 0.1 Freshwater Pond 0.1 0.0 0.0 Riverine 2.2 0.0 0.0 Spence Siding Total 164.9 19.3 23.0 Templeton Siding Annual Grassland 58.8 7.3 7.3 Blue Oak Woodland 7.0 1.5 1.2 Coastal Oak Woodland 0.1 0.0 0.0 Cropland 19.0 3.5 3.2 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 1.2 0.7 0.5 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 19.7 0.8 2.1 Riverine 16.1 0.0 0.8 Unknown Shrub Type 0.1 0.0 0.0 Urban 134.3 32.5 18.6 Valley Foothill Riparian 1.9 0.4 0.3 Templeton Siding Total 258.3 46.8 34.1 Bradley Siding2 Annual Grassland 229.9 48.0 34.1 Blue Oak Woodland 2.2 0.0 0.0 Riverine 3.2 0.3 0.7 Valley Foothill Riparian 22.9 3.7 4.5 Bradley Siding2 Total 258.2 51.9 39.4 New Chalone Creek Annual Grassland 81.3 10.4 21.9 Barren 4.9 0.5 0.6 Coastal Oak Woodland 1.0 0.0 0.1 Cropland 80.8 13.2 38.5 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 1.3 0.6 0.7 Freshwater Pond 0.1 0.0 0.0 Riverine 0.0 0.0 0.0 Valley Foothill Riparian 3.1 1.1 1.2 New Chalone Creek Total 172.6 25.8 63.0 Wellsona Siding Annual Grassland 38.3 3.2 4.5 Blue Oak Woodland 29.8 6.1 8.8 Coastal Oak Woodland 39.3 8.1 14.4 Cropland 3.8 0.1 0.9 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 25.1 7.2 11.7 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 3.1 0.8 1.6 Riverine 4.3 0.0 0.1 Urban 37.1 4.0 5.8 Valley Foothill Riparian 0.6 0.0 0.0 Wellsona Siding Total 181.2 29.6 47.9 Siding Total 1,323.5 207.6 245.9 Second Mainline Second Mainline Annual Grassland 38.2 8.9 10.2 Blue Oak Woodland 35.1 2.4 5.4 Coastal Oak Woodland 67.7 6.7 14.8 Coastal Scrub 3.4 1.2 2.1 Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.2 0.0 0.1 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 11.6 0.7 6.7 Freshwater Pond 0.8 0.0 0.0 Mixed Chaparral 4.4 0.0 0.0 Riverine 2.9 0.1 1.4 Urban 25.8 5.2 3.6 Valley Oak Woodland 6.4 0.6 1.5 Second Mainline Total 196.5 25.8 45.9 Second Mainline Total 196.5 25.8 45.9 Grand Total 3,198.4 393.7 897.9 Row Labels Sum of Existing Wetland Acreage in Study Area Sum of Permanent Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected Realignment Coburn Riverine 0.41 0.00 0.12 0.29 Coburn Total 0.41 0.00 0.12 0.29 Getty/Bradley Freshwater Pond 1.43 0.00 0.65 0.77 Riverine 15.30 0.26 3.49 11.55 Getty/Bradley Total 16.73 0.26 4.14 12.32 Harlem/Metz Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 1.08 0.00 0.00 1.08 Freshwater Pond 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.12 Riverine 1.03 0.00 0.13 0.90 Harlem/Metz Total 2.23 0.00 0.13 2.10 Henry/Santa Margarita Freshwater Emergent Wetland 11.20 1.37 3.40 6.44 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 14.01 0.36 3.34 10.31 Freshwater Pond 2.61 0.11 1.14 1.36 Riverine 15.18 0.08 4.75 10.35 Henry/Santa Margarita Total 43.00 1.92 12.62 28.45 McKay/Wellsona Freshwater Emergent Wetland 22.89 7.20 12.57 3.11 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 2.64 0.65 1.22 0.76 Riverine 10.98 0.00 0.11 10.86 McKay/Wellsona Total 36.50 7.86 13.91 14.74 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 0.65 0.13 0.24 0.28 Freshwater Pond 0.91 0.15 0.49 0.27 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Total 1.56 0.28 0.73 0.55 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Riverine 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.11 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Total 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.11 Wellsona/Paso Robles Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.56 0.00 0.00 0.56 Wellsona/Paso Robles Total 0.56 0.00 0.00 0.56 Realignment Total 101.10 10.32 31.65 59.13 Siding King City Siding Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.70 0.00 0.05 0.65 King City Siding Total 0.70 0.00 0.05 0.65 Spence Siding Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.70 0.00 0.09 0.61 Freshwater Pond 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.11 Riverine 2.22 0.01 0.03 2.18 Spence Siding Total 3.03 0.01 0.12 2.90 Templeton Siding Freshwater Emergent Wetland 1.19 0.67 0.52 0.00 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 19.74 0.84 2.11 16.80 Riverine 16.06 0.05 0.77 15.24 Templeton Siding Total 36.99 1.56 3.39 32.04 Bradley Siding Riverine 3.25 0.27 0.73 2.25 Bradley Siding Total 3.25 0.27 0.73 2.25 New Chalone Creek Freshwater Emergent Wetland 1.29 0.60 0.66 0.03 Freshwater Pond 0.13 0.00 0.00 0.13 Riverine 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.04 New Chalone Creek Total 1.47 0.60 0.66 0.21 Wellsona Siding Freshwater Emergent Wetland 25.06 7.20 11.68 6.18 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 3.06 0.82 1.65 0.59 Riverine 4.28 0.04 0.15 4.10 Wellsona Siding Total 32.40 8.06 13.47 10.87 Siding Total 77.84 10.50 18.43 48.91 Second Mainline Second Mainline Freshwater Emergent Wetland 0.15 0.00 0.14 0.01 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland 11.64 0.69 6.67 4.27 Freshwater Pond 0.79 0.00 0.04 0.75 Riverine 2.88 0.09 1.41 1.38 Second Mainline Total 15.46 0.79 8.26 6.40 Second Mainline Total 15.46 0.79 8.26 6.40 Grand Total 194.40 21.61 58.34 114.45 Study_Area Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanent Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected Bradley Siding Fish and Wildlife American badger 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 bank swallow 26.1 4.0 5.3 16.9 Burrowing owl 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California condor 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California horned lark 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California linderiella 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California red-legged frog 233.1 48.2 34.8 150.0 California tiger salamander 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 coast horned lizard 232.1 48.0 34.1 150.0 Coast range newt 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Conservancy fairy shrimp 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Ferruginous hawk 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Foothill yellow-legged frog 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 golden eagle 232.1 48.0 34.1 150.0 Grasshopper sparrow 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 great blue heron 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 hoary bat 25.1 3.7 4.5 16.9 least Bell's vireo 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 Lompoc grasshopper 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Merlin 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 pallid bat 25.1 3.7 4.5 16.9 prairie falcon 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 purple martin 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 Salinas pocket mouse 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 San Joaquin kit fox 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 San Joaquin pocket mouse 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 San Joaquin whipsnake 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 silvery legless lizard 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 tricolored blackbird 252.7 51.7 38.6 162.4 two-striped garter snake 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 vernal pool fairy shrimp 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Bradley Siding Fish and western pond turtle 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 western spadefoot toad 233.1 48.2 34.8 150.0 White-tailed kite 252.7 51.7 38.6 162.4 yellow warbler 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 Coburn Fish and Wildlife American badger 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 bank swallow 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 Burrowing owl 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 California condor 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 California horned lark 272.0 23.4 96.9 151.7 California red-legged frog 108.6 5.5 32.3 70.9 California tiger salamander 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 coast horned lizard 108.4 5.5 32.2 70.8 Ferruginous hawk 272.2 23.4 96.9 151.8 Foothill yellow-legged frog 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 golden eagle 108.4 5.5 32.2 70.8 Grasshopper sparrow 108.4 5.5 32.2 70.8 Merlin 272.0 23.4 96.9 151.7 prairie falcon 272.2 23.4 96.9 151.8 Salinas pocket mouse 108.4 5.5 32.2 70.8 San Joaquin kit fox 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 108.4 5.5 32.2 70.8 silvery legless lizard 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 tricolored blackbird 272.0 23.4 96.9 151.7 two-striped garter snake 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 western pond turtle 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 western spadefoot toad 108.6 5.5 32.3 70.9 White-tailed kite 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Plants Jolon clarkia 0.2 0.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Getty/Bradley Fish and Wildlife American badger 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 bank swallow 47.0 4.0 15.2 27.8 Burrowing owl 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California condor 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California horned lark 157.2 16.4 56.4 84.5 California linderiella 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California red-legged frog 170.9 16.4 58.5 95.9 California tiger salamander 155.6 16.2 55.0 84.4 coast horned lizard 163.7 16.2 56.6 90.9 Coast range newt 7.7 0.0 2.0 5.7 Conservancy fairy shrimp 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Ferruginous hawk 160.5 16.4 57.3 86.9 Foothill yellow-legged frog 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 golden eagle 163.7 16.2 56.6 90.9 Grasshopper sparrow 157.4 16.2 55.3 86.0 great blue heron 33.1 3.8 12.3 17.0 hoary bat 37.9 3.8 13.0 21.1 least Bell's vireo 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Lompoc grasshopper 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Merlin 157.2 16.4 56.4 84.5 pallid bat 37.9 3.8 13.0 21.1 prairie falcon 160.5 16.4 57.3 86.9 purple martin 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Salinas pocket mouse 157.4 16.2 55.3 86.0 San Joaquin kit fox 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 San Joaquin pocket mouse 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 157.4 16.2 55.3 86.0 silvery legless lizard 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 tricolored blackbird 190.3 20.1 68.7 101.5 two-striped garter snake 16.7 0.3 4.1 12.3 vernal pool fairy shrimp 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 western pond turtle 16.7 0.3 4.1 12.3 western spadefoot toad 169.4 16.4 57.8 95.2 White-tailed kite 185.8 19.9 66.0 99.8 yellow warbler 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Getty/Bradley Plants Abbott's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Davidson's bushmallow 41.2 3.8 14.0 23.5 Hardham's eveningprimrose 6.3 1.3 4.9 Jolon clarkia 41.2 3.8 14.0 23.5 Harlem/Metz Fish and Wildlife American badger 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 bank swallow 5.2 0.3 1.2 3.8 Burrowing owl 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California condor 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California horned lark 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California red-legged frog 154.4 15.0 52.9 86.5 California tiger salamander 153.4 15.0 52.8 85.6 coast horned lizard 153.4 15.0 52.8 85.6 Coast range newt 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 Ferruginous hawk 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Foothill yellow-legged frog 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 golden eagle 153.4 15.0 52.8 85.6 Grasshopper sparrow 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 great blue heron 4.3 0.3 1.0 3.0 hoary bat 4.3 0.3 1.0 3.0 least Bell's vireo 5.3 0.3 1.0 4.0 Merlin 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 pallid bat 4.3 0.3 1.0 3.0 prairie falcon 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 purple martin 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 Salinas pocket mouse 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 San Joaquin kit fox 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 San Joaquin whipsnake 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 silvery legless lizard 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 tricolored blackbird 158.7 15.3 53.8 89.6 two-striped garter snake 1.1 0.0 0.1 1.0 western pond turtle 1.1 0.0 0.1 1.0 western spadefoot toad 154.3 15.0 52.9 86.4 White-tailed kite 157.5 15.3 53.8 88.4 yellow warbler 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 Harlem/Metz Plants chaparral ragwort 18.1 1.5 5.7 10.9 Indian Valley bushmallow 2.5 0.1 2.4 Jolon clarkia 23.4 1.8 6.7 14.9 Lemmon's jewel-flower 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Monterey spineflower 171.4 16.5 58.5 96.4 robust spineflower 18.1 1.5 5.7 10.9 Henry/Santa Margarita Fish and Wildlife American badger 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Burrowing owl 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California condor 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California horned lark 130.8 14.1 49.3 67.3 California linderiella 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California red-legged frog 142.7 14.9 53.8 73.9 coast horned lizard 204.3 22.1 82.2 99.9 Coast range newt 67.9 6.2 28.7 33.0 Conservancy fairy shrimp 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Ferruginous hawk 156.1 16.9 59.4 79.8 Foothill yellow-legged frog 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 golden eagle 200.3 22.1 81.3 96.9 Grasshopper sparrow 139.0 16.1 54.6 68.3 great blue heron 13.8 1.5 4.5 7.8 hoary bat 65.3 6.1 27.6 31.7 least Bell's vireo 14.0 0.4 3.3 10.3 Lompoc grasshopper 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Merlin 130.8 14.1 49.3 67.3 pallid bat 65.3 6.1 27.6 31.7 prairie falcon 156.1 16.9 59.4 79.8 purple martin 65.3 6.1 27.6 31.7 San Joaquin kit fox 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Joaquin pocket mouse 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Joaquin whipsnake 139.0 16.1 54.6 68.3 San Luis pyrg 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 silvery legless lizard 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 tricolored blackbird 158.6 16.0 57.2 85.4 two-striped garter snake 29.0 1.6 9.3 18.1 vernal pool fairy shrimp 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Fish and western pond turtle 29.0 1.6 9.3 18.1 western spadefoot toad 128.9 13.4 49.3 66.1 White-tailed kite 117.7 13.3 45.4 58.9 Plants Brewer's spineflower 86.6 8.8 36.8 41.1 caper-fruited tropidocarpum 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 dwarf soaproot 1.6 0.0 1.6 Eastwood's larkspur 115.3 13.3 44.5 57.4 Hardham's eveningprimrose 62.9 6.1 26.7 30.2 hooked popcornflower 176.6 19.4 71.2 86.0 Hoover's bent grass 176.6 19.4 71.2 86.0 mesa horkelia 86.6 8.8 36.8 41.1 most beautiful jewelflower 176.6 19.4 71.2 86.0 pale-yellow layia 198.7 22.1 81.3 95.2 Palmer's monardella 62.9 6.1 26.7 30.2 round-leaved filaree 175.0 19.4 71.2 84.4 San Benito fritillary 1.6 0.0 1.6 San Luis mariposa-lily 139.0 16.1 54.6 68.3 San Luis Obispo County lupine 62.9 6.1 26.7 30.2 San Luis Obispo sedge 139.0 16.1 54.6 68.3 Santa Lucia manzanita 62.9 6.1 26.7 30.2 Santa Margarita manzanita 62.9 6.1 26.7 30.2 shining navarretia 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 straight-awned spineflower 86.6 8.8 36.8 41.1 yellow-flowered eriastrum 62.9 6.1 26.7 30.2 King City Siding Fish and Wildlife American badger 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Burrowing owl 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 California condor 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 California horned lark 119.1 11.2 15.5 92.4 California red-legged frog 17.5 3.5 4.1 9.9 California tiger salamander 17.5 3.5 4.1 9.9 coast horned lizard 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Ferruginous hawk 119.1 11.2 15.5 92.4 golden eagle 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Grasshopper sparrow 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 great blue heron 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 Merlin 119.1 11.2 15.5 92.4 King City Siding Fish and prairie falcon 119.1 11.2 15.5 92.4 Salinas pocket mouse 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 San Joaquin kit fox 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 silvery legless lizard 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 tricolored blackbird 119.8 11.2 15.6 93.1 two-striped garter snake 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 western pond turtle 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 western spadefoot toad 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 White-tailed kite 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Plants Davidson's bushmallow 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 Jolon clarkia 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 recurved larkspur 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 McKay/ Wellsona Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 33.9 7.2 12.7 14.0 California tiger salamander 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 coast horned lizard 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 Coast range newt 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 Foothill yellow-legged frog 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 golden eagle 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 great blue heron 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 hoary bat 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 least Bell's vireo 2.6 0.7 1.2 0.8 pallid bat 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 purple martin 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 tricolored blackbird 25.5 7.9 13.8 3.9 two-striped garter snake 33.9 7.2 12.7 14.0 western pond turtle 33.9 7.2 12.7 14.0 western spadefoot toad 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 Plants dwarf calycadenia 165.9 22.8 63.4 79.7 Hardham's eveningprimrose 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 hooked popcornflower 143.1 15.6 50.8 76.6 Indian Valley spineflower 48.9 7.0 18.5 23.4 Lemmon's jewel-flower 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 round-leaved filaree 143.1 15.6 50.8 76.6 McKay/ Plants Santa Cruz microseris 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 shining navarretia 143.1 15.6 50.8 76.6 woodland woollythreads 143.1 15.6 50.8 76.6 New Chalone Creek Fish and Wildlife American badger 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 bank swallow 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 Burrowing owl 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 California condor 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 California horned lark 162.2 23.6 60.4 78.1 California red-legged frog 82.8 11.0 22.6 49.2 California tiger salamander 82.8 11.0 22.6 49.2 coast horned lizard 82.4 10.4 22.0 49.9 Coast range newt 1.1 0.0 0.1 1.1 Ferruginous hawk 162.2 23.6 60.4 78.1 Foothill yellow-legged frog 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 golden eagle 82.4 10.4 22.0 49.9 Grasshopper sparrow 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 great blue heron 4.5 1.7 1.8 1.0 hoary bat 4.1 1.1 1.2 1.8 least Bell's vireo 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 Merlin 162.2 23.6 60.4 78.1 pallid bat 4.1 1.1 1.2 1.8 prairie falcon 162.2 23.6 60.4 78.1 purple martin 4.1 1.1 1.2 1.8 Salinas pocket mouse 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 San Joaquin kit fox 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 San Joaquin whipsnake 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 silvery legless lizard 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 tricolored blackbird 166.7 25.3 62.2 79.1 two-striped garter snake 1.5 0.6 0.7 0.2 western pond turtle 1.5 0.6 0.7 0.2 western spadefoot toad 81.4 10.4 21.9 49.0 White-tailed kite 84.4 11.5 23.1 49.9 yellow warbler 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Fish and Wildlife American badger 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Burrowing owl 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 California condor 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 California horned lark 136.9 12.5 50.6 73.8 California red-legged frog 52.1 6.5 22.3 23.3 California tiger salamander 52.1 6.5 22.3 23.3 coast horned lizard 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Coast range newt 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 Ferruginous hawk 136.9 12.5 50.6 73.8 golden eagle 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Grasshopper sparrow 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 great blue heron 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 least Bell's vireo 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.3 Merlin 136.9 12.5 50.6 73.8 prairie falcon 136.9 12.5 50.6 73.8 Salinas pocket mouse 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 San Joaquin kit fox 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 San Joaquin whipsnake 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 silvery legless lizard 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 tricolored blackbird 138.5 12.8 51.3 74.3 two-striped garter snake 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 western pond turtle 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 western spadefoot toad 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 White-tailed kite 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Plants Jolon clarkia 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.3 Monterey spineflower 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 recurved larkspur 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Fish and Wildlife American badger 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 bank swallow 5.2 0.0 0.8 4.4 Burrowing owl 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 California condor 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 California horned lark 255.4 25.0 99.3 131.0 California red-legged frog 25.8 1.4 8.5 16.0 California tiger salamander 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 coast horned lizard 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Ferruginous hawk 255.4 25.0 99.3 131.0 Foothill yellow-legged frog 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 golden eagle 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Grasshopper sparrow 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 great blue heron 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 hoary bat 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 least Bell's vireo 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 Merlin 255.4 25.0 99.3 131.0 pallid bat 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 prairie falcon 255.4 25.0 99.3 131.0 purple martin 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 Salinas pocket mouse 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 San Joaquin kit fox 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 San Joaquin whipsnake 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 silvery legless lizard 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 tricolored blackbird 260.5 25.0 100.1 135.3 two-striped garter snake 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western pond turtle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western spadefoot toad 25.8 1.4 8.5 16.0 White-tailed kite 30.8 1.4 9.3 20.2 yellow warbler 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 Plants Jolon clarkia 5.1 0.8 4.3 Monterey spineflower 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 recurved larkspur 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 San Lucas Siding Fish and Wildlife American badger 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 bank swallow 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 Burrowing owl 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California condor 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California horned lark 126.4 16.2 17.3 92.8 California red-legged frog 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California tiger salamander 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 coast horned lizard 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Ferruginous hawk 126.4 16.2 17.3 92.8 golden eagle 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Grasshopper sparrow 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 great blue heron 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 hoary bat 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 least Bell's vireo 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 Merlin 126.4 16.2 17.3 92.8 pallid bat 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 prairie falcon 126.4 16.2 17.3 92.8 purple martin 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 San Lucas Siding Fish and Salinas pocket mouse 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 San Joaquin kit fox 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 silvery legless lizard 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 tricolored blackbird 130.2 17.1 18.1 94.9 western spadefoot toad 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 White-tailed kite 74.7 8.6 9.7 56.4 yellow warbler 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 Plants Lemmon's jewel-flower 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Monterey spineflower 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Second Main Track/Siding Fish and Wildlife American badger 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Burrowing owl 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 California condor 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 California horned lark 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 California red-legged frog 42.0 9.0 11.8 21.3 coast horned lizard 155.2 19.7 34.0 101.5 Coast range newt 114.4 9.7 21.7 83.0 Ferruginous hawk 41.6 10.0 12.3 19.2 Foothill yellow-legged frog 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 golden eagle 148.8 19.1 32.5 97.2 Grasshopper sparrow 41.6 10.0 12.3 19.2 great blue heron 0.9 0.0 0.2 0.8 hoary bat 109.2 9.7 21.7 77.8 least Bell's vireo 11.6 0.7 6.7 4.3 Lompoc grasshopper 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Merlin 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 pallid bat 109.2 9.7 21.7 77.8 prairie falcon 41.6 10.0 12.3 19.2 purple martin 74.1 7.3 16.3 50.4 San Joaquin kit fox 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Joaquin pocket mouse 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Joaquin whipsnake 46.0 10.0 12.3 23.6 silvery legless lizard 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 tricolored blackbird 50.8 9.6 17.1 24.2 two-striped garter snake 3.8 0.1 1.6 2.1 western pond turtle 3.8 0.1 1.6 2.1 Second Main Track/Siding Fish and Wildlife western spadefoot toad 41.1 9.0 11.6 20.5 White-tailed kite 44.6 9.5 11.7 23.4 Second Mainline Plants Blochman's dudleya 46.0 10.0 12.3 23.6 Brewer's spineflower 117.0 10.9 23.8 82.3 chaparral ragwort 117.0 10.9 23.8 82.3 Chorro Creek bog thistle 155.3 19.7 34.1 101.5 dwarf soaproot 4.4 4.4 Eastwood's larkspur 42.6 8.9 10.2 23.5 Hardham's eveningprimrose 113.6 9.7 21.7 82.2 hooked popcornflower 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 Hoover's bent grass 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 Jones' layia 42.6 8.9 10.2 23.5 La Panza mariposa-lily 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 mesa horkelia 117.0 10.9 23.8 82.3 most beautiful jewelflower 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 mouse-gray dudleya 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 pale-yellow layia 150.8 19.7 34.0 97.1 Palmer's monardella 113.6 9.7 21.7 82.2 Pecho manzanita 7.8 1.2 2.1 4.5 San Benito fritillary 4.4 4.4 San Luis mariposa-lily 46.0 10.0 12.3 23.6 San Luis Obispo County lupine 113.6 9.7 21.7 82.2 San Luis Obispo sedge 50.4 10.0 12.3 28.0 Santa Lucia manzanita 113.6 9.7 21.7 82.2 Santa Margarita manzanita 113.6 9.7 21.7 82.2 straight-awned spineflower 117.0 10.9 23.8 82.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 113.6 9.7 21.7 82.2 Spence Siding Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 California horned lark 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 California red-legged frog 3.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 California tiger salamander 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.7 coast horned lizard 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Coast range newt 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Ferruginous hawk 70.9 0.3 1.6 68.9 Spence Siding Fish and Wildlife Foothill yellow-legged frog 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 golden eagle 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Grasshopper sparrow 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 great blue heron 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.7 Merlin 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 prairie falcon 70.9 0.3 1.6 68.9 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 tricolored blackbird 69.5 0.3 1.7 67.5 two-striped garter snake 3.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 western pond turtle 3.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 western spadefoot toad 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Plants Hutchinson's larkspur 2.2 0.0 2.2 Toro manzanita 2.2 0.0 2.2 Templeton Siding Fish and Wildlife American badger 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Burrowing owl 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 California condor 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 California horned lark 77.8 10.8 10.5 56.6 California red-legged frog 76.1 8.0 8.6 59.5 coast horned lizard 66.0 8.8 8.6 48.7 Coast range newt 7.1 1.5 1.3 4.3 Ferruginous hawk 77.9 10.8 10.5 56.7 Foothill yellow-legged frog 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 golden eagle 66.0 8.8 8.6 48.7 Grasshopper sparrow 58.9 7.3 7.3 44.3 great blue heron 3.1 1.0 0.9 1.2 hoary bat 9.0 1.9 1.6 5.5 least Bell's vireo 21.7 1.2 2.4 18.0 Lompoc grasshopper 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Merlin 77.8 10.8 10.5 56.6 pallid bat 9.0 1.9 1.6 5.5 prairie falcon 77.9 10.8 10.5 56.7 purple martin 2.0 0.4 0.4 1.2 San Joaquin kit fox 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 San Joaquin pocket mouse 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 58.9 7.3 7.3 44.3 silvery legless lizard 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 tricolored blackbird 100.7 12.7 13.5 74.6 two-striped garter snake 17.2 0.7 1.3 15.2 western pond turtle 17.2 0.7 1.3 15.2 western spadefoot toad 74.9 7.3 8.1 59.5 White-tailed kite 60.7 7.6 7.7 45.4 yellow warbler 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 Plants Eastwood's larkspur 58.9 7.3 7.3 44.3 Lemmon's jewel-flower 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 mesa horkelia 7.2 1.5 1.3 4.4 most beautiful jewelflower 66.0 8.8 8.6 48.7 round-leaved filaree 65.9 8.8 8.6 48.6 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 58.9 7.3 7.3 44.3 shining navarretia 65.9 8.8 8.6 48.6 yellow-flowered eriastrum 7.2 1.5 1.3 4.4 Templeton/ Henry Fish and Wildlife American badger 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Burrowing owl 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 California condor 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 California horned lark 19.5 0.8 5.3 13.3 California red-legged frog 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 coast horned lizard 31.1 4.1 13.8 13.2 Coast range newt 23.7 2.7 8.9 12.1 Ferruginous hawk 24.4 1.5 8.6 14.3 golden eagle 31.1 4.1 13.8 13.2 Grasshopper sparrow 7.4 1.4 5.0 1.1 hoary bat 23.7 2.7 8.9 12.1 Lompoc grasshopper 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Merlin 19.5 0.8 5.3 13.3 pallid bat 23.7 2.7 8.9 12.1 prairie falcon 24.4 1.5 8.6 14.3 purple martin 16.8 2.1 6.3 8.4 San Joaquin kit fox 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 San Joaquin pocket mouse 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 San Joaquin whipsnake 7.4 1.4 5.0 1.1 silvery legless lizard 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 tricolored blackbird 19.5 0.8 5.3 13.3 Templeton/ Henry Fish and Wildlife western spadefoot toad 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 White-tailed kite 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Plants Eastwood's larkspur 7.4 1.4 5.0 1.1 mesa horkelia 28.7 3.4 12.1 13.1 most beautiful jewelflower 31.1 4.1 13.8 13.2 round-leaved filaree 26.2 3.4 10.6 12.3 Santa Margarita manzanita 28.7 3.4 12.1 13.1 shining navarretia 26.2 3.4 10.6 12.3 straight-awned spineflower 28.7 3.4 12.1 13.1 yellow-flowered eriastrum 28.7 3.4 12.1 13.1 Wellsona Siding Fish and Wildlife American badger 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Burrowing owl 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California condor 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California horned lark 42.0 3.3 5.4 33.3 California linderiella 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California red-legged frog 67.6 10.4 16.3 40.9 coast horned lizard 68.1 9.3 13.3 45.5 Coast range newt 69.1 14.2 23.2 31.7 Conservancy fairy shrimp 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Ferruginous hawk 42.0 3.3 5.4 33.3 Foothill yellow-legged frog 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 golden eagle 107.4 17.4 27.7 62.3 Grasshopper sparrow 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 great blue heron 25.6 7.2 11.7 6.7 hoary bat 69.7 14.2 23.2 32.2 least Bell's vireo 3.6 0.8 1.6 1.2 Lompoc grasshopper 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Merlin 42.0 3.3 5.4 33.3 pallid bat 69.7 14.2 23.2 32.2 prairie falcon 42.0 3.3 5.4 33.3 purple martin 39.9 8.1 14.4 17.3 San Joaquin kit fox 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 San Joaquin pocket mouse 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 silvery legless lizard 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Wellsona Siding Fish and Wildlife steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 tricolored blackbird 70.7 11.3 18.7 40.6 two-striped garter snake 29.3 7.2 11.8 10.3 vernal pool fairy shrimp 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 western pond turtle 29.3 7.2 11.8 10.3 western spadefoot toad 42.5 3.2 4.6 34.7 White-tailed kite 38.8 3.2 4.5 31.2 yellow warbler 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Wellsona/Paso Robles Fish and Wildlife American badger 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Burrowing owl 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California condor 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California horned lark 21.6 3.8 8.9 8.8 California linderiella 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California red-legged frog 15.3 3.8 8.8 2.8 coast horned lizard 27.3 3.8 11.0 12.5 Coast range newt 15.1 0.0 3.3 11.8 Conservancy fairy shrimp 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Ferruginous hawk 21.6 3.8 8.9 8.8 golden eagle 29.9 3.8 12.1 14.0 Grasshopper sparrow 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 great blue heron 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 hoary bat 15.1 0.0 3.3 11.8 Lompoc grasshopper 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Merlin 21.6 3.8 8.9 8.8 pallid bat 15.1 0.0 3.3 11.8 prairie falcon 21.6 3.8 8.9 8.8 purple martin 2.6 0.0 1.0 1.5 San Joaquin kit fox 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 San Joaquin pocket mouse 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 silvery legless lizard 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 tricolored blackbird 22.1 3.8 8.9 9.4 two-striped garter snake 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 vernal pool fairy shrimp 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 western pond turtle 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Fish and Wildlife western spadefoot toad 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 White-tailed kite 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Plants dwarf calycadenia 29.9 3.8 12.1 14.0 Jared's pepper-grass 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 round-leaved filaree 29.9 3.8 12.1 14.0 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 15.1 3.3 11.8 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 shining navarretia 29.9 3.8 12.1 14.0 woodland woollythreads 29.9 3.8 12.1 14.0 Bradley Siding Plants Davidson's bushmallow 25.1 3.7 4.5 16.9 Hardham's eveningprimrose 2.2 2.2 Indian Valley spineflower 2.2 2.2 Santa Cruz microseris 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 shining navarretia 232.1 48.0 34.1 150.0 New Chalone Plants chaparral ragwort 1.0 0.1 0.9 Indian Valley bushmallow 1.0 0.1 0.9 Lemmon's jewel-flower 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Monterey spineflower 82.4 10.4 22.0 49.9 Wellsona Siding Plants dwarf calycadenia 107.4 17.4 27.7 62.3 Indian Valley spineflower 69.1 14.2 23.2 31.7 Jared's pepper-grass 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Lemmon's jewel-flower 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 round-leaved filaree 107.4 17.4 27.7 62.3 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 69.1 14.2 23.2 31.7 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 shining navarretia 107.4 17.4 27.7 62.3 woodland woollythreads 107.4 17.4 27.7 62.3 Study Area Land Cover Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanent Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected Bradley Siding Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Burrowing owl 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California condor 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California horned lark 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California linderiella 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California red-legged frog 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 California tiger salamander 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 coast horned lizard 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Conservancy fairy shrimp 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Ferruginous hawk 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 golden eagle 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Grasshopper sparrow 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Lompoc grasshopper 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Merlin 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 prairie falcon 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Salinas pocket mouse 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 San Joaquin kit fox 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 San Joaquin pocket mouse 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 San Joaquin whipsnake 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 silvery legless lizard 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 tricolored blackbird 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 vernal pool fairy shrimp 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 western spadefoot toad 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 White-tailed kite 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Coast range newt 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 golden eagle 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 hoary bat 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 pallid bat 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 California red-legged frog 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 Foothill yellow-legged frog 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 two-striped garter snake 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 western pond turtle 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 western spadefoot toad 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 great blue heron 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 hoary bat 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 least Bell's vireo 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 pallid bat 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 purple martin 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 tricolored blackbird 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 White-tailed kite 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 yellow warbler 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 Coburn Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Burrowing owl 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 California condor 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 California horned lark 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 California red-legged frog 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 California tiger salamander 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 coast horned lizard 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Ferruginous hawk 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 golden eagle 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Grasshopper sparrow 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Merlin 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 prairie falcon 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Salinas pocket mouse 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 San Joaquin kit fox 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 silvery legless lizard 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 tricolored blackbird 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 western spadefoot toad 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 White-tailed kite 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Plants Lemmon's jewel-flower 108.2 5.5 32.2 70.6 Barren Fish and Wildlife NONE 15.0 3.6 8.2 3.2 Plants NONE 15.0 3.6 8.2 3.2 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 Ferruginous hawk 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 golden eagle 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 Grasshopper sparrow 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 prairie falcon 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 Salinas pocket mouse 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 Plants Jolon clarkia 0.2 0.2 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 163.8 18.0 64.7 81.1 Ferruginous hawk 163.8 18.0 64.7 81.1 Merlin 163.8 18.0 64.7 81.1 prairie falcon 163.8 18.0 64.7 81.1 tricolored blackbird 163.8 18.0 64.7 81.1 Plants NONE 163.8 18.0 64.7 81.1 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 California red-legged frog 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 Foothill yellow-legged frog 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 two-striped garter snake 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 western pond turtle 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 western spadefoot toad 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.3 Plants NONE 0.4 0.1 0.3 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 7.6 0.5 4.6 2.5 Plants NONE 7.6 0.5 4.6 2.5 Getty/Bradley Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Burrowing owl 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California condor 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California horned lark 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California linderiella 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California red-legged frog 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 California tiger salamander 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 coast horned lizard 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Conservancy fairy shrimp 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Ferruginous hawk 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 golden eagle 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Grasshopper sparrow 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Lompoc grasshopper 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Merlin 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 prairie falcon 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Salinas pocket mouse 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 San Joaquin kit fox 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 San Joaquin pocket mouse 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 silvery legless lizard 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 tricolored blackbird 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 vernal pool fairy shrimp 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 western spadefoot toad 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 White-tailed kite 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Plants NONE 154.1 16.2 54.3 83.6 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 6.3 0.0 1.3 4.9 Coast range newt 6.3 0.0 1.3 4.9 golden eagle 6.3 0.0 1.3 4.9 hoary bat 6.3 0.0 1.3 4.9 pallid bat 6.3 0.0 1.3 4.9 Plants Davidson's bush-mallow 6.3 1.3 4.9 Hardham's evening-primrose 6.3 1.3 4.9 Jolon clarkia 6.3 1.3 4.9 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 Ferruginous hawk 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 golden eagle 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 Grasshopper sparrow 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 prairie falcon 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 Salinas pocket mouse 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 San Joaquin whipsnake 3.3 0.0 0.9 2.4 Plants Davidson's bush-mallow 3.3 0.9 2.4 Jolon clarkia 3.3 0.9 2.4 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 3.1 0.2 2.0 0.9 Ferruginous hawk 3.1 0.2 2.0 0.9 Merlin 3.1 0.2 2.0 0.9 prairie falcon 3.1 0.2 2.0 0.9 tricolored blackbird 3.1 0.2 2.0 0.9 Plants NONE 3.1 0.2 2.0 0.9 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 California tiger salamander 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 Coast range newt 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 great blue heron 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 tricolored blackbird 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 two-striped garter snake 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 western pond turtle 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 Plants NONE 1.4 0.0 0.7 0.8 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 California red-legged frog 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 Foothill yellow-legged frog 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 two-striped garter snake 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 western pond turtle 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 western spadefoot toad 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 Plants NONE 15.3 0.3 3.5 11.6 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 great blue heron 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 hoary bat 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 least Bell's vireo 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 pallid bat 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 purple martin 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 tricolored blackbird 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 White-tailed kite 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 yellow warbler 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Plants Abbott's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Davidson's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Jolon clarkia 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Harlem/Metz Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Burrowing owl 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California condor 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California horned lark 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California red-legged frog 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 California tiger salamander 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 coast horned lizard 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Ferruginous hawk 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 golden eagle 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Grasshopper sparrow 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Merlin 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 prairie falcon 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Salinas pocket mouse 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 San Joaquin kit fox 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 San Joaquin whipsnake 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 silvery legless lizard 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 tricolored blackbird 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 western spadefoot toad 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 White-tailed kite 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Plants Lemmon's jewel-flower 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Monterey spineflower 153.3 15.0 52.8 85.5 Barren Fish and Wildlife NONE 5.0 0.0 0.3 4.7 Plants NONE 5.0 0.3 4.7 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Coast range newt 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 golden eagle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 hoary bat 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 pallid bat 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Plants chaparral ragwort 0.1 0.1 Indian Valley bush-mallow 0.1 0.1 Jolon clarkia 0.1 0.1 Monterey spineflower 0.1 0.1 robust spineflower 0.1 0.1 Coastal Oak Woodland Plants chaparral ragwort 2.4 0.1 2.3 Indian Valley bush-mallow 2.4 0.1 2.3 Jolon clarkia 2.4 0.1 2.3 Monterey spineflower 2.4 0.1 2.3 robust spineflower 2.4 0.1 2.3 Coastal Scrub Plants chaparral ragwort 15.7 1.5 5.6 8.5 Jolon clarkia 15.7 1.5 5.6 8.5 Monterey spineflower 15.7 1.5 5.6 8.5 robust spineflower 15.7 1.5 5.6 8.5 Cropland Plants NONE 260.7 32.2 116.8 111.7 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Plants NONE 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 1.1 0.0 0.0 1.1 tricolored blackbird 1.1 0.0 0.0 1.1 Plants Jolon clarkia 1.1 1.1 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 California tiger salamander 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Coast range newt 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 great blue heron 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 tricolored blackbird 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 two-striped garter snake 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western pond turtle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Plants NONE 0.1 0.1 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 California red-legged frog 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 Foothill yellow-legged frog 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 two-striped garter snake 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 western pond turtle 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 western spadefoot toad 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 Plants NONE 1.0 0.1 0.9 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 3.8 0.3 2.7 0.8 Plants NONE 3.8 0.3 2.7 0.8 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 great blue heron 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 hoary bat 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 least Bell's vireo 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 pallid bat 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 purple martin 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 tricolored blackbird 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 White-tailed kite 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 yellow warbler 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 Plants Jolon clarkia 4.2 0.3 1.0 2.9 Henry/Santa Margarita Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Burrowing owl 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California condor 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California horned lark 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California linderiella 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 California red-legged frog 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 coast horned lizard 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Conservancy fairy shrimp 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Ferruginous hawk 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 golden eagle 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Grasshopper sparrow 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Lompoc grasshopper 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Merlin 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 prairie falcon 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Joaquin kit fox 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Joaquin pocket mouse 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Joaquin whipsnake 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 silvery legless lizard 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 tricolored blackbird 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 vernal pool fairy shrimp 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 western spadefoot toad 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 White-tailed kite 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Plants caper-fruited tropidocarpum 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Eastwood's larkspur 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 hooked popcornflower 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Hoover's bent grass 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 most beautiful jewel-flower 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 pale-yellow layia 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 round-leaved filaree 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Luis mariposa-lily 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 San Luis Obispo sedge 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 shining navarretia 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 Blue Oak-Foothill Pine Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Coast range newt 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 golden eagle 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 hoary bat 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 pallid bat 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 purple martin 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Blue Oak-Foothill Plants Brewer's spineflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Hardham's evening-primrose 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 hooked popcornflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Hoover's bent grass 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 mesa horkelia 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 most beautiful jewel-flower 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 pale-yellow layia 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Palmer's monardella 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 round-leaved filaree 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 San Luis Obispo County lupine 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Santa Lucia manzanita 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Santa Margarita manzanita 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 straight-awned spineflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 56.5 6.1 25.1 25.3 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Coast range newt 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 golden eagle 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 hoary bat 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 pallid bat 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 purple martin 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Plants Brewer's spineflower 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Hardham's evening-primrose 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 hooked popcornflower 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Hoover's bent grass 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 mesa horkelia 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 most beautiful jewel-flower 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 pale-yellow layia 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Palmer's monardella 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 round-leaved filaree 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 San Luis Obispo County lupine 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Santa Lucia manzanita 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Santa Margarita manzanita 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 straight-awned spineflower 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 4.8 0.0 1.6 3.3 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 Ferruginous hawk 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 golden eagle 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 Grasshopper sparrow 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 prairie falcon 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 San Joaquin whipsnake 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 Plants Brewer's spineflower 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 mesa horkelia 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 pale-yellow layia 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 San Luis mariposa-lily 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 San Luis Obispo sedge 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 straight-awned spineflower 23.7 2.7 10.1 10.9 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 17.1 0.8 4.8 11.5 Ferruginous hawk 17.1 0.8 4.8 11.5 Merlin 17.1 0.8 4.8 11.5 prairie falcon 17.1 0.8 4.8 11.5 tricolored blackbird 17.1 0.8 4.8 11.5 Plants NONE 17.1 0.8 4.8 11.5 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 great blue heron 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 San Luis pyrg 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 tricolored blackbird 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 two-striped garter snake 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 western pond turtle 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 Plants NONE 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 14.0 0.4 3.3 10.3 tricolored blackbird 14.0 0.4 3.3 10.3 Plants NONE 14.0 0.4 3.3 10.3 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 Coast range newt 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 great blue heron 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 tricolored blackbird 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 two-striped garter snake 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 western pond turtle 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 Plants NONE 2.6 0.1 1.1 1.4 Riverine Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 Foothill yellow-legged frog 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 two-striped garter snake 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 western pond turtle 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 western spadefoot toad 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 Plants NONE 15.2 0.1 4.8 10.3 Unknown Shrub Type Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 1.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 Ferruginous hawk 1.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 golden eagle 1.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 Grasshopper sparrow 1.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 prairie falcon 1.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 1.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 Plants Brewer's spineflower 1.6 0.0 1.6 dwarf soaproot 1.6 0.0 1.6 Eastwood's larkspur 1.6 0.0 1.6 Hardham's evening-primrose 1.6 0.0 1.6 hooked popcornflower 1.6 0.0 1.6 Hoover's bent grass 1.6 0.0 1.6 mesa horkelia 1.6 0.0 1.6 most beautiful jewel-flower 1.6 0.0 1.6 Palmer's monardella 1.6 0.0 1.6 San Benito fritillary 1.6 0.0 1.6 San Luis mariposa-lily 1.6 0.0 1.6 San Luis Obispo County lupine 1.6 0.0 1.6 San Luis Obispo sedge 1.6 0.0 1.6 Santa Lucia manzanita 1.6 0.0 1.6 Santa Margarita manzanita 1.6 0.0 1.6 straight-awned spineflower 1.6 0.0 1.6 yellow-flowered eriastrum 1.6 0.0 1.6 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 31.8 1.7 6.5 23.6 Plants NONE 31.8 1.7 6.5 23.6 Henry/Santa Margarita Valley Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 4.0 0.0 0.9 3.1 Coast range newt 4.0 0.0 0.9 3.1 hoary bat 4.0 0.0 0.9 3.1 pallid bat 4.0 0.0 0.9 3.1 purple martin 4.0 0.0 0.9 3.1 White-tailed kite 4.0 0.0 0.9 3.1 Plants NONE 4.0 0.9 3.1 King City Siding Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Burrowing owl 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 California condor 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 California horned lark 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 California red-legged frog 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 California tiger salamander 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 coast horned lizard 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Ferruginous hawk 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 golden eagle 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Grasshopper sparrow 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Merlin 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 prairie falcon 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Salinas pocket mouse 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 San Joaquin kit fox 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 silvery legless lizard 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 tricolored blackbird 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 western spadefoot toad 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 White-tailed kite 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Plants recurved larkspur 16.8 3.5 4.0 9.2 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 102.4 7.7 11.5 83.2 Ferruginous hawk 102.4 7.7 11.5 83.2 Merlin 102.4 7.7 11.5 83.2 prairie falcon 102.4 7.7 11.5 83.2 tricolored blackbird 102.4 7.7 11.5 83.2 Plants NONE 102.4 7.7 11.5 83.2 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 California tiger salamander 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 great blue heron 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 tricolored blackbird 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 two-striped garter snake 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 western pond turtle 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.7 Plants NONE 0.7 0.1 0.7 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Plants Davidson's bush-mallow 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 Jolon clarkia 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 King City Siding Riverine Plants NONE 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 Urban Plants NONE 87.8 13.8 13.7 60.4 McKay/Wellson Annual Grassland Plants dwarf calycadenia 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 hooked popcornflower 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 round-leaved filaree 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 Santa Cruz microseris 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 shining navarretia 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 woodland woollythreads 94.2 8.6 32.3 53.2 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 Coast range newt 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 golden eagle 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 hoary bat 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 pallid bat 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 Plants dwarf calycadenia 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 Hardham's evening-primrose 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 hooked popcornflower 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 Indian Valley spineflower 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 round-leaved filaree 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 shining navarretia 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 woodland woollythreads 19.1 2.4 6.0 10.7 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 Coast range newt 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 golden eagle 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 hoary bat 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 pallid bat 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 purple martin 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 Plants dwarf calycadenia 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 Hardham's evening-primrose 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 hooked popcornflower 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 Indian Valley spineflower 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 round-leaved filaree 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 shining navarretia 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 woodland woollythreads 29.7 4.6 12.4 12.7 Cropland Plants NONE 24.2 3.4 11.5 9.2 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 California tiger salamander 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 great blue heron 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 tricolored blackbird 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 two-striped garter snake 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 western pond turtle 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 Plants dwarf calycadenia 22.9 7.2 12.6 3.1 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 2.6 0.7 1.2 0.8 tricolored blackbird 2.6 0.7 1.2 0.8 Plants NONE 2.6 0.7 1.2 0.8 Riverine Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 Foothill yellow-legged frog 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 two-striped garter snake 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 western pond turtle 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 western spadefoot toad 11.0 0.0 0.1 10.9 Plants NONE 11.0 0.1 10.9 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 89.6 6.7 31.5 51.4 Plants NONE 89.6 6.7 31.5 51.4 New Chalone Creek Siding Annual Grassland Plants Lemmon's jewel-flower 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Monterey spineflower 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Barren Plants NONE 4.9 0.5 0.6 3.7 Coastal Oak Woodland Plants chaparral ragwort 1.0 0.1 0.9 Indian Valley bush-mallow 1.0 0.1 0.9 Monterey spineflower 1.0 0.1 0.9 Cropland Plants NONE 80.8 13.2 38.5 29.1 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Plants NONE 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 Freshwater Pond Plants NONE 0.1 0.1 Riverine Plants NONE 0.0 0.0 Valley Foothill Riparian Plants NONE 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 New Chalone Creek Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Burrowing owl 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 California condor 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 California horned lark 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 California red-legged frog 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 California tiger salamander 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 coast horned lizard 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Ferruginous hawk 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 golden eagle 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Grasshopper sparrow 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Merlin 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 prairie falcon 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Salinas pocket mouse 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 San Joaquin kit fox 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 San Joaquin whipsnake 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 silvery legless lizard 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 tricolored blackbird 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 western spadefoot toad 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 White-tailed kite 81.3 10.4 21.9 49.0 Barren Fish and Wildlife NONE 4.9 0.5 0.6 3.7 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 Coast range newt 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 golden eagle 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 hoary bat 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 pallid bat 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 purple martin 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 80.8 13.2 38.5 29.1 Ferruginous hawk 80.8 13.2 38.5 29.1 Merlin 80.8 13.2 38.5 29.1 prairie falcon 80.8 13.2 38.5 29.1 tricolored blackbird 80.8 13.2 38.5 29.1 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 California tiger salamander 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 great blue heron 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 tricolored blackbird 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 two-striped garter snake 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 western pond turtle 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.0 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 California tiger salamander 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Coast range newt 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 great blue heron 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 tricolored blackbird 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 two-striped garter snake 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western pond turtle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 California red-legged frog 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Foothill yellow-legged frog 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 two-striped garter snake 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 western pond turtle 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 western spadefoot toad 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 great blue heron 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 hoary bat 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 least Bell's vireo 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 pallid bat 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 purple martin 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 tricolored blackbird 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 White-tailed kite 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 yellow warbler 3.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Burrowing owl 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 California condor 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 California horned lark 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 California red-legged frog 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 California tiger salamander 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 coast horned lizard 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Ferruginous hawk 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 golden eagle 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Grasshopper sparrow 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Merlin 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 prairie falcon 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Salinas pocket mouse 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 San Joaquin kit fox 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 San Joaquin whipsnake 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 silvery legless lizard 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 tricolored blackbird 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 western spadefoot toad 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 White-tailed kite 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Plants Monterey spineflower 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 recurved larkspur 51.1 6.3 21.8 23.0 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 85.8 6.2 28.7 50.8 Ferruginous hawk 85.8 6.2 28.7 50.8 Merlin 85.8 6.2 28.7 50.8 prairie falcon 85.8 6.2 28.7 50.8 tricolored blackbird 85.8 6.2 28.7 50.8 Plants NONE 85.8 6.2 28.7 50.8 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.3 tricolored blackbird 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.3 Plants Jolon clarkia 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.3 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 California tiger salamander 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 Coast range newt 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 great blue heron 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 tricolored blackbird 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 two-striped garter snake 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 western pond turtle 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 Plants NONE 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.3 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Burrowing owl 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 California condor 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 California horned lark 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 California red-legged frog 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 California tiger salamander 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 coast horned lizard 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Ferruginous hawk 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 golden eagle 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Grasshopper sparrow 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Merlin 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 prairie falcon 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Salinas pocket mouse 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 San Joaquin kit fox 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 San Joaquin whipsnake 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 silvery legless lizard 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 tricolored blackbird 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 western spadefoot toad 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 White-tailed kite 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Plants Monterey spineflower 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 recurved larkspur 25.7 1.4 8.5 15.9 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 229.6 23.7 90.8 115.1 Ferruginous hawk 229.6 23.7 90.8 115.1 Merlin 229.6 23.7 90.8 115.1 prairie falcon 229.6 23.7 90.8 115.1 tricolored blackbird 229.6 23.7 90.8 115.1 Plants NONE 229.6 23.7 90.8 115.1 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 California red-legged frog 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Foothill yellow-legged frog 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 two-striped garter snake 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western pond turtle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western spadefoot toad 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Plants NONE 0.1 0.1 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 great blue heron 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 hoary bat 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 least Bell's vireo 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 pallid bat 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 purple martin 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 tricolored blackbird 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 White-tailed kite 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 yellow warbler 5.1 0.0 0.8 4.3 Plants Jolon clarkia 5.1 0.8 4.3 San Lucas Siding Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Burrowing owl 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California condor 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California horned lark 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California red-legged frog 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 California tiger salamander 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 coast horned lizard 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Ferruginous hawk 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 golden eagle 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Grasshopper sparrow 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Merlin 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 prairie falcon 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Salinas pocket mouse 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 San Joaquin kit fox 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 silvery legless lizard 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 tricolored blackbird 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 western spadefoot toad 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 White-tailed kite 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Plants Lemmon's jewel-flower 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Monterey spineflower 70.9 7.7 8.9 54.2 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 55.5 8.5 8.5 38.6 Ferruginous hawk 55.5 8.5 8.5 38.6 Merlin 55.5 8.5 8.5 38.6 prairie falcon 55.5 8.5 8.5 38.6 tricolored blackbird 55.5 8.5 8.5 38.6 Plants NONE 55.5 8.5 8.5 38.6 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 38.5 5.8 4.9 27.8 Plants NONE 38.5 5.8 4.9 27.8 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 great blue heron 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 hoary bat 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 least Bell's vireo 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 pallid bat 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 purple martin 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 tricolored blackbird 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 White-tailed kite 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 yellow warbler 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 Plants NONE 3.8 0.9 0.8 2.1 Second Annual Grassland Plants Blochman's dudleya 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Chorro Creek bog thistle 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Eastwood's larkspur 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 hooked popcornflower 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Hoover's bent grass 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Jones' layia 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 La Panza mariposa-lily 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 most beautiful jewel-flower 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 mouse-gray dudleya 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 pale-yellow layia 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Luis mariposa-lily 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Luis Obispo sedge 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Second Mainline Blue Oak Woodland Plants Brewer's spineflower 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 chaparral ragwort 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Chorro Creek bog thistle 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Hardham's evening-primrose 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 hooked popcornflower 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Hoover's bent grass 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 La Panza mariposa-lily 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 mesa horkelia 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 most beautiful jewel-flower 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 mouse-gray dudleya 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 pale-yellow layia 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Palmer's monardella 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 San Luis Obispo County lupine 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Santa Lucia manzanita 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 straight-awned spineflower 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 yellow-flowered eriastrum 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Coastal Oak Woodland Plants Brewer's spineflower 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 chaparral ragwort 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Chorro Creek bog thistle 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Hardham's evening-primrose 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 hooked popcornflower 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Hoover's bent grass 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 La Panza mariposa-lily 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 mesa horkelia 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 most beautiful jewel-flower 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 mouse-gray dudleya 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 pale-yellow layia 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Palmer's monardella 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 San Luis Obispo County lupine 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Santa Margarita manzanita 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 straight-awned spineflower 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 yellow-flowered eriastrum 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Coastal Scrub Plants Blochman's dudleya 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Brewer's spineflower 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 chaparral ragwort 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Chorro Creek bog thistle 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 mesa horkelia 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 pale-yellow layia 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Pecho manzanita 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 San Luis mariposa-lily 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 San Luis Obispo sedge 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 straight-awned spineflower 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Plants Chorro Creek bog thistle 0.2 0.1 0.0 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Plants NONE 11.6 0.7 6.7 4.3 Freshwater Pond Plants NONE 0.8 0.0 0.7 Mixed Chaparral Plants Blochman's dudleya 4.4 4.4 Brewer's spineflower 4.4 4.4 chaparral ragwort 4.4 4.4 Chorro Creek bog thistle 4.4 4.4 dwarf soaproot 4.4 4.4 Eastwood's larkspur 4.4 4.4 Hardham's evening-primrose 4.4 4.4 hooked popcornflower 4.4 4.4 Hoover's bent grass 4.4 4.4 Jones' layia 4.4 4.4 La Panza mariposa-lily 4.4 4.4 mesa horkelia 4.4 4.4 most beautiful jewel-flower 4.4 4.4 mouse-gray dudleya 4.4 4.4 Palmer's monardella 4.4 4.4 Pecho manzanita 4.4 4.4 San Benito fritillary 4.4 4.4 San Luis mariposa-lily 4.4 4.4 San Luis Obispo County lupine 4.4 4.4 San Luis Obispo sedge 8.8 8.8 Santa Lucia manzanita 4.4 4.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 4.4 4.4 straight-awned spineflower 4.4 4.4 yellow-flowered eriastrum 4.4 4.4 Riverine Plants NONE 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 Urban Plants NONE 25.8 5.2 3.6 17.0 Valley Oak Woodland Plants Brewer's spineflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 chaparral ragwort 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Chorro Creek bog thistle 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Hardham's evening-primrose 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 hooked popcornflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Hoover's bent grass 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 La Panza mariposa-lily 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 mesa horkelia 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 most beautiful jewel-flower 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 mouse-gray dudleya 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 pale-yellow layia 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Palmer's monardella 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 San Luis Obispo County lupine 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Santa Lucia manzanita 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Santa Margarita manzanita 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 straight-awned spineflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Second Main Tracj/Siding Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Burrowing owl 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 California condor 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 California horned lark 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 California red-legged frog 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 coast horned lizard 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Ferruginous hawk 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 golden eagle 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Grasshopper sparrow 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Lompoc grasshopper 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Merlin 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 prairie falcon 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Joaquin kit fox 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Joaquin pocket mouse 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 San Joaquin whipsnake 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 silvery legless lizard 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 tricolored blackbird 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 western spadefoot toad 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 White-tailed kite 38.2 8.9 10.2 19.1 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Coast range newt 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 golden eagle 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 hoary bat 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 pallid bat 35.1 2.4 5.4 27.4 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Coast range newt 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 golden eagle 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 hoary bat 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 pallid bat 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 purple martin 67.7 6.7 14.8 46.1 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Ferruginous hawk 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 golden eagle 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Grasshopper sparrow 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 prairie falcon 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 San Joaquin whipsnake 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.1 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 great blue heron 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 tricolored blackbird 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 two-striped garter snake 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 western pond turtle 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 11.6 0.7 6.7 4.3 tricolored blackbird 11.6 0.7 6.7 4.3 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 Coast range newt 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 great blue heron 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 tricolored blackbird 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 two-striped garter snake 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 western pond turtle 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 Mixed Chaparral Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 4.4 0.0 0.0 4.4 Coast range newt 4.4 0.0 0.0 4.4 golden eagle 4.4 0.0 0.0 4.4 San Joaquin whipsnake 4.4 0.0 0.0 4.4 Riverine Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 Foothill yellow-legged frog 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 two-striped garter snake 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 western pond turtle 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 western spadefoot toad 2.9 0.1 1.4 1.4 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 25.8 5.2 3.6 17.0 Second Main Tracj/Siding Valley Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Coast range newt 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 hoary bat 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 pallid bat 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 purple martin 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 White-tailed kite 6.4 0.6 1.5 4.3 Spence Siding Barren Fish and Wildlife NONE 91.0 19.0 21.2 50.7 Plants NONE 91.0 19.0 21.2 50.7 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Ferruginous hawk 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 golden eagle 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Grasshopper sparrow 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 prairie falcon 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Plants Hutchinson's larkspur 2.2 0.0 2.2 Toro manzanita 2.2 0.0 2.2 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 Ferruginous hawk 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 Merlin 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 prairie falcon 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 tricolored blackbird 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 Plants NONE 68.7 0.3 1.6 66.8 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 California tiger salamander 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 great blue heron 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 tricolored blackbird 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 two-striped garter snake 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 western pond turtle 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 Plants NONE 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.6 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 California tiger salamander 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Coast range newt 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 great blue heron 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 tricolored blackbird 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 two-striped garter snake 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 western pond turtle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Plants NONE 0.1 0.1 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 California red-legged frog 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Foothill yellow-legged frog 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 two-striped garter snake 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 western pond turtle 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 western spadefoot toad 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Plants NONE 2.2 0.0 0.0 2.2 Templeton Siding Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Burrowing owl 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 California condor 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 California horned lark 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 California red-legged frog 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 coast horned lizard 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Ferruginous hawk 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 golden eagle 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Grasshopper sparrow 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Lompoc grasshopper 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Merlin 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 prairie falcon 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 San Joaquin kit fox 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 San Joaquin pocket mouse 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 silvery legless lizard 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 tricolored blackbird 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 western spadefoot toad 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 White-tailed kite 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Plants Eastwood's larkspur 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 most beautiful jewel-flower 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 round-leaved filaree 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 shining navarretia 58.8 7.3 7.3 44.2 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 Coast range newt 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 golden eagle 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 hoary bat 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 pallid bat 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 Plants mesa horkelia 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 most beautiful jewel-flower 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 round-leaved filaree 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 shining navarretia 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 7.0 1.5 1.2 4.3 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Coast range newt 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 golden eagle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 hoary bat 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 pallid bat 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 purple martin 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Plants mesa horkelia 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 most beautiful jewel-flower 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 round-leaved filaree 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 shining navarretia 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 yellow-flowered eriastrum 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 19.0 3.5 3.2 12.3 Ferruginous hawk 19.0 3.5 3.2 12.3 Merlin 19.0 3.5 3.2 12.3 prairie falcon 19.0 3.5 3.2 12.3 tricolored blackbird 19.0 3.5 3.2 12.3 Plants NONE 19.0 3.5 3.2 12.3 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.0 great blue heron 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.0 tricolored blackbird 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.0 two-striped garter snake 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.0 western pond turtle 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.0 Plants NONE 1.2 0.7 0.5 0.0 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 19.7 0.8 2.1 16.8 tricolored blackbird 19.7 0.8 2.1 16.8 Plants NONE 19.7 0.8 2.1 16.8 Riverine Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 Foothill yellow-legged frog 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 two-striped garter snake 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 western pond turtle 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 western spadefoot toad 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 Plants NONE 16.1 0.0 0.8 15.2 Unknown Shrub Type Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Ferruginous hawk 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 golden eagle 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Grasshopper sparrow 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 prairie falcon 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 San Joaquin whipsnake 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Plants Eastwood's larkspur 0.1 0.1 mesa horkelia 0.1 0.1 most beautiful jewel-flower 0.1 0.1 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 0.1 0.1 yellow-flowered eriastrum 0.1 0.1 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 134.3 32.5 18.6 83.1 Plants NONE 134.3 32.5 18.6 83.1 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife great blue heron 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 hoary bat 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 least Bell's vireo 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 pallid bat 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 purple martin 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 tricolored blackbird 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 White-tailed kite 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 yellow warbler 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 Plants NONE 1.9 0.4 0.3 1.2 Templeton/He nry Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Burrowing owl 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 California condor 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 California horned lark 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 California red-legged frog 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 coast horned lizard 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Ferruginous hawk 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 golden eagle 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Grasshopper sparrow 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Lompoc grasshopper 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Merlin 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 prairie falcon 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 San Joaquin kit fox 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 San Joaquin pocket mouse 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 San Joaquin whipsnake 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 silvery legless lizard 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 tricolored blackbird 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 western spadefoot toad 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 White-tailed kite 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Plants Eastwood's larkspur 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 most beautiful jewel-flower 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 round-leaved filaree 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 shining navarretia 2.5 0.6 1.7 0.1 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 Coast range newt 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 golden eagle 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 hoary bat 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 pallid bat 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 Plants mesa horkelia 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 most beautiful jewel-flower 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 round-leaved filaree 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 Santa Margarita manzanita 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 shining navarretia 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 straight-awned spineflower 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 yellow-flowered eriastrum 6.9 0.6 2.5 3.7 Blue Oak-Foothill Pine Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 2.0 0.0 0.1 1.9 Coast range newt 2.0 0.0 0.1 1.9 golden eagle 2.0 0.0 0.1 1.9 hoary bat 2.0 0.0 0.1 1.9 pallid bat 2.0 0.0 0.1 1.9 purple martin 2.0 0.0 0.1 1.9 Plants mesa horkelia 2.0 0.1 1.9 most beautiful jewel-flower 2.0 0.1 1.9 round-leaved filaree 2.0 0.1 1.9 Santa Margarita manzanita 2.0 0.1 1.9 shining navarretia 2.0 0.1 1.9 straight-awned spineflower 2.0 0.1 1.9 yellow-flowered eriastrum 2.0 0.1 1.9 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 Coast range newt 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 golden eagle 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 hoary bat 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 pallid bat 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 purple martin 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 Plants mesa horkelia 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 most beautiful jewel-flower 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 round-leaved filaree 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 Santa Margarita manzanita 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 shining navarretia 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 straight-awned spineflower 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 yellow-flowered eriastrum 14.9 2.1 6.2 6.5 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 17.0 0.2 3.7 13.2 Ferruginous hawk 17.0 0.2 3.7 13.2 Merlin 17.0 0.2 3.7 13.2 prairie falcon 17.0 0.2 3.7 13.2 tricolored blackbird 17.0 0.2 3.7 13.2 Plants NONE 17.0 0.2 3.7 13.2 Unknown Shrub Type Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 Ferruginous hawk 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 golden eagle 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 Grasshopper sparrow 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 prairie falcon 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 San Joaquin whipsnake 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 Plants Eastwood's larkspur 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 mesa horkelia 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 most beautiful jewel-flower 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 Santa Margarita manzanita 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 straight-awned spineflower 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 yellow-flowered eriastrum 4.9 0.7 3.3 0.9 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 18.8 1.4 5.2 12.2 Plants NONE 18.8 1.4 5.2 12.2 Wellsona Siding Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Burrowing owl 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California condor 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California horned lark 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California linderiella 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 California red-legged frog 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 coast horned lizard 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Conservancy fairy shrimp 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Ferruginous hawk 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 golden eagle 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Grasshopper sparrow 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Lompoc grasshopper 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Merlin 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 prairie falcon 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 San Joaquin kit fox 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 San Joaquin pocket mouse 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 San Joaquin whipsnake 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 silvery legless lizard 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 tricolored blackbird 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 vernal pool fairy shrimp 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 western spadefoot toad 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 White-tailed kite 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 Coast range newt 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 golden eagle 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 hoary bat 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 pallid bat 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife Coast range newt 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 golden eagle 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 hoary bat 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 pallid bat 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 purple martin 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 3.8 0.1 0.9 2.7 Ferruginous hawk 3.8 0.1 0.9 2.7 Merlin 3.8 0.1 0.9 2.7 prairie falcon 3.8 0.1 0.9 2.7 tricolored blackbird 3.8 0.1 0.9 2.7 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 25.1 7.2 11.7 6.2 great blue heron 25.1 7.2 11.7 6.2 tricolored blackbird 25.1 7.2 11.7 6.2 two-striped garter snake 25.1 7.2 11.7 6.2 western pond turtle 25.1 7.2 11.7 6.2 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 3.1 0.8 1.6 0.6 tricolored blackbird 3.1 0.8 1.6 0.6 Riverine Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 Foothill yellow-legged frog 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 two-striped garter snake 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 western pond turtle 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 western spadefoot toad 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 37.1 4.0 5.8 27.3 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife great blue heron 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 hoary bat 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 least Bell's vireo 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 pallid bat 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 purple martin 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 tricolored blackbird 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 White-tailed kite 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 yellow warbler 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Wellsona/Paso Robles Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Burrowing owl 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California condor 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California horned lark 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California linderiella 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 California red-legged frog 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 coast horned lizard 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Conservancy fairy shrimp 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Ferruginous hawk 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 golden eagle 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Grasshopper sparrow 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Lompoc grasshopper 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Merlin 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 prairie falcon 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 San Joaquin kit fox 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 San Joaquin pocket mouse 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 San Joaquin whipsnake 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 silvery legless lizard 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 tricolored blackbird 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 vernal pool fairy shrimp 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 western spadefoot toad 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 White-tailed kite 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Plants dwarf calycadenia 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Jared's pepper-grass 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 round-leaved filaree 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 shining navarretia 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 woodland woollythreads 14.7 3.8 8.8 2.2 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 12.6 0.0 2.3 10.3 Coast range newt 12.6 0.0 2.3 10.3 golden eagle 12.6 0.0 2.3 10.3 hoary bat 12.6 0.0 2.3 10.3 pallid bat 12.6 0.0 2.3 10.3 Plants dwarf calycadenia 12.6 2.3 10.3 round-leaved filaree 12.6 2.3 10.3 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 12.6 2.3 10.3 shining navarretia 12.6 2.3 10.3 woodland woollythreads 12.6 2.3 10.3 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife Coast range newt 2.6 0.0 1.0 1.5 golden eagle 2.6 0.0 1.0 1.5 hoary bat 2.6 0.0 1.0 1.5 pallid bat 2.6 0.0 1.0 1.5 purple martin 2.6 0.0 1.0 1.5 Plants dwarf calycadenia 2.6 1.0 1.5 round-leaved filaree 2.6 1.0 1.5 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 2.6 1.0 1.5 shining navarretia 2.6 1.0 1.5 woodland woollythreads 2.6 1.0 1.5 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 6.8 0.0 0.2 6.6 Ferruginous hawk 6.8 0.0 0.2 6.6 Merlin 6.8 0.0 0.2 6.6 prairie falcon 6.8 0.0 0.2 6.6 tricolored blackbird 6.8 0.0 0.2 6.6 Plants NONE 6.8 0.2 6.6 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 great blue heron 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 tricolored blackbird 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 two-striped garter snake 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 western pond turtle 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 Plants NONE 0.6 0.6 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 24.9 1.4 8.5 15.0 Plants NONE 24.9 1.4 8.5 15.0 Bradley Siding Annual Grassland Plants Santa Cruz microseris 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 shining navarretia 229.9 48.0 34.1 147.8 Blue Oak Woodland Plants Davidson's bush-mallow 2.2 2.2 Hardham's evening-primrose 2.2 2.2 Indian Valley spineflower 2.2 2.2 shining navarretia 2.2 2.2 Riverine Plants NONE 3.2 0.3 0.7 2.2 Valley Foothill Riparian Plants Davidson's bush-mallow 22.9 3.7 4.5 14.7 Wellsona Siding Annual Grassland Plants dwarf calycadenia 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Jared's pepper-grass 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Lemmon's jewel-flower 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 round-leaved filaree 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 shining navarretia 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 woodland woollythreads 38.3 3.2 4.5 30.6 Blue Oak Woodland Plants dwarf calycadenia 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 Indian Valley spineflower 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 round-leaved filaree 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 shining navarretia 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 woodland woollythreads 29.8 6.1 8.8 14.9 Coastal Oak Woodland Plants dwarf calycadenia 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 Indian Valley spineflower 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 round-leaved filaree 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 shining navarretia 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 woodland woollythreads 39.3 8.1 14.4 16.8 Cropland Plants NONE 3.8 0.1 0.9 2.7 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Plants NONE 25.1 7.2 11.7 6.2 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Plants NONE 3.1 0.8 1.6 0.6 Riverine Plants NONE 4.3 0.0 0.1 4.1 Urban Plants NONE 37.1 4.0 5.8 27.3 Valley Foothill Riparian Plants NONE 0.6 0.6 Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanent Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Sum of Areas Potentially Indirectly Affected Fish and Wildlife American badger 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 691.0 bank swallow 93.1 10.3 24.5 58.4 Burrowing owl 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 691.0 California condor 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 691.0 California horned lark 2,010.9 233.4 574.7 1,202.8 California linderiella 550.7 84.4 146.2 320.0 California red-legged frog 1,299.1 169.1 358.7 771.3 California tiger salamander 919.6 121.9 253.1 544.6 coast horned lizard 1,507.5 188.7 422.4 896.4 Coast range newt 358.6 41.5 108.2 209.0 Conservancy fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 320.0 Ferruginous hawk 2,050.3 238.1 591.1 1,221.1 Foothill yellow-legged frog 71.7 0.8 11.7 59.3 golden eagle 1,539.0 196.2 435.4 907.3 Grasshopper sparrow 1,196.9 155.6 332.0 709.3 great blue heron 143.1 27.5 51.8 63.9 hoary bat 421.4 51.4 126.2 243.9 least Bell's vireo 126.1 13.6 35.6 76.9 Lompoc grasshopper 650.2 101.2 165.4 383.5 Merlin 2,010.9 233.4 574.7 1,202.8 pallid bat 421.4 51.4 126.2 243.9 prairie falcon 2,050.3 238.1 591.1 1,221.1 purple martin 302.2 38.4 98.5 165.3 Salinas pocket mouse 894.8 113.9 239.5 541.4 San Joaquin kit fox 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 691.0 San Joaquin pocket mouse 650.2 101.2 165.4 383.5 San Joaquin whipsnake 1,182.3 152.1 327.9 702.3 San Luis pyrg 11.2 1.4 3.4 6.4 silvery legless lizard 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 691.0 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 71.7 0.8 11.7 59.3 Fish and Wildlife tricolored blackbird 2,206.8 264.4 641.7 1,300.8 two-striped garter snake 141.6 18.1 43.1 80.4 vernal pool fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 320.0 western pond turtle 141.6 18.1 43.1 80.4 western spadefoot toad 1,229.2 151.8 327.2 750.2 White-tailed kite 1,241.2 161.8 338.2 741.2 yellow warbler 73.2 10.1 20.3 42.8 Plants Abbott's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 16.2 Blochman's dudleya 46.0 10.0 12.3 23.6 Brewer's spineflower 203.6 19.7 60.6 123.4 caper-fruited tropidocarpum 113.7 13.3 44.5 55.8 chaparral ragwort 136.1 12.4 29.6 94.2 Chorro Creek bog thistle 155.3 19.7 34.1 101.5 Davidson's bushmallow 66.8 7.5 18.6 40.7 dwarf calycadenia 303.2 44.0 103.1 156.1 dwarf soaproot 6.0 0.0 6.0 Eastwood's larkspur 224.2 30.8 67.0 126.3 Hardham's eveningprimrose 233.9 22.8 68.2 142.9 hooked popcornflower 471.5 53.6 153.9 264.0 Hoover's bent grass 328.4 38.0 103.1 187.3 Hutchinson's larkspur 2.2 0.0 2.2 Indian Valley bushmallow 3.5 0.2 3.3 Indian Valley spineflower 120.2 21.2 41.7 57.3 Jared's pepper-grass 53.0 7.0 13.2 32.8 Jolon clarkia 71.1 5.8 21.8 43.4 Jones' layia 42.6 8.9 10.2 23.5 La Panza mariposa-lily 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 Lemmon's jewel-flower 619.7 61.4 168.7 389.6 mesa horkelia 239.5 24.6 74.0 140.9 Monterey spineflower 401.5 42.3 119.7 239.5 most beautiful jewelflower 425.6 50.8 125.5 249.2 mouse-gray dudleya 151.8 18.6 31.9 101.4 pale-yellow layia 349.5 41.9 115.3 192.3 Palmer's monardella 176.5 15.8 48.4 112.4 Pecho manzanita 7.8 1.2 2.1 4.5 Plants recurved larkspur 93.6 11.2 34.4 48.1 robust spineflower 18.1 1.5 5.7 10.9 round-leaved filaree 547.4 68.3 180.9 298.2 San Benito fritillary 6.0 0.0 6.0 San Luis mariposa-lily 185.0 26.1 67.0 91.9 San Luis Obispo County lupine 176.5 15.8 48.4 112.4 San Luis Obispo sedge 189.4 26.1 67.0 96.3 Santa Cruz microseris 324.0 56.6 66.5 201.0 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 84.3 14.2 26.5 43.5 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 206.1 22.8 52.9 130.4 Santa Lucia manzanita 176.5 15.8 48.4 112.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 205.2 19.2 60.5 125.5 shining navarretia 718.2 110.2 188.3 419.6 straight-awned spineflower 232.3 23.1 72.7 136.5 Toro manzanita 2.2 0.0 2.2 woodland woollythreads 280.3 36.8 90.6 153.0 yellow-flowered eriastrum 212.4 20.7 61.8 129.9 Land Cover Taxanomic Group Species Sum of Existing Land Cover in Study Area Sum of Permanent Impacts Sum of Temporary Impacts Annual Grassland Fish and Wildlife American badger 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 Burrowing owl 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 California condor 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 California horned lark 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 California linderiella 550.7 84.4 146.2 California red-legged frog 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 California tiger salamander 891.3 113.9 238.6 coast horned lizard 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 Conservancy fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 Ferruginous hawk 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 golden eagle 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 Grasshopper sparrow 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 Lompoc grasshopper 650.2 101.2 165.4 Merlin 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 prairie falcon 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 Salinas pocket mouse 891.3 113.9 238.6 San Joaquin kit fox 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 San Joaquin pocket mouse 650.2 101.2 165.4 San Joaquin whipsnake 1,140.7 147.5 311.5 silvery legless lizard 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 tricolored blackbird 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 vernal pool fairy shrimp 550.7 84.4 146.2 western spadefoot toad 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 White-tailed kite 1,157.5 151.0 315.5 Plants Blochman's dudleya 38.2 8.9 10.2 caper-fruited tropidocarpum 113.7 13.3 44.5 Chorro Creek bog thistle 38.2 8.9 10.2 dwarf calycadenia 147.2 15.6 45.6 Eastwood's larkspur 213.2 30.1 63.8 hooked popcornflower 246.1 30.8 87.1 Hoover's bent grass 151.9 22.2 54.7 Jared's pepper-grass 53.0 7.0 13.2 Jones' layia 38.2 8.9 10.2 La Panza mariposa-lily 38.2 8.9 10.2 Lemmon's jewel-flower 619.7 61.4 168.7 Monterey spineflower 382.4 40.8 113.9 most beautiful jewel-flower 213.2 30.1 63.8 mouse-gray dudleya 38.2 8.9 10.2 Annual Grassland Plants NONE 154.1 16.2 54.3 pale-yellow layia 151.9 22.2 54.7 recurved larkspur 93.6 11.2 34.4 round-leaved filaree 322.1 36.8 99.1 San Luis mariposa-lily 151.9 22.2 54.7 San Luis Obispo sedge 151.9 22.2 54.7 Santa Cruz microseris 324.0 56.6 66.5 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 206.0 22.8 52.9 shining navarretia 552.0 84.8 133.2 woodland woollythreads 147.2 15.6 45.6 Barren Fish and Wildlife NONE 115.8 23.1 30.4 Plants NONE 115.8 23.1 30.4 Blue Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 119.2 13.0 27.6 Coast range newt 119.2 13.0 27.6 golden eagle 119.2 13.0 27.6 hoary bat 119.2 13.0 27.6 pallid bat 119.2 13.0 27.6 Plants Brewer's spineflower 35.1 2.4 5.4 chaparral ragwort 35.3 2.4 5.4 Chorro Creek bog thistle 35.1 2.4 5.4 Davidson's bush-mallow 8.5 1.3 dwarf calycadenia 61.6 8.5 17.1 Hardham's evening-primrose 62.7 4.8 12.8 hooked popcornflower 54.3 4.8 11.4 Hoover's bent grass 35.1 2.4 5.4 Indian Valley bush-mallow 0.1 Indian Valley spineflower 51.2 8.5 14.9 Jolon clarkia 6.4 1.3 La Panza mariposa-lily 35.1 2.4 5.4 mesa horkelia 49.0 4.5 9.1 Monterey spineflower 0.1 most beautiful jewel-flower 49.0 4.5 9.1 mouse-gray dudleya 35.1 2.4 5.4 pale-yellow layia 35.1 2.4 5.4 Palmer's monardella 35.1 2.4 5.4 robust spineflower 0.1 round-leaved filaree 75.5 10.6 20.9 San Luis Obispo County lupine 35.1 2.4 5.4 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 42.4 6.1 11.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 35.1 2.4 5.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 42.0 3.0 7.9 Blue Oak Woodland Plants shining navarretia 77.7 10.6 20.9 straight-awned spineflower 42.0 3.0 7.9 woodland woollythreads 61.6 8.5 17.1 yellow-flowered eriastrum 49.0 4.5 9.1 Blue Oak-Foothill Pine Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 58.4 6.1 25.2 Coast range newt 58.4 6.1 25.2 golden eagle 58.4 6.1 25.2 hoary bat 58.4 6.1 25.2 pallid bat 58.4 6.1 25.2 purple martin 58.4 6.1 25.2 Plants Brewer's spineflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 Hardham's evening-primrose 56.5 6.1 25.1 hooked popcornflower 56.5 6.1 25.1 Hoover's bent grass 56.5 6.1 25.1 mesa horkelia 58.4 6.1 25.2 most beautiful jewel-flower 58.4 6.1 25.2 pale-yellow layia 56.5 6.1 25.1 Palmer's monardella 56.5 6.1 25.1 round-leaved filaree 58.4 6.1 25.2 San Luis Obispo County lupine 56.5 6.1 25.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 56.5 6.1 25.1 Santa Margarita manzanita 58.4 6.1 25.2 shining navarretia 2.0 0.1 straight-awned spineflower 58.4 6.1 25.2 yellow-flowered eriastrum 58.4 6.1 25.2 Coastal Oak Woodland Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 118.2 13.4 35.2 Coast range newt 160.1 21.5 50.6 golden eagle 160.1 21.5 50.6 hoary bat 160.1 21.5 50.6 pallid bat 160.1 21.5 50.6 purple martin 160.1 21.5 50.6 Plants Brewer's spineflower 72.5 6.7 16.4 chaparral ragwort 71.0 6.7 15.0 Chorro Creek bog thistle 67.7 6.7 14.8 dwarf calycadenia 71.6 12.7 27.9 Hardham's evening-primrose 102.2 11.3 28.8 hooked popcornflower 102.2 11.3 28.8 Hoover's bent grass 72.5 6.7 16.4 Indian Valley bush-mallow 3.4 0.2 Indian Valley spineflower 69.0 12.7 26.8 Jolon clarkia 2.4 0.1 La Panza mariposa-lily 67.7 6.7 14.8 Coastal Oak Plants mesa horkelia 87.5 8.8 22.7 Monterey spineflower 3.4 0.2 most beautiful jewel-flower 87.5 8.8 22.7 mouse-gray dudleya 67.7 6.7 14.8 pale-yellow layia 72.5 6.7 16.4 Palmer's monardella 72.5 6.7 16.4 robust spineflower 2.4 0.1 round-leaved filaree 91.4 14.8 35.7 San Luis Obispo County lupine 72.5 6.7 16.4 Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws 41.8 8.1 15.4 Santa Lucia manzanita 72.5 6.7 16.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 87.4 8.8 22.6 shining navarretia 86.6 14.8 34.1 straight-awned spineflower 87.4 8.8 22.6 woodland woollythreads 71.6 12.7 27.9 yellow-flowered eriastrum 87.5 8.8 22.7 Coastal Scrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 32.7 3.9 13.2 Ferruginous hawk 32.7 3.9 13.2 golden eagle 32.7 3.9 13.2 Grasshopper sparrow 32.7 3.9 13.2 prairie falcon 32.7 3.9 13.2 Salinas pocket mouse 3.5 0.0 0.9 San Joaquin whipsnake 30.5 3.9 13.1 Plants Blochman's dudleya 3.4 1.2 2.1 Brewer's spineflower 27.1 3.9 12.2 chaparral ragwort 19.0 2.7 7.7 Chorro Creek bog thistle 3.4 1.2 2.1 Davidson's bush-mallow 3.3 0.9 Hutchinson's larkspur 2.2 0.0 Jolon clarkia 19.1 1.5 6.5 mesa horkelia 27.1 3.9 12.2 Monterey spineflower 15.7 1.5 5.6 pale-yellow layia 27.1 3.9 12.2 Pecho manzanita 3.4 1.2 2.1 robust spineflower 15.7 1.5 5.6 San Luis mariposa-lily 27.1 3.9 12.2 San Luis Obispo sedge 27.1 3.9 12.2 straight-awned spineflower 27.1 3.9 12.2 Toro manzanita 2.2 0.0 Cropland Fish and Wildlife California horned lark 853.4 82.4 259.1 Ferruginous hawk 853.4 82.4 259.1 Merlin 853.4 82.4 259.1 prairie falcon 853.4 82.4 259.1 tricolored blackbird 853.4 82.4 259.1 Plants NONE 1,138.3 118.0 387.5 Freshwater Emergent Wetland Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 63.7 17.1 29.1 California tiger salamander 25.6 7.8 13.4 great blue heron 63.7 17.1 29.1 San Luis pyrg 11.2 1.4 3.4 tricolored blackbird 63.7 17.1 29.1 two-striped garter snake 63.7 17.1 29.1 western pond turtle 63.7 17.1 29.1 Plants Chorro Creek bog thistle 0.2 0.1 dwarf calycadenia 22.9 7.2 12.6 NONE 42.0 10.5 17.1 Freshwater Forested/Shrub Wetland Fish and Wildlife least Bell's vireo 52.8 3.5 15.2 tricolored blackbird 52.8 3.5 15.2 Plants Davidson's bush-mallow 0.4 0.1 0.1 Jolon clarkia 2.2 0.2 0.3 NONE 51.1 3.4 15.0 Freshwater Pond Fish and Wildlife California red-legged frog 6.1 0.3 2.3 California tiger salamander 2.7 0.2 1.1 Coast range newt 6.1 0.3 2.3 great blue heron 6.1 0.3 2.3 tricolored blackbird 6.1 0.3 2.3 two-striped garter snake 6.1 0.3 2.3 western pond turtle 6.1 0.3 2.3 Plants NONE 6.1 0.3 2.3 Mixed Chaparral Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 4.4 0.0 0.0 Coast range newt 4.4 0.0 0.0 golden eagle 4.4 0.0 0.0 San Joaquin whipsnake 4.4 0.0 0.0 Plants Blochman's dudleya 4.4 Brewer's spineflower 4.4 chaparral ragwort 4.4 Chorro Creek bog thistle 4.4 dwarf soaproot 4.4 Eastwood's larkspur 4.4 Hardham's evening-primrose 4.4 hooked popcornflower 4.4 Hoover's bent grass 4.4 Jones' layia 4.4 La Panza mariposa-lily 4.4 mesa horkelia 4.4 most beautiful jewel-flower 4.4 mouse-gray dudleya 4.4 Mixed Chaparral Plants Palmer's monardella 4.4 Pecho manzanita 4.4 San Benito fritillary 4.4 San Luis mariposa-lily 4.4 San Luis Obispo County lupine 4.4 San Luis Obispo sedge 8.8 Santa Lucia manzanita 4.4 Santa Margarita manzanita 4.4 straight-awned spineflower 4.4 yellow-flowered eriastrum 4.4 Riverine Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 22.4 0.5 4.5 California red-legged frog 71.7 0.8 11.7 Foothill yellow-legged frog 71.7 0.8 11.7 steelhead - south/central California coast DPS 71.7 0.8 11.7 two-striped garter snake 71.7 0.8 11.7 western pond turtle 71.7 0.8 11.7 western spadefoot toad 71.7 0.8 11.7 Plants NONE 72.1 0.8 11.7 Unknown Shrub Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 6.7 0.7 3.3 Ferruginous hawk 6.7 0.7 3.3 golden eagle 6.7 0.7 3.3 Grasshopper sparrow 6.7 0.7 3.3 prairie falcon 6.7 0.7 3.3 San Joaquin whipsnake 6.7 0.7 3.3 Plants Brewer's spineflower 1.6 0.0 dwarf soaproot 1.6 0.0 Eastwood's larkspur 6.7 0.7 3.3 Hardham's evening-primrose 1.6 0.0 hooked popcornflower 1.6 0.0 Hoover's bent grass 1.6 0.0 mesa horkelia 6.7 0.7 3.3 most beautiful jewel-flower 6.7 0.7 3.3 Palmer's monardella 1.6 0.0 San Benito fritillary 1.6 0.0 San Luis mariposa-lily 1.6 0.0 San Luis Obispo County lupine 1.6 0.0 San Luis Obispo sedge 1.6 0.0 Santa Lucia dwarf rush 0.1 Santa Lucia manzanita 1.6 0.0 Santa Margarita manzanita 6.6 0.7 3.3 straight-awned spineflower 6.6 0.7 3.3 yellow-flowered eriastrum 6.7 0.7 3.3 Urban Fish and Wildlife NONE 412.1 59.6 91.9 Urban Plants NONE 499.9 73.4 105.6 Valley Foothill Riparian Fish and Wildlife bank swallow 70.8 9.8 20.0 great blue heron 73.2 10.1 20.3 hoary bat 73.2 10.1 20.3 least Bell's vireo 73.2 10.1 20.3 pallid bat 73.2 10.1 20.3 purple martin 73.2 10.1 20.3 tricolored blackbird 73.2 10.1 20.3 White-tailed kite 73.2 10.1 20.3 yellow warbler 73.2 10.1 20.3 Plants Abbott's bush-mallow 31.7 3.8 11.7 Davidson's bush-mallow 54.6 7.5 16.2 Jolon clarkia 41.0 4.1 13.5 NONE 9.3 2.3 2.3 Valley Oak Fish and Wildlife coast horned lizard 10.4 0.6 2.4 Coast range newt 10.4 0.6 2.4 hoary bat 10.4 0.6 2.4 pallid bat 10.4 0.6 2.4 purple martin 10.4 0.6 2.4 White-tailed kite 10.4 0.6 2.4 Plants Brewer's spineflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 chaparral ragwort 6.4 0.6 1.5 Chorro Creek bog thistle 6.4 0.6 1.5 Hardham's evening-primrose 6.4 0.6 1.5 hooked popcornflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 Hoover's bent grass 6.4 0.6 1.5 La Panza mariposa-lily 6.4 0.6 1.5 mesa horkelia 6.4 0.6 1.5 most beautiful jewel-flower 6.4 0.6 1.5 mouse-gray dudleya 6.4 0.6 1.5 NONE 4.0 0.9 pale-yellow layia 6.4 0.6 1.5 Palmer's monardella 6.4 0.6 1.5 San Luis Obispo County lupine 6.4 0.6 1.5 Santa Lucia manzanita 6.4 0.6 1.5 Santa Margarita manzanita 6.4 0.6 1.5 straight-awned spineflower 6.4 0.6 1.5 yellow-flowered eriastrum 6.4 0.6 1.5 Study_Area Species Common Name Total CNDDB Ocurrences in Study Area CNDDB Occurreces Potentially Directly Impacted (Permanent or Temporary) CNDDB Occurrences Potentially Indirectly Affected Bradley Siding Hardham's evening-primrose 1 0 1 least Bell's vireo 1 1 1 prairie falcon 3 3 3 San Joaquin kit fox 1 1 1 tricolored blackbird 1 0 1 yellow warbler 1 1 1 Coburn bank swallow 1 1 1 Getty/Bradley prairie falcon 1 1 1 Harlem/Metz American peregrine falcon 1 1 1 bank swallow 1 1 1 California condor 1 1 1 golden eagle 3 3 3 pale-yellow layia 1 0 1 prairie falcon 13 13 13 San Joaquin kit fox 1 1 1 white-tailed kite 1 1 1 King City Siding American badger 1 1 1 bank swallow 1 1 1 McKay/Wellsona Lemmon's jewel-flower 1 1 1 San Joaquin kit fox 1 1 1 San Joaquin pocket mouse 1 1 1 San Joaquin whipsnake 1 1 1 New Chalone Creek Siding bank swallow 1 1 1 San Joaquin kit fox 1 1 1 Second Mainline Cambria morning-glory 1 0 1 dwarf soaproot 1 1 1 San Benito fritillary 1 1 1 Santa Margarita manzanita 1 1 1 western pond turtle 1 0 1 Spence Siding Congdon's tarplant 1 1 1 Templeton Siding mesa horkelia 1 1 1 western spadefoot 1 1 1 Templeton/Henry mesa horkelia 1 1 1 Wellsona Siding Lemmon's jewel-flower 1 1 1 San Joaquin pocket mouse 1 1 1 Species Common Name CNDDB Ocurrences in Coast Corridor Project Area CNDDB Occurreces Potentially Directly Impacted (Permanent or Temporary) CNDDB Occurrences Potentially Indirectly Affected American badger 1 1 1 American peregrine falcon 1 1 1 bank swallow 2 2 2 California condor 1 1 1 Cambria morning-glory 1 0 1 Congdon's tarplant 1 1 1 dwarf soaproot 1 1 1 golden eagle 3 3 3 Hardham's eveningprimrose 1 0 1 least Bell's vireo 1 1 1 Lemmon's jewel-flower 1 1 1 mesa horkelia 2 2 2 pale-yellow layia 1 0 1 prairie falcon 16 16 16 San Benito fritillary 1 1 1 San Joaquin kit fox 3 3 3 San Joaquin pocket mouse 1 1 1 San Joaquin whipsnake 1 1 1 Santa Margarita manzanita 1 1 1 tricolored blackbird 1 0 1 western pond turtle 1 0 1 western spadefoot 1 1 1 white-tailed kite 1 1 1 yellow warbler 1 1 1 Study Area Species with Critical Habitat Existing in Study Area (acres) Permanent Impacts (acres) Temporary Impacts (acres) Area Potentially Indirectly Affected (within 250 feet of disturbance) Bradley Siding (Existing) Vernal pool fairy shrimp 43 7 5 31 Henry/Santa Margarita California red-legged frog 5 0 <0.01 5 Second Main Tracj/Siding California red-legged frog 196 26 46 123 Acreage Grand Total 244 33 51 159 Study Area Species with Critical Habitat Existing in Study Area (linear feet) Permanent Impacts (linear feet) Temporary Impacts (linear feet) Linear Feet Potentially Indirectly Affected (within 250 feet of disturbance) Getty/Bradley South-Coast California steelhead 1,945 0 0 1,945 Henry/Santa Margarita South-Coast California steelhead 7,001 0 1,362 5,639 McKay/Wellsona South-Coast California steelhead 559 0 0 536 Templeton Siding South-Coast California steelhead 4,280 0 0 4,280 Wellsona Siding (Existing) South-Coast California steelhead 785 61 66 634 Linear Feet Grand Total 14,570 61 1,428 13,034 Study Area Existing Stream Length in Study Area (linear feet) Permanent Impacts to Streams (linear feet) Temporary Impacts to Streams (linear feet) Number of Stream Crossings in Study Area Notes Species Potentially Occurring in Stream Bradley Siding 983 109 109 2 Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle Coburn 451 0 61 1 Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle Getty/Bradley 6,771 417 1,636 7 Salinas River crossed twice Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle Harlem/Metz 1,011 302 3 Includes Salinas River Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle Henry/Santa Margarita 13,739 305 5,719 6 Includes Salinas River, Santa Margarita Creek (2 crossings), and Yerba Buena Creek Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle King City Siding 950 100 133 2 Includes San Lorenzo Creek Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle McKay/Wellsona 1,903 0 0 3 Includes Salinas River (2 crossings) and San Marcos Creek Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle Realign Tracks at MP 165 1,005 100 403 1 Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond Realign Tracks at MP 172 1,674 150 785 1 Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond Second Mainline 12,027 749 5,986 8 Includes Santa Margarita Creek Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond Spence Siding 1,014 83 129 3 Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond Templeton Siding 7,049 226 267 5 Salinas River crossed three times Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond Wellsona Siding 1,991 124 123 3 Includes Salinas River and San Marcos Creek Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond Wellsona/Paso Robles 102 0 0 1 Foothill yellow legged frog, California red-legged frog, Coast Range newt, western spadefoot toad, two-striped garter snake, and western pond turtle Grand Total 50,670 2,364 15,654 46     Appendix D-3 Cultural Resources Data  IC P-number Trinomial Site Type Recordation Date Author HRI Built Enviro- ArchHist POS-Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Eligible CRHR Only Eligible Local Only Eval NE Recorded - No Eval Outside Temp/Perm Boundary Improvements/ EA-10 Improvements/ EA-9 Improvements/ EA-8 Improvements/EA-7 Permanent/ Templeton/ Henry Permanent/ Templeton Siding Permanent/ Wellsona Siding (Existing) Temporary/ 2nd Main Line Temporary/ Henry/ Santa Margarita Temporary/ Templeton/ Henry Temporary/ Templeton Siding Temporary/ Wellsona Siding (Existing) CCIC P-40-000065 CA-SLO-65 Historic 49 thru Oct-99 A.R. Pilling - S. Welcher Mission San Miguel Arcangel building remains, wall decorations done by Native Americans, procelain artifacts. Associated with CA-SLO-67 X No X CCIC P-40-000122 CA-SLO-122 Prehistoric Jul-52 A.R. Pilling Bedrock mortars X No X X CCIC P-40-000587 CA-SLO-587 Preshistoric Jan-71 thru Jun- 99 M. Hunter and A. Hunter - A. Ruby and M. Darcangelo Temporary Village recorded three times from 1971 and 1999 X No X CCIC P-40-001077 CA-SLO-1077 Prehistoric Oct-81 thru Dec- 99 R. Gibson - W. Nettles and D. McIntosh Sparse lithic and shell scatter recorded three times X No X CCIC P-40-001260 CA-SLO-1260 Prehistoric Jul-89 C. Singer and L. Odom Isolated burials X No X CCIC P-40-001372 CA-SLO-1372 Prehistoric Feb-91 and Nov- 98 T. Cooley and D. James - S. Waechter Scatter of chipped stone, manufacturing debris, artifacts, and marine shell recorded twice X No X CCIC P-40-001375 CA-SLO-1375 Prehistoric Feb-91 and Oct- 99 T. Cooley and D. James - S. Waechter Marine sheel and chert flaks X No X CCIC P-40-001387 CA-SLO-1387 Prehistoric Feb-91 thru Oct- 99 L. Santoro and S. Campbell - W. Nettles et al. Sparse lithic scatter recorded three times from 1991 to 1999 X No X CCIC P-40-001875 CA-SLO-1875 Prehistoric Mar-98 R.O. Gibson Habitation debris X No X CCIC P-40-001876 CA-SLO-1876 Prehistoric Mar-98 R.O. Gibson Habitation debris X No X CCIC P-40-001896 CA-SLO-1896 Prehistoric Nov-98 J. Atwood Habitation debris X No X CCIC P-40-001910 CA-SLO-1910 Prehistoric Apr-99 J. Atwood Habitation debris X No X CCIC P-40-001911 CA-SLO-1911 Prehistoric Apr-99 J. Atwood Lithic scatter X No X CCIC P-40-001912 CA-SLO-1912 Prehistoric/Historic Apr-99 J. Atwood Remains of Estrada Adobe X No X X CCIC P-40-001913 CA-SLO-1913 Prehistoric Apr-99 J. Atwood Small workshop area with lithic scatter X No X CCIC P-40-001978 CA-SLO-1978/H Prehistoric/Historic Oct-99 Applied Earth Works Trash scatter X No X CCIC P-40-002029 CA-SLO-2029 Prehistoric Jul-99 M. Avina Lithic scatter, quarry, habitation debris X No X CCIC P-40-002144 CA-SLO-2144 Prehistoric Nov-97 R. Gibson Lithic scatter X No X X CCIC P-40-002518 CA-SLO-2518 Prehistoric May-04 R.O. Gibson Chert and burnt rock X No X CCIC P-40-002529 CA-SLO-2529 Historic-BE Nov-06 W. Nettles X 1957 Historic-era railroad bridge X No X CCIC P-40-002530 CA-SLO-2530 Historic-BE Nov-06 W. Nettles X 1901 Historic-era railroad bridge X No X CCIC P-40-002531 CA-SLO-2531 Historic Nov-06 R. Baloian 2 concrete foundations X No X CCIC P-40-040278 Historic-BE Jun-84 C. Morehouse X X ca. 1891 Residence - Carpenter Gothic X No X CCIC P-40-040279 Historic-BE Jun-84 C. Morehouse X X ca. 1915 Residence - Cottage X No X CCIC P-40-040282 Historic-BE Jun-84 C. Morehouse X X ca. 1889 Residence - Cottage X No X CCIC P-40-040704 Historic-BE Jun-84 C. Morehouse X X ca. 1892 Residence - Cottage X No X CCIC P-40-040778 Historic-BE Nov-78 C. Pursell/UCSB X X 1902 Hwy 41 overpass of the SPRR X No X CCIC P-40-041015 Historic-BE Jan-00 J. Berg/S. Mikesell X X 1916 Union Pacific Railroad Bridge X No X CCIC P-40-041045 Historic-BE Aug-99 L. Leach-Palm/S. Mikesell X X 1949 Bridge/Culvert on Cuesta Forrest Road X No X CCIC P-40-041056 Historic-BE Aug-99 T. Carpenter/S. Mikesell X X 1902 SPRR Bridge X No X CCIC P-40-000044 CA-SLO-44 Prehistoric Sep-48 thru Oct- 02 A.R. Pilling - J. Berg Occupation site between Spooner house and barn recorded four times from 1948 to 2002 X Yes CCIC P-40-000067 CA-SLO-67 Historic Oct-66 D.S. Miller Mission Native American site--shell midden, animal bone and teeth, stone flakes (1966). Associated with CA-SLO-65 X Yes CCIC P-40-000492 CA-SLO-492 Preshistoric Jul-69 thru Dec-99 von Werlhof - W. Nettls and D. McIntosh Occupation site for seasonal milling. Probably related to SLO-AS-493. X Yes CCIC P-40-000493 CA-SLO-493 Preshistoric Jul-69 thru Dec-99 von Werlhof - W. Nettls and D. McIntosh Temporary campsite probably related to, but distinct from SLO-492 and SLO-494. Recorded tree times between 1969 and 1999. X Yes CCIC P-40-000524 Prehistoric Jan-70 von Werlhof Temporary campsite or extension of Mustang Village X Yes CCIC P-40-000538 Prehistoric Mar-70 E. Dills and J. von Werlhof Two mortars X Yes CCIC P-40-000539 Prehistoric Mar-70 C. Dills Two mortars X Yes CCIC P-40-000586 CA-SLO-586 Preshistoric Jan-71 thru Nov- 99 M. Hunter and A. Hunter - S. Flint Village site recorded three times from 1971 to 1999 X Yes CCIC P-40-000592 Preshistoric Feb-71 M. Hunter Mortar site X Yes CCIC P-40-000593 CA-SLO-593 Prehistoric Feb-71 thru Jul-01 M. Hunter and A. Hunter - Clay A. Singer Mortar site visited three times between 1971 and 2001 X Yes CCIC P-40-000594 CA-SLO-594 Prehistoric Jul-01 Clay A. Singer Mortar site X Yes CCIC P-40-000596 CA-SLO-596 Prehistoric Feb-71 thru Oct- 99 M. Hunter and A. Hunter - B. Polansky et al. Mortar site associated with CA-SLO-122 recorded three times from 1971 to 1999. Heavily distrubed by 1999 X Yes CCIC P-40-000597 CA-SLO-597 Record missing from CCIC Yes CCIC P-40-000669 Prehistoric Mar-73 C. Dills Unspecified site in rocks above Memorial Fountain at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo X Yes CCIC P-40-000700 Prehistoric No Date R. Gibson Small site X Yes CCIC P-40-000785 Prehistoric Jul-84 C. Dills Shell scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-000834 CA-SLO-834 Prehistoric Aug-78 R. Gibson River terrace site listed on NRHP under Criterion D in 1982 Yes CCIC P-40-000901 CA-SLO-901 Prehistoric Dec-79 R. Gibson Artifact scatter X Yes IC P-number Trinomial Site Type Recordation Date Author HRI Built Enviro- ArchHist POS-Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Eligible CRHR Only Eligible Local Only Eval NE Recorded - No Eval Outside Temp/Perm Boundary Improvements/ EA-10 Improvements/ EA-9 Improvements/ EA-8 Improvements/EA-7 Permanent/ Templeton/ Henry Permanent/ Templeton Siding Permanent/ Wellsona Siding (Existing) Temporary/ 2nd Main Line Temporary/ Henry/ Santa Margarita Temporary/ Templeton/ Henry Temporary/ Templeton Siding Temporary/ Wellsona Siding (Existing) CCIC P-40-001075 CA-SLO-1075 Prehistoric Oct-81 thru Apr- 99 R. Gibson Low-intensity lithic scatter recorded twice X Yes CCIC P-40-001076 CA-SLO-1076 Prehistoric Oct-81 and Apr-99 R. Gibson - S. Waechter Light scatter of stone artifacts recorded twice X Yes CCIC P-40-001225 CA-SLO-1225 Prehistoric Oct-87 R. Gibson Low-density concentration of burnt rock, chert tools and debitage, and shellfish fragments X Yes CCIC P-40-001271 CA-SLO-1271 Prehistoric Dec-89 R. Gibson Sparse burnt rock and chert artifacts X Yes CCIC P-40-001297 CA-SLO-1297 Prehistoric Apr-90 C. Dills Mortor site X Yes CCIC P-40-001384 CA-SLO-1384 Prehistoric Feb-91 L. Santoro and S. Campbell Large site with chert and volcanic debris, tools, cores, bifaces, and shell X Yes CCIC P-40-001388 CA-SLO-1388 Prehistoric & Historic Mar-91 and Nov- 98 L. Santoro and S. Campbell - S. Waechter et al. Small artifact scatter with some historic materials. X Yes CCIC P-40-001414 CA-SLO-1414 Prehistoric No Date C. Dills Possible "large" site -- otherwise unspecified X Yes CCIC P-40-001425 CA-SLO-1425 Prehistoric Jul-90 C. Dills Moved rocks containing several mortars each X Yes CCIC P-40-001431 CA-SLO-1431 Prehistoric Nov-90 C. Dills Lithics scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-001494 CA-SLO-1494H Historic - BE Jun-92 C. Dills X Late 19th C Site of historic adobes no longer present; remains of historic dwelling (concrete fragments, cistern, water tank); historic ranch complex consisting of a dwelling, dairy barn, barn, and boiler room. X Yes CCIC P-40-001547 CA-SLO-1547H Historic Jan-93 J. Romni One-mile-long modified segment of El Camino Real trail X Yes CCIC P-40-001560 CA-SLO-1560H Historic Jan-93 R. Gibson Sparsely concentrated historic artifacts that may be associated with San Marcos Store of early 19th century X Yes CCIC P-40-001605 CA-SLO-1605H Historic Jun-93 J. Maniery and S. Heipel Concrete slab foundation and associated debris of buildings that dated to 1930s or 40s X Yes CCIC P-40-001674 CA-SLO-1674/H Historic-BE Oct-55 L. Steidl X N/A Eight Mile House X Yes CCIC P-40-001738 CA-SLO-1738/H Prehistoric/Historic-BE Jul-95 E. Bertrando X house ca. 1900 Lithic scatter, historic trash, house X Yes CCIC P-40-001748 CA-SLO-1748/H Prehistoric Jun-95 E. Bertrando Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-001787 CA-SLO-1787 Prehistoric Oct-94 R.O. Gibson Shell midden X Yes CCIC P-40-001805 CA-SLO-1805 Prehistoric Feb-97 A. Ruby Historic lithic scatter, BRMs X Yes CCIC P-40-001815 CA-SLO-1815 Prehistoric May-96 R. Orlins Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-001874 CA-SLO-1874 Prehistoric Mar-98 R.O. Gibson Habitation debris X Yes CCIC P-40-001877 CA-SLO-1877 Prehistoric Mar-98 R.O. Gibson Habitation debris X Yes CCIC P-40-001894 CA-SLO-1894 Prehistoric Nov-98 J. Atwood Habitation debris X Yes CCIC P-40-001895 CA-SLO-1895 Prehistoric Nov-98 J. Atwood Habitation debris X Yes CCIC P-40-001932 CA-SLO-1932 Historic Apr-99 D. Mackey ca. 1920 Historic trash dump X Yes CCIC P-40-001959 CA-SLO-1959/H Prehistoric/Historic Oct-99 W. Nettles Lithic scatter, trash scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-001964 CA-SLO-1964 Prehistoric Nov-99 B. Goller Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-001965 CA-SLO-1965 Prehistoric Nov-99 S. Flint Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002004 CA-SLO-2004 Prehistoric Jan-99 K. Davis Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002023 CA-SLO-2023 Prehistoic/Historic Jan-00 E. Bertrando Lithic scatter, huntig blinds, stone quarry, rockwall, corrals, WWII firing points X Yes CCIC P-40-002042 CA-SLO-2042 Prehistoric Jul-99 M. Darcangelo Lithic scatter, BRM X Yes CCIC P-40-002056 CA-SLO-2056 Prehistoric Oct-00 M. Baloian Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002063 CA-SLO-2063 Prehistoric Oct-00 S. Lippman Bedrock milling X Yes CCIC P-40-002064 CA-SLO-2064 Prehistoric Oct-00 T. Kennedy Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002091 CA-SLO_2091 Prehistoric Apr-01 C. Singer Bedrock milling X Yes CCIC P-40-002175 CA-SLO-2175 Prehistoric Aug-01 E. Bertrando Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002182 CA-SLO-2182H Historic Feb-01 G. Zeimens 5 old rock and concrete foundations X Yes CCIC P-40-002186 CA-SLO-2186 Prehistoric May-02 J. Parker Midden site X Yes CCIC P-40-002189H CA-SLO-2189 Historic 7/9/2002; 3/2004 C.A. Singer; J. Foster ca. 1800-1950 Mission Gardens Estates historic remnant site X Yes CCIC P-40-002360 CA-SLO-2360 Prehistoric Jun-04 M. Maki Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002363 CA-SLO-2363 Prehistoric Jun-04 M. Maki Isolate X Yes CCIC P-40-002364 CA-SLO-2364 Prehistoric Jun-04 M. Maki Isolate X Yes CCIC P-40-002376 CA-SLO-2376 Prehistoric Feb-05 E. Bertrando Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002378 CA-SLO-2578 Prehistoric Dec-04 E. Bertrando Lithic scatter X Yes CCIC P-40-002383 CA-SLO-2383 Prehistoric Mar-05 C.A. Singer Habitation debris X Yes CCIC P-40-002458 CA-SLO-2458 Prehistoric Apr-06 C.A. Singer Chert flakes X Yes CCIC P-40-002533 CA-SLO-2533 Prehistoric Feb-06 K. Wilson Chert flakes and pestle X Yes IC P-number Trinomial Site Type Recordation Date Author HRI Built Enviro- ArchHist POS-Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Eligible CRHR Only Eligible Local Only Eval N-E Recorded - No Eval Outside Temp/ Perm Boundary Improvements/ EA-6 Improvements/ EA-5 Improvements/ EA-3 Improvements/ EA-2 Permanent Permanent/ King City Siding Temporary/ McKay/ Wellsona Temporary/ San Lucas Siding Temporary/ Getty/ Bradley Temporary/ King City Siding NWIC P-27-001191 CA-MNT-1138 Prehistoric May-81 M. Ryan two chert flakes. X No X NWIC P-27-001243 CA-MNT-1191 Prehistoric Feb-82 Hampson, Loeffer and Wilfong The site consists of a lithics scatter that includes, scattered chert debitage. X No X NWIC P-27-001782 CA-MNT-1840 Prehistoric Apr-95 J. Budd and K.R. Bethard A lithic scatter conprised of 15 pieces of cryptocrystalline debitage. Material was noted eroding out of the drainage bank, located on a low terrace east of the Salinas River floodplain. X No X NWIC P-27-001783 CA-MNT-1841 Prehistoric Apr-95 J. Budd and K.R. Bethard 20 pieces of cryptocrystalline debitage, and FAR. All noted eroding out of the drainage bank. X No X NWIC P-27-001796 Historic - BE Apr-95 J. Budd X 1939 Concrete Culvert X No X NWIC P-27-001798 Historic - BE Apr-95 J. Budd X Unknown Brick Culvert X No X NWIC P-27-001804 Historic - BE 4/1/1995, March-03 J. Budd, J. Fledman/D. Greenwood X 1940 Bradley Road Bridge over the Salinas River C No X NWIC P-27-002182 CA-MNT-1953 Prehistoric Apr-95 J. Budd and K.R. Bethard A lithic scatter that consists of 15 pieces of cryptocrystalline debitage and one CCR flake. X No X NWIC P-27-002322 CA-MNT-2050H Historic - BE 9/1/1999, Aug-02 J. Berg/S. Mikesell, T. Rogers X 1932 Segment of Highway 101 X No X X NWIC P-27-002341 CA-MNT-2052H Historic - BE May-00 L. Leach-Palm X ca. 1915 /1927 old and modern segments of the Hwy 198. X No X NWIC P-27-002612 Historic - BE Oct-99 B. Delvac X Circa 1970s 3 structures associated with Holly Sugar Beet railroad freight site X No X NWIC P-27-002971 Historic - BE Oct-08 M. Millett and J. Glover X 1883-1923 Southern Pacific Railroad (King City) X No X P-27-002972 Historic - BE 8-Oct M. Millett and J. Glover X Unknown Transmisson Line X No X X NWIC P-27-003072 CA-MNT-85 Prehistoric Aug-11 E. Bertrando X A highly disturbed lithic scatter, that runs along thr river terrace. 500m along the terrace, 50 m wide. Materials include Franciscan and Monterey chert flakes and core tools, one projectile point fragment and one fragment of burned bone. X No X NWIC CA-MNT-1187 Prehistoric Dec-81 T. Haversat, J. Heyse, N. Wilfong, K. Loeffler A lithic scatter located on a knoll overlooking the Salinas River X No X NWIC C-253 Historic - BE Nov-85 C. Gerike and D. Fredrickson X Possible historic barn near Welby, see S-7750 X Yes NWIC P-27-001219 CA-MNT-1167 Prehistoric Nov-68 R. Desautels The site consists of a large campsite on a rise near the Salinas River. Artifacts include, bowl frags, scrapers, cores, hammerstones, handstone frags, debitage and pismo clam frags in midden. Ethnographically noted to have Native American residences on them. X Yes NWIC P-27-001771 Prehistoric Apr-95 J. Budd An isolated green cryptocrystalline flake. X Yes NWIC P-27-001772 Prehistoric Apr-95 J. Budd An isolated yellow cryptocrystalline flake. X Yes NWIC P-27-001773 Prehistoric Apr-95 J. Budd An isolated cryptocrystalline flake and one CCR core. X Yes NWIC P-27-001774 Prehistoric Apr-95 B. Scott and W. Norton An isolated tertiary cryptocrystalline flake. X Yes NWIC P-27-001775 Prehistoric Apr-95 B. Scott and W. Norton An isolated acramel-colored cryptocrystalline flake. X Yes NWIC P-27-001777 Prehistoric Apr-95 B. Scott and W. Norton An isolated secondary cryptocrystalline flake. X Yes NWIC P-27-001784 Historic Apr-95 B. Scott and W. Norton The fragmented remains of a railroad trestle across the Salinas River. Only the lower section remains. Possibly associated to the existing Southern Pacific tracks to the west. X Yes NWIC P-27-001797 Historic - BE Apr-95 J. Budd X 1939 Concrete Culvert X Yes NWIC P-27-001805 Historic - BE Apr-95 J. Budd X 1914 Southern Pacific Railroad Bridge over the Salinas River X Yes NWIC P-27-001889 CA-MNT-1898 Prehistoric Sep-97 E. Bertrando The site consists of a lithic scatter, includes debitage, , groundstone and finished tools. Artifacts aremano, cobble, chopper, biface frag, utilized flakes and secondary flakes. X Yes NWIC P-27-002242 Prehistoric Nov-98 B. Polansky Isolated chert biface thinning flake. X Yes NWIC P-27-002577 Historic - BE Sep-00 S.Clark X X 1908 Foletta Road Jacks House Dairy (Dairy Complex) X Yes NWIC P-27-002578 Historic - BE Jun-00 S.Clark X X ca. 1910 Lanini/Franscioni Farmstead X Yes NWIC P-27-002582 Historic - BE Jun-00 J. Caprara X X 1910 Rianda Jacks House (farm complex) X Yes NWIC P-27-002583 Historic - BE Aug-00 S.Clark X X 1920-1925 Dadro Farmstead X Yes NWIC P-27-002584 Historic - BE Aug-00 S.Clark X X ca. 1930 Tudor Revival residence X Yes NWIC P-27-002585 Historic - BE Mar-00 S. Clark, T. Cochrane X X 1890 Queen Anne vernacular residence, with associated barn,windmill and contemporary farm complex X Yes NWIC P-27-002609 Prehistoric - isolate Oct-96 B. Scott, W.L. Norton One green Franciscan chert flake X Yes IC P-number Trinomial Site Type Recordation Date Author HRI Built Enviro- ArchHist POS-Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Eligible CRHR Only Eligible Local Only Eval N-E Recorded - No Eval Outside Temp/ Perm Boundary Improvements/ EA-6 Improvements/ EA-5 Improvements/ EA-3 Improvements/ EA-2 Permanent Permanent/ King City Siding Temporary/ McKay/ Wellsona Temporary/ San Lucas Siding Temporary/ Getty/ Bradley Temporary/ King City Siding NWIC P-27-002613 Historic - BE Sep-02 J. Marvin X Circa 1930s Auto court complex consisting of 7 buildings X Yes NWIC P-27-002686 Historic - BE Jun-03 R. Cartier X 1906 Greyhound bus station, remodeled in modern utilitarian style circa 1960s X Yes NWIC P-27-002687 Historic - BE Jun-03 R. Cartier X 1913-1962 Short strip of retail stores, all in the similar style X Yes NWIC P-27-002690 Historic - BE Jun-03 R. Cartier X Crica 1870- 1918; circa 1890 A two story commercial building in the Classical Revival style, circa 1890s C Yes NWIC P-27-002691 Historic - BE Jun-03 R. Cartier X Circa 1930s Mission Revival courthouse annex building X Yes NWIC P-27-002693 Historic - BE Jun-03 R. Cartier X Crica 1870- 1918; circa 1891 Classical Revival "Temple Front" style commercial building remodeled with Moorish and Art-Deco influences C Yes NWIC P-27-002694 Historic - BE Jun-03 R. Cartier X Circa 1930 Commerical building with Neoclassical elements X Yes NWIC P-27-002695 Historic - BE Sep-03 R. Cartier X Circa 1890 Vernacular commercial building X Yes NWIC P-27-002714 Prehistoric Aug-01 D. Davey Deeply buried (2.46 meters) single hearth area with FAR, and three associated lithic artifacts. X Yes NWIC P-27-002753 Prehistoric Dec-03 D. Nicholson 10 pieces of crypto-crystalline debitage, some FAR fragments and one piece of groundstone X Yes NWIC P-27-002754 Prehistoric Dec-03 D. Nicholson Sparce crypto=crystalline lithihc scatter 90mx85m X Yes NWIC P-27-002755 Prehistoric Dec-03 D. Nicholson Sparce crypto=crystalline lithihc scatter 75mx65m X Yes NWIC P-27-002759 Prehistoric Jan-01 E. Bertrando A quarry and lithic reduction area. Cobbles and chipping debris are present. Materials consist of quartz, basalt and high quality chert. X Yes NWIC P-27-002761 Prehistoric Jan-01 E. Bertrando Complex lithic scatter, with formal tools, including, one projectile point and hammerstones. Site is distrubed by vehicle and animal activity. X Yes NWIC P-27-002764 Historic Sep-03 D. McIntosh A subsurface archaeological desposit, consisting of two features. Feature one is clear and aqua bottle fragments, plate glass, ceramic tableware sherds, structural debris and one complete clam shell. Feature two contains ceramic tableware sherds, clear and amber bottle fragments, and clam shell fragments. Site may constitute a portion of the intact privy of the Salinas Hotel. X Yes NWIC P-27-002780 Historic - BE Jun-04 K. Lambert X 1930 Warehouse historically associated with Tynan Lumber Yard X Yes NWIC P-27-002839 Historic - BE Aug-04 R. Cartier X 1960s Public housing complex X Yes NWIC P-27-002870 Historic - BE ???-96 Caltrans X 1930s Associated Seed Growers complex X Yes NWIC P-27-002871 Historic - BE ???-96 Caltrans X 1937 Golden Meat Market building X Yes NWIC P-27-002872 Historic - BE ???-96 Caltrans X 1928 Reinforced concreete commercial building X Yes NWIC P-27-002873 Historic - BE ???-96 Caltrans X 1908 Wood-frame commercial building, former C.E. Bugbee Blacksmith Shop X Yes NWIC P-27-002874 Historic - BE ???-96 Caltrans X Circa 1898 Wood-frame two-story boarding house, formerly Mrs. Kathrine Leifgen Furnished Rooms (1926) X Yes NWIC P-27-002875 Historic - BE Apr-07 R. Cartier X Ciira 1925 (office); circa 1930 (motor lodge motel) Mission-style and Spanish Colonial Revivalstyle Soledad Motor Lodge complex X Yes NWIC P-27-002877 CA-MNT-2252 Prehistoric Jan-08 E. Bertrando A sparse lithics scatter, comprised of Monterey chert. Looks similar to surrounding sutes (MNT-2189 and MNT-2190). X Yes NWIC P-27-002878 CA-MNT-2253 Prehistoric Jan-08 E. Bertrando A moderate concentration of lithics, including finished tools X Yes NWIC P-27-002908 Historic - BE ???-96 Caltrans X Circa 1935 Wood-frame commercial building, former Pasquale Maida Grocery Store X Yes NWIC P-27-002923 Historic - BE Nov-99 JRP Historical Consulting Services X X 1870 Southern Pacific Railroad (Castroville) X Yes NWIC P-27-002924 Historic - BE Dec-08 D. Supernowicz X 1960 San Ardo Water District Elevated Water Tower X Yes NWIC P-27-002949 Historic - BE Dec-08 D. Supernowicz X 1904-1960; 1904 Gothic Revival Church building A and C Yes NWIC P-27-003036 Historic - BE Mar-11 M. Hibma X 1875-1943; Circa 1875- 1943 Southern Pacific Railraod Historic District (Salinas) A and C Yes NWIC P-27-003037 Historic - BE 1996-Nov10 Caltrans-M. Hibma X Circa 1875- 1891; Circa 1875-1891 Southern Pacific Freight Depot (Salinas) A Yes IC P-number Trinomial Site Type Recordation Date Author HRI Built Enviro- ArchHist POS-Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Eligible CRHR Only Eligible Local Only Eval N-E Recorded - No Eval Outside Temp/ Perm Boundary Improvements/ EA-6 Improvements/ EA-5 Improvements/ EA-3 Improvements/ EA-2 Permanent Permanent/ King City Siding Temporary/ McKay/ Wellsona Temporary/ San Lucas Siding Temporary/ Getty/ Bradley Temporary/ King City Siding NWIC P-27-003038 Historic - BE 1996-Nov10 Caltrans-M. Hibma X 1942; 1942 Southern Pacific Passenger Station A Yes NWIC CA-MNT-1166 Prehistoric Nov-68 R. Desautels Metate frag, cores, scraper plane and FAR (sandstone) X Yes NWIC CA-MNT-1188 Prehistoric Dec-81 T. Haversat, J. Heyse, N. Wilfong, K. Loeffler A lithic scatter located on a knoll overlooking the Salinas River X Yes NWIC CA-MNT-1190 Prehistoric Feb-82 Hampson, Loeffer and Wilfong A lithic scatter on a flat ridge overlooking the Salinas River. Comprised of chert debitage. X Yes NWIC CA-MNT-1345 Prehistoric Feb-86 A. York, G. Davis and K. Norwood A small lithics concentration, three artifacts include a battered andesite cobble, another with four flake scars and a Monterey chert contracting-stem projectile point. X Yes ICF-ID Existing Alignment (Track/Signal Upgrades) RRB-1 EA-5 RRB-2 EA-6 RRB-3 EA-6 RRB-4 EA-6 RRB-5 EA-7 RRB-6 EA-9 ICF-ID APN Est. Year Built if known Resource Type Upgrade Type Upgrade Name Impact FC-1 Unkown Unknown Residential and/ or Farm Complexes 2nd Mainline 2nd Mainline Temporary RES-1 59472019 1947 Residential Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita Temporary RES-2 59501007 1948 Residential Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita Permanent RES-3 59541003 Unknown Residential Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita Temporary RES-4 Unkown Unknown Residential Realignment Wellsona/Paso Robles n/a RES-5 26142003 1930 Residential Realignment Wellsona/Paso Robles n/a RES-6 26141047 1940 Residential Realignment Wellsona/Paso Robles Temporary RES-7 27311018 Unknown Residential Realignment McKay/Wellsona Temporary RES-8 237011003000 Unknown Residential Realignment Realign Tracks at MP 172 Temporary RES-9 235081017000 1950 Residential Realignment Realign Tracks at MP 165 Temporary RES-10 235081063000 1953 Residential Realignment Realign Tracks at MP 165 Temporary RES-11 Unknown Unknown Residential Realignment Harlem/Metz Temporary RES-12 Unknown Unknown Residential Realignment Harlem/Metz Temporary RES-13 Unknown Unknown Residential Realignment Harlem/Metz Temporary RES-14 418391034000 1953 Residential Realignment Harlem/Metz Temporary RES-15 418391031000 Unknown Residential Realignment Harlem/Metz Temporary RES-16 Unkown Unknown Residential Realignment Realign Tracks at MP 172 Temporary RES-17 Unkown Unknown Residential Realignment Getty/Bradley Temporary RES-18 418391032000 1945 Residential Realignment Harlem/Metz Temporary IND-1 026292002000 1952 Industrial Station King City Station n/a IND-2 235091001000 Unkown Industrial Realignmnet Realign Tracks at MP 165 Temporary IND-3 026285007000 1938 Industrial Realignmnet King City Temporary IND-4 026261008000 1934 Industrial Realignmnet King City Temporary IND-5 026293002000 1940 Industrial Realignmnet King City Temporary IND-6 Unkown Unkown Industrial Realignmnet King City Permanent IND-7 026293003000 Unkown Industrial Realignmnet King City Permanent COM-1 22025010000 1944 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-2 022026005000 1920 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-3 022026018000 1920 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-4 022026015000 1922 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-5 022026016000 1922 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-6 022014018000 1920 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-7 022014016000 1960 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-8 022014011000 1929 Commercial Station Soledad n/a P-1 Unknown Unknown Park Station Soledad Permanent ICF-ID APN Est. Year Built if known Resource Type Upgrade Type Upgrade Name Impact Type IND-1 026292002000 1952 Industrial Station King City Station n/a IND-2 235091001000 Unkown Industrial Realignmnet Realign Tracks at MP 165 IND-3 026285007000 1938 Industrial Realignmnet King City Temporary IND-4 026261008000 1934 Industrial Realignmnet King City Temporary IND-5 026293002000 1940 Industrial Realignmnet King City Temporary IND-6 Unkown Unkown Industrial Realignmnet King City Permanent IND-7 026293003000 Unkown Industrial Realignmnet King City Permanent COM-1 22025010000 1944 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-2 022026005000 1920 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-3 022026018000 1920 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-4 022026015000 1922 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-5 022026016000 1922 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-6 022014018000 1920 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-7 022014016000 1960 Commercial Station Soledad n/a COM-8 022014011000 1929 Commercial Station Soledad n/a P-1 Unknown Unknown Park Station Soledad Permanent      Appendix D-4 Environmental Justice Data  Row Labels Percent Population Living Below Poverty  Greater than 25% below Poverty (1=EJ)  Tracts 10% greater than the County Poverty Percentage* (1=EJ) Notes: *Percent Living Below Poverty Monterey - 15.10% San Luis Obispo - 13.20%  Monterey County Existing Alignment (Track/Signal EA-1 Census Tract 106.06 15.50 Census Tract 107.02 1.40 Census Tract 12 14.40 Census Tract 13 38.50 1 1 Census Tract 14 19.10 Census Tract 145 9.00 Census Tract 148 11.10 Census Tract 15 13.40 Census Tract 16 15.10 Census Tract 17 16.30 Census Tract 18.01 15.20 Census Tract 18.02 26.10 1 1 Census Tract 4 23.80 Census Tract 5.01 46.70 1 1 Census Tract 5.02 16.00 Census Tract 6 28.00 1 1 Census Tract 8 20.00 Census Tract 9 27.20 1 1 Census Tract 9800 0.00 EA-2 Census Tract 106.06 15.50 Census Tract 107.02 1.40 Census Tract 108.04 18.60 Census Tract 109 32.40 1 1 Census Tract 111.01 25.00 1 Census Tract 111.02 11.00 Census Tract 112.04 9.20 Census Tract 148 11.10 EA-3 Census Tract 112.04 9.20 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 EA-4 Census Tract 113.02 27.50 1 1 Census Tract 113.03 4.70 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 EA-5 Census Tract 113.03 4.70 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 Census Tract 114 11.90 EA-6 Census Tract 114 11.90 EA-7 Census Tract 114 11.90 Realignment Coburn Census Tract 112.04 9.20 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 Getty/Bradley Census Tract 114 11.90 Harlem/Metz Census Tract 111.02 11.00 Census Tract 112.04 9.20 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 McKay/Wellsona Census Tract 114 11.90 Realign Tracks at MP 165 Census Tract 113.03 4.70 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Census Tract 114 11.90 Sidings Bradley Siding Census Tract 114 11.90 King City Siding Census Tract 113.02 27.50 1 1 Census Tract 113.03 4.70 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 New Chalone Creek Siding Census Tract 112.04 9.20 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 San Lucas Siding Census Tract 113.03 4.70 Census Tract 113.04 10.30 Census Tract 114 11.90 Spence Siding Census Tract 106.06 15.50 Census Tract 107.02 1.40 Census Tract 108.04 18.60 Census Tract 148 11.10  San Luis Obispo County Existing Alignment (Track/Signal Upgrades) EA-6 Census Tract 100.02 9.90 Census Tract 100.16 9.10 Census Tract 103 7.70 EA-7 Census Tract 100.02 9.90 Census Tract 100.16 9.10 Census Tract 103 7.70 EA-8 Census Tract 100.16 9.10 Census Tract 101.01 12.10 Census Tract 101.02 17.40 Census Tract 102.01 3.90 Census Tract 102.04 13.50 Census Tract 102.05 6.80 Census Tract 103 7.70 Census Tract 127.04 3.70 Census Tract 129 6.40 EA-9 Census Tract 125.02 9.00 Census Tract 125.03 13.90 Census Tract 125.05 6.50 Census Tract 126 9.00 Census Tract 127.02 11.20 Census Tract 127.04 3.70 Census Tract 128 43.50 1 1 Census Tract 129 6.40 EA-10 Census Tract 109.01 74.30 1 1 Census Tract 109.02 63.70 1 1 Census Tract 110.01 11.70 Census Tract 110.02 38.00 1 1 Census Tract 111.01 28.80 1 1 Census Tract 111.02 30.60 1 1 Census Tract 111.03 13.90 Census Tract 112 38.00 1 1 Census Tract 114 0.00 Census Tract 115.04 16.80 Census Tract 127.02 11.20 Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita Census Tract 125.03 13.90 Census Tract 126 9.00 Census Tract 127.02 11.20 Census Tract 128 43.50 1 1 Census Tract 129 6.40 McKay/Wellsona Census Tract 100.02 9.90 Census Tract 100.16 9.10 Census Tract 103 7.70 Templeton/Henry Census Tract 125.02 9.00 Census Tract 125.05 6.50 Census Tract 129 6.40 Wellsona/Paso Robles Census Tract 100.16 9.10 Census Tract 101.01 12.10 Census Tract 101.02 17.40 Census Tract 102.01 3.90 Census Tract 103 7.70 Second Main Line Second Main Line Census Tract 115.04 16.80 Census Tract 127.02 11.20 Sidings Templeton Siding Census Tract 103 7.70 Census Tract 125.05 6.50 Census Tract 126 9.00 Census Tract 127.04 3.70 Census Tract 129 6.40 Wellsona Siding Census Tract 100.16 9.10 Census Tract 103 7.70 Row Labels  % Minority  Greater than 50% Minority (1=EJ) % Minority Population Higher than 10% Over County Percentage (1=EJ) Notes: *Percent Non-white Monterey - 44.41% San Luis Obispo - 17.39%  Monterey County Existing Alignment EA-1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 106.06 37.55% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 107.02 10.24% Block Group 1, Census Tract 12 35.84% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 13 59.42% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 14 41.09% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 145 60.80% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 148 50.38% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 17 49.16% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 18.01 59.33% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 18.02 55.28% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 4 50.59% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 5.01 61.50% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 5.02 57.21% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 6 60.03% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 9 58.73% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 9800 0.00% Block Group 2, Census Tract 12 30.11% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 14 39.90% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 145 38.47% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 16 33.81% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 17 51.60% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 18.01 49.70% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 18.02 52.68% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 4 51.94% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 5.01 60.23% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 5.02 54.09% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 8 50.24% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 9 58.19% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 145 28.41% 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 15 31.93% 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 18.02 54.47% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 4 55.85% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 9 48.09% 1 EA-2 Block Group 1, Census Tract 106.06 37.55% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 107.02 10.24% Block Group 1, Census Tract 108.04 57.81% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 109 43.45% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 111.01 31.63% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 111.02 53.27% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 112.04 58.51% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 148 50.38% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 108.04 53.06% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 111.01 58.79% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 111.02 54.52% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 148 71.82% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 108.04 59.17% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 111.01 57.74% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 111.02 56.54% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 148 57.50% 1 1 EA-3 Block Group 1, Census Tract 112.04 58.51% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.04 56.12% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.04 47.80% 1 EA-4 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.02 58.42% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.03 31.94% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.03 39.98% 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.02 48.99% 1 EA-5 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.03 31.94% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 114 21.63% EA-6 Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 114 21.63% EA-7 Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 114 21.63% Realignment Coburn Block Group 1, Census Tract 112.04 58.51% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Getty/Bradley Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 114 21.63% Harlem/Metz Block Group 1, Census Tract 112.04 58.51% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 111.02 56.54% 1 1 McKay/Wellsona Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 114 21.63% Realign Tracks at MP 165 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.03 31.94% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Realign Tracks at MP 172 Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Sidings Bradley Siding Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 114 21.63% King City Siding Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.02 58.42% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.03 31.94% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.02 52.23% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.03 39.98% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 113.04 56.12% 1 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.02 48.99% 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 113.04 47.80% 1 New Chalone Creek Block Group 1, Census Tract 112.04 58.51% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 San Lucas Siding Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.03 31.94% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 113.04 56.50% 1 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 30.50% 1 Spence Siding Block Group 1, Census Tract 106.06 37.55% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 107.02 10.24% Block Group 1, Census Tract 148 50.38% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 108.04 53.06% 1 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 148 71.82% 1 1  San Luis Obispo County Existing Alignment EA-6 Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.02 8.91% Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.16 30.18% 1 Block Group 4, Census Tract 103 14.72% EA-7 Block Group 1, Census Tract 100.16 10.50% Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.02 8.91% Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.16 30.18% 1 Block Group 4, Census Tract 103 14.72% EA-8 Block Group 1, Census Tract 100.16 10.50% Block Group 1, Census Tract 101.01 11.72% Block Group 1, Census Tract 101.02 30.43% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 102.01 14.13% Block Group 1, Census Tract 102.04 17.70% Block Group 1, Census Tract 102.05 24.24% Block Group 1, Census Tract 103 9.51% Block Group 1, Census Tract 129 9.71% Block Group 2, Census Tract 101.02 38.83% 1 Block Group 2, Census Tract 102.01 13.74% Block Group 2, Census Tract 129 17.01% Block Group 3, Census Tract 101.02 28.65% 1 Block Group 3, Census Tract 102.05 22.82% Block Group 3, Census Tract 127.04 9.02% Block Group 4, Census Tract 101.02 18.13% Block Group 4, Census Tract 103 14.72% Block Group 5, Census Tract 101.02 21.83% EA-9 Block Group 1, Census Tract 125.02 13.58% Block Group 1, Census Tract 125.03 11.57% Block Group 1, Census Tract 125.05 13.09% Block Group 1, Census Tract 126 10.93% Block Group 1, Census Tract 127.04 6.11% Block Group 1, Census Tract 128 35.23% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 129 9.71% Block Group 2, Census Tract 125.02 17.26% Block Group 2, Census Tract 125.03 21.59% Block Group 2, Census Tract 125.05 8.26% Block Group 2, Census Tract 126 13.87% Block Group 2, Census Tract 127.02 8.97% Block Group 2, Census Tract 127.04 5.62% Block Group 2, Census Tract 129 17.01% Block Group 3, Census Tract 125.02 14.98% Block Group 3, Census Tract 125.03 18.99% Block Group 3, Census Tract 125.05 13.14% Block Group 3, Census Tract 126 13.28% Block Group 3, Census Tract 127.02 13.08% Block Group 3, Census Tract 127.04 9.02% Block Group 4, Census Tract 126 11.16% Block Group 4, Census Tract 127.02 8.69% Block Group 4, Census Tract 127.04 6.56% Block Group 5, Census Tract 126 7.78% Block Group 5, Census Tract 127.02 8.51% EA-10 Block Group 1, Census Tract 109.01 21.78% Block Group 1, Census Tract 109.02 11.83% Block Group 1, Census Tract 110.02 11.17% Block Group 1, Census Tract 111.01 12.43% Block Group 1, Census Tract 111.02 12.74% Block Group 1, Census Tract 111.03 20.19% Block Group 1, Census Tract 112 20.27% Block Group 1, Census Tract 114 47.39% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 115.04 7.61% Block Group 2, Census Tract 109.01 22.19% Block Group 2, Census Tract 109.02 14.26% Block Group 2, Census Tract 110.01 8.95% Block Group 2, Census Tract 110.02 12.83% Block Group 2, Census Tract 111.01 15.32% Block Group 2, Census Tract 111.02 16.71% Block Group 2, Census Tract 111.03 17.86% Block Group 2, Census Tract 112 8.85% Block Group 2, Census Tract 115.04 21.46% Block Group 2, Census Tract 127.02 8.97% Block Group 3, Census Tract 109.02 19.62% Block Group 3, Census Tract 110.01 18.80% Block Group 3, Census Tract 111.01 16.03% Block Group 3, Census Tract 111.02 12.86% Block Group 3, Census Tract 112 9.90% Block Group 4, Census Tract 111.02 12.58% Block Group 4, Census Tract 112 10.40% Block Group 4, Census Tract 127.02 8.69% Block Group 5, Census Tract 112 9.16% Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita Block Group 1, Census Tract 128 35.23% 1 Block Group 1, Census Tract 129 9.71% Block Group 2, Census Tract 125.03 21.59% Block Group 2, Census Tract 127.02 8.97% Block Group 3, Census Tract 127.02 13.08% Block Group 4, Census Tract 127.02 8.69% Block Group 5, Census Tract 126 7.78% Block Group 5, Census Tract 127.02 8.51% McKay/Wellsona Block Group 1, Census Tract 100.16 10.50% Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.02 8.91% Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.16 30.18% 1 Block Group 4, Census Tract 103 14.72% Templeton/Henry Block Group 1, Census Tract 125.02 13.58% Block Group 1, Census Tract 125.05 13.09% Block Group 1, Census Tract 129 9.71% Block Group 2, Census Tract 125.02 17.26% Block Group 2, Census Tract 125.05 8.26% Block Group 3, Census Tract 125.02 14.98% Block Group 3, Census Tract 125.05 13.14% Wellsona/Paso Robles Block Group 1, Census Tract 100.16 10.50% Block Group 1, Census Tract 101.01 11.72% Block Group 1, Census Tract 102.01 14.13% Block Group 2, Census Tract 101.02 38.83% 1 Block Group 4, Census Tract 103 14.72% Second Mainline Second Mainline Block Group 1, Census Tract 115.04 7.61% Block Group 2, Census Tract 115.04 21.46% Block Group 2, Census Tract 127.02 8.97% Block Group 3, Census Tract 127.02 13.08% Block Group 4, Census Tract 127.02 8.69% Sidings Templeton Siding Block Group 1, Census Tract 103 9.51% Block Group 1, Census Tract 125.05 13.09% Block Group 1, Census Tract 126 10.93% Block Group 1, Census Tract 127.04 6.11% Block Group 1, Census Tract 129 9.71% Block Group 2, Census Tract 127.04 5.62% Block Group 2, Census Tract 129 17.01% Block Group 3, Census Tract 127.04 9.02% Block Group 4, Census Tract 127.04 6.56% Wellsona Siding Block Group 1, Census Tract 100.16 10.50% Block Group 2, Census Tract 100.16 30.18% 1 Block Group 4, Census Tract 103 14.72%      Appendix D-5 Geology and Soils Data  Geologic Units Sum of Acres Ex. Alignment  1,368.99 EA-1  94.83 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  94.83 EA-2  274.72 Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene loosely consolidated deposits Miocene to Pleistocene  0.18 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  263.67 Schist of various types and ages, unit 1 (Peninsular Ranges) Late Cretaceous to Eocene  10.87 EA-3  83.10 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  83.10 EA-4  55.74 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  55.74 EA-5  265.13 Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene loosely consolidated deposits Miocene to Pleistocene  46.54 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  218.59 EA-6  110.70 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  110.70 EA-7  55.04 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  55.04 EA-8  100.52 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  100.52 EA-9  143.42 Miocene marine rocks Oligocene to Pliocene  25.67 Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene loosely consolidated deposits Miocene to Pleistocene  7.20 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  82.97 Upper Cretaceous marine rocks, unit 1 (Upper Great Valley Sequence) Late Cretaceous  27.59 EA-10  185.81 Lower Cretaceous marine rocks Early Cretaceous  3.95 Miocene marine rocks Oligocene to Pliocene  17.23 Franciscan Complex, unit 1 (Coast Ranges) Jurassic to Cretaceous  121.28 Ultramafic rocks, chiefly Mesozoic, unit 1 (Trinity Ophiolite) Middle to Late Jurassic  13.91 Quaternary large landslide deposits Quaternary  6.63 Mesozoic volcanic rocks, unit 1 (Coast Ranges) Jurassic to Cretaceous  15.04 Cretaceous marine rocks (in part nonmarine), unit 1 (Coast Ranges) Early to Late Cretaceous  7.72 Tertiary intrusive rocks (hypabyssal), unit 1 (Cascades Volcanic Field) Tertiary  0.06 2nd Main Line  71.62 2nd Main Line  71.62 Lower Cretaceous marine rocks Early Cretaceous  66.37 Tertiary volcanic flow rocks, unit 1 (Quien Sabe-Burdell Mountain) Tertiary (16-18 Ma)  1.75 Upper Cretaceous marine rocks, unit 1 (Upper Great Valley Sequence) Late Cretaceous  3.50 Realignment  937.34 Coburn  137.32 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  137.32 Getty/Bradley  91.15 Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene loosely consolidated deposits Miocene to Pleistocene  48.97 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  42.18 Harlem/Metz  207.80 Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene loosely consolidated deposits Miocene to Pleistocene  7.52 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  137.42 Schist of various types and ages, unit 1 (Peninsular Ranges) Late Cretaceous to Eocene  62.85 Henry/Santa Margarita  132.72 Miocene marine rocks Oligocene to Pliocene  33.54 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  99.18 McKay/Wellsona  124.70 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  124.70 Realign Tracks at MP 165  64.11 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  64.11 Realign Tracks at MP 172  125.19 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  125.19 Templeton/Henry  28.38 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  28.38 Wellsona/Paso Robles  25.97 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  25.97 Siding  390.46 Bradley Siding Siding  83.34 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  83.34 King City Siding  54.44 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  54.44 New Chalone Creek Siding  37.86 Plio-Pleistocene and Pliocene loosely consolidated deposits Miocene to Pleistocene  3.10 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  34.76 San Lucas Siding  45.86 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  45.86 Spence Siding  42.32 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  42.32 Templeton Siding  80.90 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  80.90 Wellsona Siding  45.74 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  45.74 Station  5.31 King City Station  3.40 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  3.40 Soledad Station  1.91 Quaternary alluvium and marine deposits Pliocene to Holocene  1.91 Grand Total  2,773.72 Quaternary and Younger Faults Length (feet) Ex. Alignment  999.45 EA-8 9 5.25 Track/Signal Upgrades 95.25 Rinconada fault 95.25 EA-9 508.80 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 08.80 Rinconada fault 5 08.80 EA-10 395.41 Track/Signal Upgrades 3 95.41 Cambria fault 1 00.09 Oceanic fault 2 95.32 Realignment 2,117.67 Henry/Santa Margarita 2,117.67 Permanent 4 90.86 Rinconada fault 4 90.86 Temporary 1,626.81 Rinconada fault 1,626.81 Siding 296.64 Templeton Siding 296.64 Permanent 1 47.34 Unamed Fault 1 47.34 Temporary 1 49.31 Unamed Fault 1 49.31 Grand Total 3,413.77 Note: No faults ocurr within the proposed King City and Soledad stations. Row Labels Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line  71.62 2nd Main Line 71.62 Permanent Low (0.35) 18.67 Low (0.55) 7.10 Temporary Low (0.35) 33.17 Low (0.45) 0.00 Low (0.55) 12.69 Ex. Alignment 1,368.99 EA-1 94.83 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.75) 16.28 Medium (0.85) 78.55 EA-2 274.72 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.65) 191.07 Low (0.75) 83.65 EA-3 83.10 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.55) 82.37 Low (0.65) 0.73 EA-4 55.74 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.55) 36.32 Low (0.65) 19.42 EA-5 265.13 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.55) 19.81 Low (0.65) 179.53 Low (0.75) 65.78 EA-6 110.70 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.75) 110.70 EA-7 55.04 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.65) 29.52 Low (0.75) 25.51 EA-8 100.52 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.65) 96.06 Low (0.75) 4.46 EA-9  143.42 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.35) 27.39 Low (0.55) 50.80 Low (0.65) 65.24 EA-10 185.81 Track/Signal Upgrades Low (0.35) 133.77 Low (0.55) 52.03 Realignment 937.34 Coburn 137.32 Permanent Low (0.55) 27.46 Temporary Low (0.55) 109.86 Getty/Bradley 91.15 Permanent Low (0.55) 4.83 Low (0.65) 4.52 Low (0.75) 8.88 Temporary Low (0.55) 19.02 Low (0.65) 18.01 Low (0.75) 35.88 Harlem/Metz 207.80 Permanent Low (0.65) 41.56 Temporary Low (0.65) 166.24 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.72 Permanent Low (0.55) 7.85 Low (0.65) 18.70 Temporary Low (0.55) 29.82 Low (0.65) 76.35 McKay/Wellsona 124.70 Permanent Low (0.65) 11.93 Low (0.75) 13.01 Temporary Low (0.65) 42.73 Low (0.75) 57.03 Realign Tracks at MP 165 64.11 Permanent Low (0.55) 12.82 Temporary Low (0.55)  48.08 Low (0.65) 3.21 Realign Tracks at MP 172 125.19 Permanent Low (0.65) 25.04 Temporary Low (0.65) 100.15 Templeton/Henry 28.38 Permanent Low (0.55) 5.68 Temporary Low (0.55) 22.70 Wellsona/Paso Robles 25.97 Permanent Low (0.65) 5.20 Temporary Low (0.65) 20.78 Siding 390.46 Bradley Siding 83.34 Permanent Low (0.65) 10.77 Low (0.75) 39.50 Temporary Low (0.65) 6.98 Low (0.75) 26.09 King City Siding 54.44 Permanent Low (0.55) 6.51 Low (0.65) 18.56 Temporary Low (0.55) 9.68 Low (0.65) 19.68 New Chalone Creek Siding 37.86 Permanent Low (0.65) 14.90 Temporary Low (0.65) 22.96 San Lucas Siding 45.86 Permanent Low (0.55) 22.88 Temporary Low (0.55) 22.98 Spence Siding 42.32 Permanent Low (0.75) 19.34 Temporary Low (0.75)  22.98 Templeton Siding 80.90 Permanent Low (0.55) 5.36 Low (0.65) 41.41 Temporary Low (0.55) 5.64 Low (0.65) 28.49 Wellsona Siding 45.74 Permanent Low (0.65) 22.80 Temporary Low (0.65) 22.30 Low (0.75) 0.64 Station 5.31 King City Station 3.40 Permanent Low (0.65) 3.40 Soledad Station 1.91 Permanent Low (0.65) 1.91 Grand Total 2,773.72 California Potential Shaking Ranges from Low (0- 0.83), Medium (0.83-1.66) and High (1.66-2.50). SLO Liquefaction Potential Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line 71.62 2nd Main Line 71.62 Permanent 25.77 Moderate 4.46 Very Low 21.30 Temporary 45.85 Moderate 8.35 Very Low 37.51 Ex. Alignment 485.03 EA-10 185.81 Track/Signal Upgrades 185.81 Moderate 31.94 Very Low 153.87 EA-6 0.24 Track/Signal Upgrades 0.24 Moderate 0.24 EA-7 55.04 Track/Signal Upgrades 55.04 Moderate 52.29 Very High 2.75 EA-8 100.52 Track/Signal Upgrades 100.52 Moderate 22.74 Very High 30.23 Very Low 47.55 EA-9 143.42 Track/Signal Upgrades 143.42 Moderate 102.64 Very High 1.57 Very Low 39.21 Realignment 311.78 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.72 Permanent 26.54 Moderate 14.60 Very Low 11.94 Temporary 106.18 Moderate 64.63 Very Low 41.55 McKay/Wellsona 124.70 Permanent 24.94 Moderate 20.74 Very High 4.20 Temporary 99.76 Moderate 75.90 Very High 22.66 Very Low 1.20 Templeton/Henry 28.38 Permanent 5.68 Moderate 5.68 Temporary 22.70 Moderate 22.62 Very Low 0.08 Wellsona/Paso Robles 25.97 Permanent 5.20 Moderate 5.19 Very Low 0.01 Temporary 20.78 Moderate 18.95 Very Low 1.83 Siding 126.64 Templeton Siding 80.90 Permanent 46.77 Moderate 9.31 Very High 18.76 Very Low 18.70 Temporary 34.13 Moderate 9.66 Very High 11.34 Very Low 13.13 Wellsona Siding (Existing) 45.74 Permanent 22.80 Moderate 13.24 Very High 9.56 Temporary 22.94 Moderate 11.90 Very High 10.59 Very Low 0.46 Grand Total 995.06 SLO Landslide Potential Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line  71.62 2nd Main Line 71.62 Permanent 25.77 High Potential 12.16 Low Potential 13.60 Temporary 45.85 High Potential 23.53 Low Potential 22.33 Ex. Alignment 5 86.09 EA-6 0.19 Track/Signal Upgrades 0.19 Low Potential 0.19 EA-7 55.04 Track/Signal Upgrades 55.04 Low Potential 55.04 EA-8 1 13.69 Track/Signal Upgrades 1 13.69 Low Potential 1 12.49 Moderate Potential 1.20 EA-9 2 02.58 Track/Signal Upgrades 2 02.58 High Potential 32.11 Low Potential 1 37.64 Moderate Potential 32.84 EA-10 2 14.60 Track/Signal Upgrades 2 14.60 High Potential 1 72.67 Low Potential 33.21 Moderate Potential 0.23 Very High 8.50 Realignment 3 40.07 Henry/Santa Margarita 1 32.72 Permanent 26.54 Low Potential 22.93 Moderate Potential 3.61 Temporary 1 06.18 High Potential 0.24 Low Potential 91.74 Moderate Potential 14.20 McKay/Wellsona 1 24.70 Permanent 24.94 Low Potential 24.94 Temporary 99.76 Low Potential 99.76 Templeton/Henry  56.67 Permanent 11.35 Low Potential 11.35 Temporary 45.32 Low Potential 45.32 Wellsona/Paso Robles 25.97 Permanent 5.20 Low Potential 5.20 Temporary 20.78 Low Potential 20.78 Siding 1 84.36 Templeton Siding 1 38.62 Permanent 82.32 High Potential 5.89 Low Potential 72.61 Moderate Potential 3.82 Temporary 56.29 High Potential 2.50 Low Potential 53.14 Moderate Potential 0.65 Wellsona Siding (Existing) 45.74 Permanent 22.80 Low Potential 22.80 Temporary 22.94 Low Potential 22.94 Grand Total 1,182.15 Monterey Landslide Potential Ex. Alignment EA-1 Track/Signal Upgrades Low Potential EA-2 Track/Signal Upgrades Moderate Potential EA-3 Track/Signal Upgrades Moderate Potential EA-4 Track/Signal Upgrades Low Potential EA-5 Track/Signal Upgrades High Potential EA-6 Track/Signal Upgrades Low Potential Realignment Coburn Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Getty/Bradley Permanent High Potential Temporary High Potential Harlem/Metz Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Realign Tracks at MP 165 Permanent Low Potential Temporary Low Potential Realign Tracks at MP 172 Permanent Low Potential Temporary Low Potential Siding Bradley Siding Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential King City Siding Permanent Low Potential Temporary Low Potential New Chalone Creek Siding Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential San Lucas Siding Permanent Low Potential Temporary Low Potential Spence Siding Permanent Low Potential Temporary Low Potential Station Soledad Station Permanent Low Potential King City Station Permanent Low Potential Monterey Liquefaction Ex. Alignment EA-1 Track/Signal Upgrades High Potential EA-2 Track/Signal Upgrades Moderate Potential EA-3 Track/Signal Upgrades High Potential EA-4 Track/Signal Upgrades Moderate Potential EA-5 Track/Signal Upgrades High Potential EA-6 Track/Signal Upgrades High Potential Realignment Coburn Permanent High Potential Temporary High Potential Getty/Bradley Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Harlem/Metz Permanent High Potential Temporary High Potential Realign Tracks at MP 165 Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Realign Tracks at MP 172 Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Siding Bradley Siding Permanent High Potential Temporary High Potential King City Siding Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential New Chalone Creek Permanent High Potential Temporary High Potential San Lucas Siding Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Spence Siding Permanent Moderate Potential Temporary Moderate Potential Station King City Station Permanent Moderate Potential Soledad Permanent Moderate Potential Upgrade Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line  7 1.62 2nd Main Line 7 1.62 Permanent 2 5.77 High 0.86 Low 1 5.30 Moderate 9.60 Temporary 4 5.85 High 2.35 Low 2 7.00 Moderate 1 6.50 Ex. Alignment 484.77 EA-7 5 5.04 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 5.04 Low 5 4.80 Not Rated or N/A 0.23 EA-8 100.52 Track/Signal Upgrades 100.52 Low 5 8.79 Moderate 4 1.61 Not Rated or N/A 0.12 EA-9 143.42 Track/Signal Upgrades 143.42 High 9.06 Low 7 9.51 Moderate 5 4.85 EA-10 185.80 Track/Signal Upgrades 185.80 High 5 5.18 Low 1 4.60 Moderate 114.77 Not Rated or N/A 1.25 Realignment 311.78 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.72 Permanent 2 6.54 Low 1 7.07 Moderate 9.47 Temporary 106.18 Low 6 2.75 Moderate 3 9.97 Not Rated or N/A 3.46 McKay/Wellsona 124.70 Permanent 2 4.94 Low 2 4.92 Not Rated or N/A 0.02 Temporary 9 9.76 Low 9 4.25 Not Rated or N/A 5.51 Templeton/Henry  2 8.38 Permanent 5.68 Low 5.68 Temporary 2 2.70 Low 2 2.70 Wellsona/Paso Robles 2 5.97 Permanent 5.20 Low 5.20 Temporary 2 0.78 Low 2 0.78 Siding 126.64 Templeton Siding 8 0.90 Permanent 4 6.77 Low 3 1.64 Moderate 1 3.91 Not Rated or N/A 1.22 Temporary 3 4.13 Low 1 7.89 Moderate 1 3.89 Not Rated or N/A 2.35 Wellsona Siding (Existing) 4 5.74 Permanent 2 2.80 Low 2 2.76 Not Rated or N/A 0.04 Temporary 2 2.94 Low 2 2.88 Not Rated or N/A 0.07 Grand Total 994.81 Upgrades Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line  71.62 2nd Main Line 71.62 Permanent 25.77 High 6 .32 Moderate 7 .46 Not Rated or N/A 11.99 Temporary 45.85 High 12.23 Moderate 12.88 Not Rated or N/A 20.74 Ex. Alignment 484.77 EA-7 55.04 Track/Signal Upgrades 55.04 High 1 .89 Moderate 53.14 EA-8 100.52 Track/Signal Upgrades 100.52 High 43.10 Moderate 40.12 Not Rated or N/A 17.29 EA-9 143.42 Track/Signal Upgrades 143.42 High 18.30 Moderate 117.34 Not Rated or N/A 7 .78 EA-10 185.80 Track/Signal Upgrades 185.80 High 137.61 Low 30.47 Moderate 4 .73 Not Rated or N/A 12.98 Realignment 311.78 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.72 Permanent 26.54 High 0 .79 Moderate 17.73 Not Rated or N/A 8 .03 Temporary 106.18 High 8 .47 Moderate 75.72 Not Rated or N/A 21.98 McKay/Wellsona 124.70 Permanent 24.94 High 2 .50 Moderate 22.44 Temporary  99.76 High 12.30 Moderate 87.46 Templeton/Henry 28.38 Permanent 5 .68 Moderate 5 .68 Temporary 22.70 Moderate 22.70 Wellsona/Paso Robles 25.97 Permanent 5 .20 High 2 .17 Moderate 3 .02 Temporary 20.78 High 7 .32 Moderate 13.46 Siding 126.64 Templeton Siding 80.90 Permanent 46.77 High 23.13 Moderate 23.64 Temporary 34.13 High 17.32 Moderate 16.68 Not Rated or N/A 0 .12 Wellsona Siding (Existing) 45.74 Permanent 22.80 High 0 .21 Moderate 21.73 Not Rated or N/A 0 .86 Temporary 22.94 High 0 .48 Moderate 21.52 Not Rated or N/A 0 .94 Grand Total 994.81 Upgrades Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line  7 1.62 2nd Main Line 7 1.62 Permanent 2 5.77 High 5.45 Moderate 8.32 Not Rated or N/A 1 1.99 Temporary 4 5.85 High 9.88 Moderate 1 5.24 Not Rated or N/A 2 0.74 Ex. Alignment 484.77 EA-7 5 5.04 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 5.04 Low 4 9.54 Moderate 5.50 EA-8 100.52 Track/Signal Upgrades 100.52 Low 7 1.78 Moderate 2 8.73 EA-9 143.42 Track/Signal Upgrades 143.42 High 9.06 Low 104.87 Moderate 2 8.01 Not Rated or N/A 1.49 EA-10 185.80 Track/Signal Upgrades 185.80 Low 8 4.48 Moderate 8 8.33 Not Rated or N/A 1 2.98 Realignment 311.78 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.72 Permanent 2 6.54 Low 1 3.53 Moderate 1 2.78 Not Rated or N/A 0.24 Temporary 106.18 Low 5 9.27 Moderate 4 5.91 Not Rated or N/A 1.00 McKay/Wellsona 124.70 Permanent 2 4.94 Low 1 7.36 Moderate 7.58 Temporary 9 9.76 Low 7 0.18 Moderate 2 9.58 Templeton/Henry  2 8.38 Permanent 5.68 Low 0.62 Moderate 5.06 Temporary 2 2.70 Low 2.43 Moderate 2 0.27 Wellsona/Paso Robles 2 5.97 Permanent 5.20 Low 2.85 Moderate 2.35 Temporary 2 0.78 Low 9.44 Moderate 1 1.34 Siding 126.64 Templeton Siding 8 0.90 Permanent 4 6.77 Low 4 1.88 Moderate 4.89 Temporary 3 4.13 Low 3 1.46 Moderate 2.54 Not Rated or N/A 0.12 Wellsona Siding (Existing) 4 5.74 Permanent 2 2.80 Low 9.35 Moderate 1 3.45 Temporary 2 2.94 Low 9.25 Moderate 1 3.70 Grand Total 994.81 Row Labels Sum of Acres 2nd Main Line  71.62 2nd Main Line 71.62 Permanent 25.77 Moderate 0.57 Severe 5.97 Slight 3.61 Very severe 15.61 Temporary 45.85 Moderate 0.89 Severe 10.88 Slight 7.72 Very severe 26.36 Ex. Alignment 4 84.77 EA-7 55.04 Track/Signal Upgrades 55.04 Slight 55.04 EA-8 1 00.52 Track/Signal Upgrades 1 00.52 Slight 83.22 Very severe 17.29 EA-9 1 43.42 Track/Signal Upgrades 1 43.42 Moderate 4.52 Severe 4.43 Slight 1 34.35 Very severe 0.12 EA-10 1 85.80 Track/Signal Upgrades 1 85.80 Low 84.48 Moderate 88.33 Not Rated or N/A 1.86 Very severe 11.12 Realignment 3 11.78 Henry/Santa Margarita 1 32.72 Permanent 26.54 Moderate 0.24 Slight 22.01 Very severe 4.30 Temporary 1 06.18 Moderate 1.38 Slight 95.93 Very severe 8.87 McKay/Wellsona 1 24.70 Permanent 24.94 Severe 2.41 Slight 22.54 Temporary  99.76 Severe 11.76 Slight 88.01 Templeton/Henry 28.38 Permanent 5.68 Moderate 5.06 Slight 0.62 Temporary 22.70 Moderate 19.01 Slight 3.70 Wellsona/Paso Robles 25.97 Permanent 5.20 Slight 5.20 Temporary 20.78 Slight 20.78 Siding 1 26.64 Templeton Siding 80.90 Permanent 46.77 Slight 46.77 Temporary 34.13 Slight 34.13 Wellsona Siding (Existing) 45.74 Permanent 22.80 Severe 6.86 Slight 15.08 Very severe 0.86 Temporary 22.94 Severe 6.21 Slight 15.80 Very severe 0.94 Grand Total 994.81 Row Labels Sum of Acreage Ex. Alignment  883.746 EA-1 94.827 Track/Signal Upgrades 94.827 High 53.168 Low 29.897 Moderate 11.762 EA-2 274.326 Track/Signal Upgrades 274.326 High 79.152 Low 101.637 Moderate 77.556 Not Rated or N/A 15.980 EA-3 83.098 Track/Signal Upgrades 83.098 High 28.736 Low 26.938 Moderate 18.060 Not Rated or N/A 9.364 EA-4 55.742 Track/Signal Upgrades 55.742 High 0.111 Low 17.204 Moderate 24.205 Not Rated or N/A 14.222 EA-5 265.126 Track/Signal Upgrades 265.126 High 34.867 Low 83.910 Moderate 136.198 Not Rated or N/A 10.150 EA-6 110.628 Track/Signal Upgrades 110.628 High 13.672 Low 96.956 Realignment 625.562 Coburn 137.320 Permanent 27.464 High 14.623 Low 4.207 Moderate 7.274 Not Rated or N/A 1.360 Temporary 109.856 High 55.121 Low 13.119 Moderate 32.581 Not Rated or N/A 9.036 Getty/Bradley  91.150 Permanent 18.230 Low 8.840 Moderate 9.390 Temporary 72.920 Low 29.350 Moderate 43.570 Harlem/Metz 207.796 Permanent 41.559 Low 29.256 Moderate 9.991 Not Rated or N/A 2.313 Temporary 166.237 Low 114.836 Moderate 35.530 Not Rated or N/A 15.871 Realign Tracks at MP 165 64.111 Permanent 12.822 High 8.277 Low 1.009 Moderate 1.575 Not Rated or N/A 1.961 Temporary 51.289 High 28.269 Low 3.819 Moderate 9.228 Not Rated or N/A 9.973 Realign Tracks at MP 172 125.185 Permanent 25.037 High 4.133 Low 3.550 Moderate 17.354 Temporary 100.148 High 20.443 Low 10.106 Moderate 69.599 Siding 262.974 Bradley Siding 83.343 Permanent 50.270 High 34.562 Low 8.007 Moderate 7.701 Temporary 33.073 High 23.519 Low 5.011 Moderate 4.543 King City Siding  53.590 Permanent 24.929 High 5.418 Low 1.613 Moderate 17.898 Temporary 28.660 High 7.857 Low 1.656 Moderate 19.148 New Chalone Creek Siding 37.861 Permanent 14.903 Low 5.884 Moderate 9.019 Temporary 22.958 Low 10.277 Moderate 12.681 San Lucas Siding 45.856 Permanent 22.878 High 15.470 Low 7.408 Temporary 22.978 High 12.720 Low 10.259 Spence Siding 42.324 Permanent 19.342 High 8.880 Low 2.158 Moderate 8.304 Temporary 22.982 High 11.382 Low 3.086 Moderate 8.515 Station 5.317 King City Station 3.403 Permanent 3.403 Moderate 3.403 Soledad Station 1.914 Permanent 1.914 High 1.914 Grand Total 1,777.599 Row Labels Sum of Acreage Ex. Alignment  883.746 EA-1 94.827 Track/Signal Upgrades 94.827 High 94.827 EA-2 274.326 Track/Signal Upgrades 274.326 High 241.651 Moderate 16.695 Not Rated or N/A 15.980 EA-3 83.098 Track/Signal Upgrades 83.098 High 70.032 Low 0.113 Moderate 3.590 Not Rated or N/A 9.364 EA-4 55.742 Track/Signal Upgrades 55.742 High 41.520 Not Rated or N/A 14.222 EA-5 265.126 Track/Signal Upgrades 265.126 High 250.319 Low 3.042 Not Rated or N/A 11.764 EA-6 110.628 Track/Signal Upgrades 110.628 High 106.817 Low 3.038 Moderate 0.773 Realignment 625.562 Coburn 137.320 Permanent 27.464 High 26.104 Not Rated or N/A 1.360 Temporary 109.856 High 95.206 Low 2.264 Not Rated or N/A 12.386 Getty/Bradley 91.150 Permanent 18.230 High 15.089 Low 3.141 Temporary 72.920 High 60.481 Low 12.439 Harlem/Metz  207.796 Permanent 41.559 High 38.755 Moderate 0.491 Not Rated or N/A 2.313 Temporary 166.237 High 146.353 Low 0.002 Moderate 4.010 Not Rated or N/A 15.871 Realign Tracks at MP 165 64.111 Permanent 12.822 High 10.861 Not Rated or N/A 1.961 Temporary 51.289 High 41.316 Not Rated or N/A 9.973 Realign Tracks at MP 172 125.185 Permanent 25.037 High 25.037 Temporary 100.148 High 100.148 Siding 262.974 Bradley Siding 83.343 Permanent 50.270 High 50.227 Low 0.043 Temporary 33.073 High 32.332 Low 0.741 King City Siding 53.590 Permanent 24.929 High 24.591 Not Rated or N/A 0.338 Temporary 28.660 High 28.291 Not Rated or N/A 0.370 New Chalone Creek Siding 37.861 Permanent 14.903 High 14.903 Temporary 22.958 High 22.892 Moderate 0.067 San Lucas Siding 45.856 Permanent 22.878 High 22.878 Temporary 22.978 High 22.978 Spence Siding  42.324 Permanent 19.342 High 19.342 Temporary 22.982 High 22.982 Station 5.317 King City Station 3.403 Permanent 3.403 High 3.403 Soledad Station 1.914 Permanent 1.914 High 1.914 Grand Total 1,777.599 Row Labels Sum of Acreage Ex. Alignment  883.746 EA-1 9 4.827 Track/Signal Upgrades 9 4.827 Low 9 4.827 EA-2 274.326 Track/Signal Upgrades 274.326 Low 212.830 Moderate 4 5.516 Not Rated or N/A 1 5.980 EA-3 8 3.098 Track/Signal Upgrades 8 3.098 Low 5 7.160 Moderate 1 6.574 Not Rated or N/A 9.364 EA-4 5 5.742 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 5.742 Low 2 5.686 Moderate 1 5.834 Not Rated or N/A 1 4.222 EA-5 265.126 Track/Signal Upgrades 265.126 High 4.989 Low 224.716 Moderate 2 3.656 Not Rated or N/A 1 1.764 EA-6 110.628 Track/Signal Upgrades 110.628 Low 109.855 Moderate 0.773 Realignment 625.562 Coburn 137.320 Permanent 2 7.464 Low 2 6.104 Not Rated or N/A 1.360 Temporary 109.856 Low 9 7.105 Moderate 0.365 Not Rated or N/A 1 2.386 Getty/Bradley 9 1.150 Permanent 1 8.230 Low 1 8.230 Temporary 7 2.920 High 0.237 Low 7 1.728 Moderate 0.955 Harlem/Metz  207.796 Permanent 4 1.559 Low 3 6.106 Moderate 3.141 Not Rated or N/A 2.313 Temporary 166.237 Low 134.068 Moderate 1 6.297 Not Rated or N/A 1 5.871 Realign Tracks at MP 165 6 4.111 Permanent 1 2.822 Low 2.667 Moderate 8.195 Not Rated or N/A 1.961 Temporary 5 1.289 Low 1 3.461 Moderate 2 7.855 Not Rated or N/A 9.973 Realign Tracks at MP 172 125.185 Permanent 2 5.037 Low 2 0.904 Moderate 4.133 Temporary 100.148 Low 7 9.147 Moderate 2 1.001 Siding 262.974 Bradley Siding 8 3.343 Permanent 5 0.270 Low 2 2.591 Moderate 2 7.679 Temporary 3 3.073 Low 1 5.047 Moderate 1 8.026 King City Siding 5 3.590 Permanent 2 4.929 Low 2 4.591 Not Rated or N/A 0.338 Temporary 2 8.660 Low 2 8.291 Not Rated or N/A 0.370 New Chalone Creek 3 7.861 Permanent 1 4.903 Low 1 3.229 Moderate 1.674 Temporary 2 2.958 Low 2 0.807 Moderate 2.151 San Lucas Siding  4 5.856 Permanent 2 2.878 Moderate 2 2.878 Temporary 2 2.978 Moderate 2 2.978 Spence Siding 4 2.324 Permanent 1 9.342 Low 1 9.342 Temporary 2 2.982 Low 2 2.982 Station 5.317 King City Station 3.403 Permanent 3.403 Low 3.403 Soledad Station 1.914 Permanent 1.914 Low 1.914 Grand Total 1,777.599 Row Labels Sum of Acreage Ex. Alignment  883.746 EA-1 9 4.827 Track/Signal Upgrades 9 4.827 Slight 9 4.827 EA-2 274.326 Track/Signal Upgrades 274.326 Moderate 5.142 Severe 2 2.641 Slight 246.543 EA-3 8 3.098 Track/Signal Upgrades 8 3.098 Moderate 1 8.722 Severe 9.364 Slight 5 5.012 EA-4 5 5.742 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 5.742 Moderate 2.135 Severe 1 4.222 Slight 3 9.385 EA-5 265.126 Track/Signal Upgrades 265.126 Moderate 1 3.216 Severe 2 9.670 Slight 206.446 Very severe 1 5.793 EA-6 110.628 Track/Signal Upgrades 110.628 Moderate 0.773 Slight 109.855 Realignment 625.562 Coburn 137.320 Permanent 2 7.464 Moderate 0.002 Severe 1.360 Slight 2 6.102 Temporary 109.856 Moderate 9.322 Severe 9.036 Slight 8 8.148 Very severe 3.350 Getty/Bradley 9 1.150 Permanent 1 8.230 Severe 2.579 Slight 1 4.705 Very severe 0.946 Temporary  7 2.920 Moderate 0.955 Severe 1 7.628 Slight 4 5.985 Very severe 8.352 Harlem/Metz 207.796 Permanent 4 1.559 Severe 5.454 Slight 3 6.106 Temporary 166.237 Moderate 1.497 Severe 3 1.975 Slight 132.765 Realign Tracks at MP 165 6 4.111 Permanent 1 2.822 Moderate 1.575 Severe 1.961 Slight 9.286 Temporary 5 1.289 Moderate 7.299 Severe 9.973 Slight 3 4.018 Realign Tracks at MP 172 125.185 Permanent 2 5.037 Moderate 1.167 Slight 2 3.870 Temporary 100.148 Moderate 9.479 Slight 9 0.669 Siding 262.974 Bradley Siding 8 3.343 Permanent 5 0.270 Severe 7.701 Slight 4 2.569 Temporary 3 3.073 Severe 4.543 Slight 2 8.530 King City Siding 5 3.590 Permanent 2 4.929 Slight 2 4.591 Very severe 0.338 Temporary 2 8.660 Slight 2 8.291 Very severe 0.370 New Chalone Creek Siding 3 7.861 Permanent 1 4.903 Severe 1.674 Slight  1 3.229 Temporary 2 2.958 Severe 2.151 Slight 2 0.807 San Lucas Siding 4 5.856 Permanent 2 2.878 Moderate 1.137 Slight 2 1.741 Temporary 2 2.978 Moderate 3.594 Slight 1 9.384 Spence Siding 4 2.324 Permanent 1 9.342 Slight 1 9.342 Temporary 2 2.982 Slight 2 2.982 Station 5.317 King City Station 3.403 Permanent 3.403 Slight 3.403 Soledad Station 1.914 Permanent 1.914 Slight 1.914 Grand Total 1,777.599 Mineral Resource by Upgrade # of Wells Oil and Gas Fields Crossed Sum of Acres EA-5 2 Ex. Alignment  40.49 Ex. Alignment 2 EA-5 Track/Signal Upgrades Track/Signal Upgrades Plugged Oil and Gas Well 2 San Ardo 40.49 Templeton/Henry 1 Grand Total 40.49 Realignment 1 Temporary Plugged Oil and Gas Well 1 Grand Total 3 *Geothermal Wells are not within any of the upgrade areas.       Appendix D-6 Hazards and Hazardous Materials Data  Row Labels Ex. Alignment EA-1 Track/Signal Upgrades Hazardous 110013828493 Hazardous "Historic" CAD990793887 EA-8 Track/Signal Upgrades Hazardous "Historic" 6522 Siding King City Siding Temporary Hazardous 110013971620 110013975207 T0605318033 Station Soledad Rail Station Permanent Hazardous "Historic" T0605300107 T0605300273 T0605300388 Grand Total Notes: 1. Historic refers to a hazardous site that has had past enforcement actions. 2. No Superfund Sites are found within any of the proposed upgrades and stations. 3. No Landfills are found within any of the proposed upgrades and stations. 4. Three hazardous sites Identified within the King City Siding. 5. Three historic hazardous sites Identified within the Soledad Station. Site type Hazardous Hazardous Site Id. Status Type Impact Name Source Cleanup Program Site Hazardous T0605318033 Open - Site Assessment Siding Temporary King City Siding UST Impacts Cleanup Site Hazardous "Historic" 6522 Refer: RWQCB Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-8 EnviroStorCleanupSites SQG Not Hazardous 110002698475 Active Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-8 Facility Interests CESQG Not Hazardous 110001186546 Active Realignment Temporary Realign Tracks at MP 165 Facility Interests SUPERFUND (NON-NPL) Not Hazardous 110001186546 NOT ON NPL Realignment Temporary Realign Tracks at MP 165 Facility Interests STATE MASTER Not Hazardous 110001186546 N/A Realignment Temporary Realign Tracks at MP 165 Facility Interests HAZARDOUS WASTE BIENNIAL REPORTER Not Hazardous 110001186546 Not Active Realignment Temporary Realign Tracks at MP 165 Facility Interests SPCC Hazardous 110013971620 Active Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests FORMAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION Hazardous 110013971620 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests ENFORCEMENT/COMPLIANCE ACTIVITY Hazardous 110013971620 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests CRITERIA AND HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT INVENTORY Hazardous 110013971620 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests CRITERIA AND HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT INVENTORY Hazardous 110013975207 Active Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests SPCC Hazardous 110013975207 Active Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests CRITERIA AND HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT INVENTORY Hazardous 110013975207 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests FORMAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION Hazardous 110013975207 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests ENFORCEMENT/COMPLIANCE ACTIVITY Hazardous 110013975207 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests AIR MONITORING SITE Not Hazardous 110020817614 N/A Siding Temporary King City Siding Facility Interests CRITERIA AND HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT INVENTORY Hazardous 110013828493 N/A Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-1 Facility Interests CRITERIA AND HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT INVENTORY Hazardous 110013828493 N/A Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-1 Facility Interests CRITERIA AND HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT INVENTORY Hazardous 110013828493 Active Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-1 Facility Interests ENFORCEMENT/COMPLIANCE ACTIVITY Hazardous 110013828493 N/A Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-1 Facility Interests Historical - Non-Operating Hazardous "Historic" CAD990793887 CLOSED Ex. Alignment Improvements EA-1 EnviroStorHazardousWaste Leaking Underground Storage Tank Hazardous "Historic" T0605300388 Closed Station Permanent Soledad Rail Station UST Impacts Leaking Underground Storage Tank Hazardous "Historic" T0605300107 Closed Station Permanent Soledad Rail Station UST Impacts Leaking Underground Storage Tank Hazardous "Historic" T0605300273 Closed Station Permanent Soledad Rail Station UST Impacts      Appendix D-7 Hydrology and Water Resources Data  100yr Flood Impacts Sum of Acres Ex. Alignment (Track/Signal Upgrades) 48.85 EA-1 0.00 None 0.00 EA-2 5.01 Improvements 5.01 EA-3 0.89 Improvements 0.89 EA-4 7.59 Improvements 7.59 EA-5 5.66 Improvements 5.66 EA-6 2.37 Improvements 2.37 EA-7 1.82 Improvements 1.82 EA-8 12.87 Improvements 12.87 EA-9 10.48 Improvements 10.48 EA-10 2.17 Improvements 2.17 Realignment 165.25 Coburn 21.11 Permanent 1.52 Temporary 19.59 Getty/Bradley 22.59 Permanent 3.42 Temporary 19.17 Harlem/Metz 75.14 Permanent 13.89 Temporary 61.25 Henry/Santa Margarita 22.55 Permanent 3.75 Temporary 18.80 McKay/Wellsona 10.16 Permanent 0.20 Temporary 9.96 Realign Tracks at MP 165 6.55 Permanent 1.05 Temporary 5.51 Realign Tracks at MP 172 6.27 Permanent 0.01 Temporary 6.26 Wellsona/Paso Robles 0.87 Temporary 0.87 Templeton/Henry 0.00 None 0.00 Siding 13.65 King City Siding 2.07 Permanent 1.05 Temporary 1.02 Templeton Siding 9.76 Permanent 3.44 Temporary 6.33 New Chalone Creek Siding 0.53 Permanent 0.03 Temporary 0.49 Wellsona Siding Siding 1.29 Permanent 0.19 Temporary 1.10 Bradley Siding 0.00 None 0.00 Spence Siding 0.00 None 0.00 San Lucas Siding 0.00 None 0.00 2nd Mainline 0.00 2nd Mainline 0.00 None 0.00 Station 0.00 Soledad Station 0.00 None 0.00 King City Station 0.00 None 0.00 Grand Total 227.75 Upgrades Linear Feet Ex. Alignment (Track/Signal Upgrades)  11,787.90 EA-1 82.87 Track/Signal Upgrades 8 2.87 Unnamed Waterbody 82.87 EA-2 2,411.45 Track/Signal Upgrades 2,411.45 Unnamed Waterbody 2,196.71 Chualar Creek 1 01.06 Stonewall Creek 1 13.68 EA-3 1 19.86 Track/Signal Upgrades 119.86 Unnamed Waterbody 1 05.78 Chalone Creek 14.08 EA-5 1,732.24 Track/Signal Upgrades 1,732.24 Unnamed Waterbody 1,494.14 Pancho Rico Creek 1 12.09 Sargent Creek 21.63 Pine Creek 1 04.37 EA-6 1,075.73 Track/Signal Upgrades 1,075.73 Salinas River 2 39.54 Unnamed Waterbody 8 36.19 EA-7 2 87.20 Track/Signal Upgrades 287.20 San Marcos Creek 75.71 Unnamed Waterbody 2 11.49 EA-8 6 11.77 Track/Signal Upgrades 611.77 Unnamed Waterbody 6 11.77 EA-9 1,846.31 Track/Signal Upgrades 1,846.31 Santa Margarita Creek 83.87 Yerba Buena Creek 60.50 Unnamed Waterbody 1,248.35 Paso Robles Creek 1 35.91 Paloma Creek 73.05 Atascadero Creek 1 89.13 Graves Creek 55.49 EA-10 3,620.48 Track/Signal Upgrades 3,620.48 Santa Margarita Creek 3 01.40 Unnamed Waterbody 2,717.30 Brizzolara Creek  2 57.88 Stenner Creek 2 28.18 San Luis Obispo Creek 1 15.73 Realignment 9,878.10 Coburn 60.72 Temporary 6 0.72 Unnamed Waterbody 60.72 Getty/Bradley 2,053.82 Permanent 417.33 Unnamed Waterbody 4 17.33 Temporary 1,636.48 Unnamed Waterbody 1,636.48 Harlem/Metz 3 01.60 Temporary 301.60 Unnamed Waterbody 3 01.60 Henry/Santa Margarita 6,024.10 Permanent 304.63 Unnamed Waterbody 3 04.63 Temporary 5,719.46 Salinas River 8 04.82 Santa Margarita Creek 9 42.49 Yerba Buena Creek 3 22.43 Unnamed Waterbody 3,649.73 Realign Tracks at MP 165 5 03.00 Permanent 100.13 Unnamed Waterbody 1 00.13 Temporary 402.86 Unnamed Waterbody 4 02.86 Realign Tracks at MP 172 9 34.88 Permanent 150.18 Unnamed Waterbody 1 50.18 Temporary 784.70 Unnamed Waterbody 7 84.70 Second Mainline 6,735.27 Second Mainline 6,735.27 Permanent 749.39 Santa Margarita Creek 3 32.73 Unnamed Waterbody 4 16.66 Temporary 5,985.88 Santa Margarita Creek 4,406.50 Unnamed Waterbody 1,579.39 Siding 1,404.57 King City Siding 2 33.43 Permanent 100.09 San Lorenzo Creek 1 00.09 Temporary 133.34 San Lorenzo Creek  1 33.34 Spence Siding 2 12.95 Permanent 8 3.45 Unnamed Waterbody 83.45 Temporary 129.50 Unnamed Waterbody 1 29.50 Templeton Siding 4 92.88 Permanent 226.13 Unnamed Waterbody 2 26.13 Temporary 266.75 Unnamed Waterbody 2 66.75 Wellsona Siding 2 47.45 Permanent 124.12 Unnamed Waterbody 1 24.12 Temporary 123.34 Unnamed Waterbody 1 23.34 Bradley Siding 2 17.86 Permanent 108.98 Unnamed Waterbody 1 08.98 Temporary 108.88 Unnamed Waterbody 1 08.88 Grand Total 29,805.84 Note: There are no impcts to stations. Study Area Number of Stream Crossings in Upgrade Area Sidings Bradley Siding 1 Spence Siding 2 Templeton Siding 2 Wellsona Siding 1 San Lucas Siding 0 New Chalone Creek Siding 0 King City Siding 1 Realignments Coburn 1 Getty/Bradley 4 Harlem/Metz 2 Henry/Santa Margarita 6 McKay/Wellsona 0 Realign Tracks at MP 165 1 Realign Tracks at MP 172 1 Templeton/Henry 0 Wellsona/Paso Robles 0 Second Mainline 15 Second Mainline 7 Stations King City Station 0 Soledad Station 0 Ex. Alignment (Track/Signal Upgrades) EA-1 1 EA-2 8 EA-3 3 EA-4 0 EA-5 17 EA-6 8 EA-7 4 EA-8 7 EA-9 12 EA-10 28 T Grand Total 117      Appendix D-8 Land Use Data  GP Land Use Sum of Acreage 2nd Main Line  6 4.519 2nd Main Line 6 4.519 Permanent 25.741 Agriculture 4.677 Rural Lands 1 8.825 Public Facilities 2.239 Temporary 38.778 Agriculture 1 3.875 Rural Lands 2 2.773 Public Facilities 2.130 Ex. Alignment 929.135 EA-1 1 4.077 Improvements 14.077 Commercial 0.086 Industrial 1 3.584 Public Facilities 0.407 EA-2 152.015 Improvements 152.015 Agriculture 119.384 Commercial 2 1.415 Industrial 1 1.036 Recreation 0.012 Residential 0.167 EA-3 7 4.602 Improvements 74.602 Agriculture 7 4.602 EA-4 5 2.120 Improvements 52.120 Agriculture 5 2.120 EA-5 264.660 Improvements 264.660 Agriculture 199.063 Industrial 6 2.303 Public Facilities 3.294 EA-6 110.362 Improvements 110.362 Agriculture 1 0.837 Open Space 2.510 Public Facilities 9 7.015 EA-7 2 0.497 Improvements 20.497 Agriculture 1.154 Commercial 1.334 Industrial 1 6.484 Open Space 0.111 Recreation 0.028 Residential 1.090 Public Facilities  0.297 EA-8 7 1.157 Improvements 71.157 Agriculture 3.257 City Roads 4 8.572 Commercial 8.850 Industrial 8.738 Mixed Use 0.000 Open Space 0.006 Residential 1.445 Public Facilities 0.289 EA-9 133.504 Improvements 133.504 Agriculture 1 9.984 City Roads 2.423 Commercial 0.115 Industrial 1 4.855 Open Space 0.468 Recreation 7.804 Residential 1 0.588 ROW 7 4.412 Public Facilities 2.855 EA-10 3 6.142 Improvements 36.142 Agriculture 2.205 Commercial 5.956 Industrial 2.752 Open Space 0.285 Residential 1 2.675 Rural Lands 7.448 Public Facilities 4.821 Realignment 856.856 Coburn 127.732 Permanent 27.034 Agriculture 2 7.034 Temporary 100.699 Agriculture 100.699 Getty/Bradley 9 1.150 Permanent 18.230 Agriculture 1 8.230 Temporary 72.920 Agriculture 7 2.920 Harlem/Metz  207.797 Permanent 41.559 Agriculture 3 8.141 Industrial 3.419 Temporary 166.237 Agriculture 151.955 Industrial 1 4.282 Henry/Santa Margarita 124.235 Permanent 25.166 Agriculture 5.634 City Roads 0.172 Residential 1 9.071 ROW 0.290 Temporary 99.069 Agriculture 1 7.020 City Roads 0.921 Commercial 0.002 Open Space 0.888 Residential 7 8.411 ROW 1.826 McKay/Wellsona 7 8.896 Permanent 15.631 Agriculture 5.159 Residential 0.002 Public Facilities 1 0.471 Temporary 63.265 Agriculture 2 3.400 Residential 3.079 Public Facilities 3 6.786 Realign Tracks at MP 165 6 0.487 Permanent 12.822 Agriculture 1 2.822 Temporary 47.665 Agriculture 4 6.561 Commercial 1.104 Realign Tracks at MP 172 119.013 Permanent 23.154 Agriculture 2 3.154 Temporary 95.859 Agriculture 9 5.859 Templeton/Henry 2 8.378 Permanent 5 .676 City Roads 0.023 Open Space 0.014 Recreation 2.568 ROW 3.070 Temporary  22.702 City Roads 5.642 Industrial 0.135 Open Space 5.856 Recreation 3.194 Residential 3.411 ROW 4.464 Wellsona/Paso Robles 1 9.167 Permanent 3 .776 Agriculture 3.776 Temporary 15.391 Agriculture 1 4.038 Commercial 1.353 Siding 243.501 Bradley Siding (Existing) 7 9.884 Permanent 50.270 Agriculture 5 0.058 Residential 0.212 Temporary 29.614 Agriculture 2 8.290 Residential 1.203 Public Facilities 0.121 King City Siding 1 6.544 Permanent 1 .372 Commercial 1.372 Temporary 15.172 Agriculture 6.402 Commercial 1.813 Industrial 2.686 Residential 4.271 New Chalone Creek Siding 3 7.861 Permanent 14.903 Agriculture 1 3.193 Industrial 1.710 Temporary 22.958 Agriculture 1 9.352 Industrial 3.606 San Lucas Siding 3 4.092 Permanent 22.878 Agriculture 1 6.480 Industrial 6.398 Temporary 11.214 Agriculture 8.574 Industrial 2.640 Spence Siding 9.037 Temporary 9 .037 Agriculture 7.429 Industrial 1.608 Templeton Siding  4 9.787 Permanent 23.523 Agriculture 1 5.217 Commercial 4.282 Industrial 0.312 Residential 2.096 Public Facilities 1.616 Temporary 26.264 Agriculture 1 3.138 Commercial 5.639 Industrial 0.533 Residential 4.138 Public Facilities 2.816 Wellsona Siding 1 6.297 Permanent 1 .967 Agriculture 0.003 Industrial 0.710 Residential 1.254 Temporary 14.330 Agriculture 8.242 Industrial 1.069 Residential 5.019 Station 5.000 King City Station 3.178 Permanent 3 .178 Commercial 3.113 Residential 0.065 Soledad Station 1.822 Permanent 1 .822 Commercial 1.822 Grand Total 2,099.012 Notes: 1. In terms of evaluating compatibility, there has to be at least 1 acre of land to consider the impact. 2. Except for San Luis Obispo City, tranportation corridors (i.e. roads, highways, etc.) are not included in Land Use data and thus reflect the reduction of impacts reported. Land Ownership Sum of Acreage 2nd Main Line  71.618 2nd Main Line 71.618 Permanent 2 5.765 Private 25.765 Temporary 4 5.853 Private 45.853 Ex. Alignment 1,368.599 EA-1 94.827 Track/Signal Upgrades 9 4.827 Private 94.827 EA-2 274.327 Track/Signal Upgrades 274.327 Private 274.214 Soledad, City of 0.113 EA-3 83.098 Track/Signal Upgrades 8 3.098 Private 83.098 EA-4 55.742 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 5.742 Private 55.742 EA-5 265.127 Track/Signal Upgrades 265.127 Private 265.127 EA-6 110.696 Track/Signal Upgrades 110.696 California Department of Fish and Game 0.860 Private 10.751 United States Department of Defense 99.085 EA-7 55.036 Track/Signal Upgrades 5 5.036 California Department of Fish and Game 0.206 Private 45.769 United States Department of Defense 9.061 EA-8 100.517 Track/Signal Upgrades 100.517 Private 100.517 EA-9 143.423 Track/Signal Upgrades 143.423 Atascadero, City of 0.142 Private 142.172 San Luis Obispo, County of 1.109 EA-10 185.805 Track/Signal Upgrades 185.805 California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation 0.487 California State University 0.664 Private 184.637 San Luis Obispo, City of 0.018 Realignment  937.344 Coburn 137.321 Permanent 2 7.464 Private 27.464 Temporary 109.856 Private 109.856 Getty/Bradley 91.150 Permanent 1 8.230 Private 18.230 Temporary 7 2.920 Private 72.920 Harlem/Metz 207.797 Permanent 4 1.559 Private 41.559 Temporary 166.237 Private 166.237 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.723 Permanent 2 6.545 Private 26.525 United States Bureau of Land Management 0.020 Temporary 106.178 Private 106.178 United States Bureau of Land Management 0.000 McKay/Wellsona 124.704 Permanent 2 4.941 California Department of Fish and Game 10.247 Private 13.405 United States Department of Defense 1.289 Temporary 9 9.763 California Department of Fish and Game 36.389 Private 48.547 United States Department of Defense 14.826 Realign Tracks at MP 165 64.112 Permanent 1 2.822 Private 12.822 Temporary 5 1.289 Private 51.289 Realign Tracks at MP 172 125.185 Permanent 2 5.037 Private 25.037 Temporary 100.148 Private 100.148 Templeton/Henry 28.378 Permanent 5.676 Private 5.676 Temporary 2 2.702 Private 22.702 Wellsona/Paso Robles  25.975 Permanent 5.195 Private 5.195 Temporary 2 0.780 Private 20.780 Siding 389.614 Bradley Siding 83.343 Permanent 5 0.270 Private 50.270 Temporary 3 3.073 Private 33.073 King City Siding 53.590 Permanent 2 4.930 Private 24.930 Temporary 2 8.660 Private 28.660 New Chalone Creek Siding 37.861 Permanent 1 4.903 Private 14.903 Temporary 2 2.958 Private 22.958 San Lucas Siding 45.857 Permanent 2 2.878 Private 22.878 Temporary 2 2.979 Private 22.979 Spence Siding 42.324 Permanent 1 9.342 Private 19.342 Temporary 2 2.983 Private 22.983 Templeton Siding 80.897 Permanent 4 6.771 Private 46.286 Templeton Community Services District 0.485 Temporary 3 4.126 Private 32.959 Templeton Community Services District 1.166 Wellsona Siding 45.742 Permanent 2 2.800 Private 22.800 Temporary 2 2.943 Private 22.943 Station 5.317 King City Station 3.403 Permanent 3.403 Private 3.403 Soledad Station  1.914 Permanent 1.914 Private 1.914 Grand Total 2,772.491 Proposed Upgrades Acres 2nd Mainline 2nd Mainline  71.618 Permanent 2 5.765 Temporary 4 5.853 Ex. Alignment (Track/Signal Upgrades) EA-1 9 4.827 Improvements 9 4.827 EA-2 274.715 Improvements 274.715 EA-3 8 3.098 Improvements 8 3.098 EA-4 5 5.742 Improvements 5 5.742 EA-5 265.127 Improvements 265.127 EA-6 110.696 Improvements 110.696 EA-7 5 5.036 Improvements 5 5.036 EA-8 100.517 Improvements 100.517 EA-9 143.423 Improvements 143.423 EA-10 185.805 Improvements 185.805 Realignment Coburn 137.321 Permanent 2 7.464 Temporary 109.856 Getty/Bradley 91.150 Permanent 1 8.230 Temporary 7 2.920 Harlem/Metz 207.797 Permanent 4 1.559 Temporary 166.237 Henry/Santa Margarita 132.723 Permanent 2 6.545 Temporary 106.178 McKay/Wellsona 124.704 Permanent 2 4.941 Temporary 9 9.763 Realign Tracks at MP 165 64.112 Permanent 1 2.822 Temporary 5 1.289 Realign Tracks at MP 172  125.185 Permanent 2 5.037 Temporary 100.148 Templeton/Henry 28.378 Permanent 5.676 Temporary 2 2.702 Wellsona/Paso Robles 25.975 Permanent 5.195 Temporary 2 0.780 Sidings Bradley Siding 83.343 Permanent 5 0.270 Temporary 3 3.073 King City Siding 54.439 Permanent 2 5.074 Temporary 2 9.366 New Chalone Creek 37.861 Permanent 1 4.903 Temporary 2 2.958 San Lucas Siding 45.857 Permanent 2 2.878 Temporary 2 2.979 Spence Siding 42.324 Permanent 1 9.342 Temporary 2 2.982 Templeton Siding 80.896 Permanent 4 6.771 Temporary 3 4.125 Wellsona Siding 45.742 Permanent 2 2.800 Temporary 2 2.943 Grand Total 2,768.411     Appendix D-9 Noise and Vibration Data  Start Point End Point 2020 2040 Name MP Name MP Mainline Operations Siding Increase Mainline Operations Siding Increase No Horns Horns No Horns Horns No Horns Horns No Horns Horns Salinas 114.9 Salinas 116.9 50 100 100 200 200 200 300 0 Firestone 116.9 Soledad 144.9 400 500 100 100 500 600 0 0 Harlem 144.9 Harlem 155.5 400 500 100 0 500 700 0 0 Detector 155.5 Detector 160.3 50 50 0 100 50 100 300 100 King City 160.3 King City 163.7 50 50 0 200 100 100 300 100 Welby 163.7 San Ardo 185.7 400 500 100 100 500 600 0 0 Wunpost 185.7 McKay 207.6 400 500 100 100 500 600 0 0 Wellsona 207.6 Wellsona 210.7 400 600 100 0 500 700 0 0 Detector 210.7 Paso Robles 218.4 400 500 100 100 500 600 0 0 Templeton 218.4 Atascadero 226.9 400 600 100 0 500 700 0 0 Detector 226.9 Detector 229.6 50 50 0 100 50 50 300 100 Santa Margarita 229.6 Santa Margarita 233.1 100 100 100 200 200 300 300 0 South Santa Margarita 233.1 South Santa Margarita 234 200 300 100 100 400 500 100 0 Cuesta 234 Cuesta 238.8 300 500 100 100 500 700 0 0 Serrano 238.8 Chorro 244.8 400 600 100 0 600 900 0 0 Detector 244.8 Detector 248.4 300 500 100 100 500 700 0 0 N. San Luis Obispo 248.4 N. San Luis Obispo 248.5 400 500 100 0 500 800 0 0 Start Point End Point Vibration Name MP Name MP Screening Distances (ft) Salinas 114.9 Salinas 116.9 80 Firestone 116.9 Soledad 144.9 130 Harlem 144.9 Harlem 155.5 100 Detector 155.5 Detector 160.3 100 King City 160.3 King City 163.7 100 Welby 163.7 San Ardo 185.7 130 Wunpost 185.7 McKay 207.6 120 Wellsona 207.6 Wellsona 210.7 120 Detector 210.7 Paso Robles 218.4 120 Templeton 218.4 Atascadero 226.9 120 Detector 226.9 Detector 229.6 120 Santa Margarita 229.6 Santa Margarita 233.1 80 South Santa Margarita 233.1 South Santa Margarita 234 60 Cuesta 234 Cuesta 238.8 50 Serrano 238.8 Chorro 244.8 40 Detector 244.8 Detector 248.4 50 N. San Luis Obispo 248.4 N. San Luis Obispo 248.5 40 Noise levels at 50 feet No Horns With Horns Mainline With Siding Mainline With Siding Start Point End Point Existing 2020 2040 2020 2040 Existing 2020 2040 2020 2040 Name MP Name MP Noise Future Future Future Future Noise Future Future Future Future Level Noise Noise Noise Noise Level Noise Noise Noise Noise Salinas 114.9 Salinas 116.9 69 70 71 70 73 71 73 74 73 76 Firestone 116.9 Soledad 144.9 71 73 73 73 75 72 75 76 75 77 Harlem 144.9 Harlem 155.5 67 71 71 71 74 70 73 75 73 76 Detector 155.5 Detector 160.3 71 71 71 71 74 72 73 75 73 76 King City 160.3 King City 163.7 70 71 71 71 74 72 73 75 73 76 Welby 163.7 San Ardo 185.7 71 73 73 73 75 72 75 76 75 77 Wunpost 185.7 McKay 207.6 69 71 72 72 74 71 74 75 74 76 Wellsona 207.6 Wellsona 210.7 68 71 72 72 74 70 74 75 74 76 Detector 210.7 Paso Robles 218.4 69 71 72 72 74 71 74 75 74 76 Templeton 218.4 Atascadero 226.9 68 71 72 72 74 70 74 75 74 76 Detector 226.9 Detector 229.6 71 71 72 72 74 72 73 75 74 76 Santa Margarita 229.6 Santa Margarita 233.1 69 70 70 70 73 71 73 74 73 76 South Santa Margarita 233.1 South Santa Margarita 234 67 69 70 70 73 70 72 74 73 76 Cuesta 234 Cuesta 238.8 67 70 71 70 73 70 73 74 73 76 Serrano 238.8 Chorro 244.8 67 70 71 71 74 70 73 75 73 76 Detector 244.8 Detector 248.4 67 70 71 70 73 70 73 74 73 76 N. San Luis Obispo 248.4 N. San Luis Obispo 248.5 67 70 71 70 73 70 73 74 73 76 Noise levels at 100 feet No Horns With Horns Mainline With Siding Mainline With Siding Start Point End Point Existing 2020 2040 2020 2040 Existing 2020 2040 2020 2040 Name MP Name MP Noise Future Future Future Future Noise Future Future Future Future Level Noise Noise Noise Noise Level Noise Noise Noise Noise Salinas 114.9 Salinas 116.9 66 67 68 67 70 68 70 71 70 73 Firestone 116.9 Soledad 144.9 68 70 70 70 72 69 72 73 72 74 Harlem 144.9 Harlem 155.5 64 68 68 68 71 67 70 72 70 73 Detector 155.5 Detector 160.3 68 68 68 68 71 69 70 72 70 73 King City 160.3 King City 163.7 67 68 68 68 71 69 70 72 70 73 Welby 163.7 San Ardo 185.7 68 70 70 70 72 69 72 73 72 74 Wunpost 185.7 McKay 207.6 66 68 69 69 71 68 71 72 71 73 Wellsona 207.6 Wellsona 210.7 65 68 69 69 71 67 71 72 71 73 Detector 210.7 Paso Robles 218.4 66 68 69 69 71 68 71 72 71 73 Templeton 218.4 Atascadero 226.9 65 68 69 69 71 67 71 72 71 73 Detector 226.9 Detector 229.6 68 68 69 69 71 69 70 72 71 73 Santa Margarita 229.6 Santa Margarita 233.1 66 67 67 67 70 68 70 71 70 73 South Santa Margarita 233.1 South Santa Margarita 234 64 66 67 67 70 67 69 71 70 73 Cuesta 234 Cuesta 238.8 64 67 68 67 70 67 70 71 70 73 Serrano 238.8 Chorro 244.8 64 67 68 68 71 67 70 72 70 73 Detector 244.8 Detector 248.4 64 67 68 67 70 67 70 71 70 73 N. San Luis Obispo 248.4 N. San Luis Obispo 248.5 64 67 68 67 70 67 70 71 70 73     Appendix D-10 Public Services & Utilities Data  Row Labels Sum of Length Siding  18,005.43 Second Mainline 6,836.98 Permanent Southern California Gas Co 3,374.04 Temporary Southern California Gas Co 3,462.94 Spence Siding 10,002.34 Permanent Pacific Gas & Electric Co 10,002.34 Templeton Siding 1,166.11 Temporary Southern California Gas Co 1,166.11 Grand Total 18,005.43 Row Labels Sum of LENGTH Siding  5,711.04 King City Siding 4,616.09 Permanent 372.16 Basic Energy 1 to Tap 69 kV 61.03 Basic Vegetable to Basic Energy 1 69 kV 241.33 Coburn to Basic Vegetable 69 kV 69.79 Temporary 4,243.93 Basic Energy 1 to Tap 69 kV 1,193.20 Basic Vegetable to Basic Energy 1 69 kV 234.06 Coburn to Basic Vegetable 69 kV 2,816.66 San Lucas Siding 242.15 Permanent 132.78 Coburn to San Ardo 69 kV 132.78 Temporary 109.37 Coburn to San Ardo 69 kV 109.37 Second Mainline 306.29 Permanent 91.49 Midway to Morro Bay 230 kV 91.49 Temporary 214.80 Midway to Morro Bay 230 kV 214.80 Templeton Siding 546.51 Permanent 309.09 Paso Robles to Atascardero 69 kV 309.09 Temporary 237.42 Paso Robles to Atascardero 69 kV 237.42 Grand Total 5,711.04 Study Area Number of Pipe Line Crossings in Upgrade Area Number of Transmission Line Crossings in Upgrade Area Sidings Bradley Siding 0 0 Spence Siding 0 1 Templeton Siding 1 1 Wellsona Siding 0 0 San Lucas Siding 1 0 New Chalone Creek Siding 0 0 King City Siding 3 0 Realignments Coburn 0 0 Getty/Bradley 0 0 Harlem/Metz 0 0 Henry/Santa Margarita 0 0 McKay/Wellsona 0 0 Realign Tracks at MP 165 0 0 Realign Tracks at MP 172 0 0 Templeton/Henry 0 0 Wellsona/Paso Robles 0 0 Second Mainline Second Mainline 1 1 Grand Total 6 3     Appendix D-11 Section 4F & 6F Data  4(f) Properties by Upgrade (Does not include Historic) Sum of Acreage 2nd Main Line 2nd Main Line  37.03 Noise/Vibration Buffer 3 7.03 Los Padres National Forest 37.03 Ex. Alignment EA-1 0.34 Noise/Vibration Buffer 0.34 Batann Park 0.34 EA-10 53.70 Improvements 0.02 Stenner Spring Open Space 0.00 City Park (Untitled) 0.02 Noise/Vibration Buffer 5 3.68 Elsford Park 0.23 Los Padres National Forest 25.55 Santa Rosa Park 0.56 Stenner Spring Open Space 27.30 City Park (Untitled) 0.04 EA-10b 3.93 Improvements 3.93 Edna/Islay Open Space 0.44 Future Railroad Area Bike Path 0.10 Railroad Area Bike Path 0.18 Railroad Bike Path Phase II 2.91 unnamed bike path 0.30 EA-2 11.18 Improvements 0.11 Vosti Park 0.11 Noise/Vibration Buffer 1 1.07 Bill Ramos Park 0.17 Ceaser Chavez Park 0.13 Gonzales Cemetery 4.45 Vosti Park 6.33 EA-6 26.21 Improvements 2.28 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 2.28 Noise/Vibration Buffer 2 3.93 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 23.93 EA-7 93.18 Improvements 0.30 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 0.30 Noise/Vibration Buffer 9 2.89 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 89.66 Rios Caledonia Adobe 3.23 EA-8  7.60 Noise/Vibration Buffer 7.60 Lawrence Moore Park 1.52 Paso Robles City Park 1.80 Pioneer Park 2.23 Robbins Field 2.05 EA-9 70.56 Improvements 1.25 Heilmann Park / Chalk Mountain Golf Course 1.11 Paloma Creek Park 0.14 Noise/Vibration Buffer 6 9.31 BLM 0.01 Heilmann Park / Chalk Mountain Golf Course 58.47 Paloma Creek Park 9.20 Santa Margarita Community Park 1.62 Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita 0.02 Permanent 0.02 BLM 0.02 Temporary 0.00 BLM 0.00 McKay/Wellsona 1 38.89 Noise/Vibration Buffer 9 1.64 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 91.64 Permanent 1 0.47 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 10.47 Temporary 3 6.78 Big Sandy Wildlife Area 36.78 Siding Templeton Siding 15.81 Noise/Vibration Buffer 1 3.91 Evers Park 11.88 Templeton Skate Park 2.03 Permanent 0.48 Evers Park 0.48 Temporary 1.41 Evers Park 1.17 Templeton Skate Park 0.24 Station Soledad Rail Station 1.36 Permanent 1.36 Ceaser Chavez Park 1.36 Grand Total 459.81 Section 4(f) Properties by Upgrade Area (Historic Properties Not Included) Sum of Acreage Notes: 2nd Main Line 2nd Main Line Noise/Vibration Buffer Los Padres National Forest 37.033 Does not appear to have developed recreation facilities, recommend further analysis during project phase. Ex. Alignment EA-1 Noise/Vibration Buffer Batann Park 0.339 Park is not listed on the City of Salina's website, but does appear on General Plan map as parkland. City of Salinas. 2002. General Plan Land Use & Circulation Policy Map. Available at: http://www.ci.salinas.ca.us/services/commdev/generalplan/GP_Land_Use_Circulation_Policy_Map.pdf. Accessed 7/30/13. EA-10 Improvements City Park (Untitled) 0.018 This small park is included in the California Protected Areas Database in the City of San Luis Obispo. The General Plan Land Use GIS data indicates this is designated small residential. Recommend further analysis during project phase. Stenner Spring Open Space 0.000 See note below.* Noise/Vibration Buffer City Park (Untitled) 0.042 This small park is included in the California Protected Areas Database data as parklands owned by the City of San Luis Obispo. The General Plan Land Use GIS data indicates this is designated small residential. Recommend further analysis during project phase. Elsford Park 0.234 Los Padres National Forest 25.550 Does not appear to have developed recreation facilities, recommend further analysis during project phase. Santa Rosa Park 0.556 Stenner Spring Open Space 27.299 *The open space system is a multiple-use public land holding where the primary function is not that of a park, recreation facility, or wildlife or waterfowl refuge. However, there are multiple trails in this open space that may be considered Section 4(f) resources and further analysis during project phase is recommended. See the City of San Luis Obispo Stenner Springs Open Space webpage and map available at:http://www.slocity.org/parksandrecreation/stenner_springs.asp. Accessed: July 31, 2013. EA-2 Improvements Vosti Park 0.113 Noise/Vibration Buffer Gonzales Cemetery 4.449 The cemetery is included in the California Protected Areas Database but is not designated as parklands on the City of Gonzales 2010 General Plan Land Use Diagram. Recommend further analysis during project phase. Accessed: 7/30/13. Source: City of Gonzales 2010. 2010 General Plan Land Use Diagram. available at: http://www.ci.gonzales.ca.us/Documents/Planning/General%20Plan/Land_Use_Map_Compiled_Display_ Size.pdf Bill Ramos Park 0.166 Ceaser Chavez Park 0.127 Vosti Park 6.327 EA-6 Improvements Big Sandy Wildlife Area 2.279 Noise/Vibration Buffer Big Sandy Wildlife Area 23.929 EA-7 Improvements Big Sandy Wildlife Area 0.297 Noise/Vibration Buffer Big Sandy Wildlife Area 89.657 Rios Caledonia Adobe 3.230 EA-8 Noise/Vibration Buffer Lawrence Moore Park 1.519 Paso Robles City Park 1.799 Pioneer Park 2.229 Robbins Field 2.049 EA-9 Improvements Heilmann Park / Chalk Mountain Golf Course 1.109 Paloma Creek Park 0.142 Noise/Vibration Buffer BLM 0.015 Heilmann Park / Chalk Mountain Golf Course 58.472 Paloma Creek Park 9.202 Santa Margarita Community Park 1.623 Realignment Henry/Santa Margarita Permanent BLM 0.020 Does not appear to have developed recreation facilities, recommend further analysis during project phase. Temporary BLM 0.000 Does not appear to have developed recreation facilities, recommend further analysis during project phase. McKay/Wellsona Noise/Vibration Buffer Big Sandy Wildlife Area 91.639 Permanent Big Sandy Wildlife Area 10.471 Temporary Big Sandy Wildlife Area 36.783 Siding Templeton Siding Noise/Vibration Buffer Evers Park 11.881 Templeton Skate Park 2.033 Permanent Evers Park 0.485 Temporary Evers Park 1.166 Templeton Skate Park 0.244 Station Soledad Station Permanent Ceaser Chavez Park 1.357 Grand Total 455.883 P-number Site Type Recordation Date Date Constructed Description Eligible NRHP Project Component P-27-001804 Historic - BE Apr-95, March-03 1940 Bradley Road Bridge over the Salinas River C Temporary/San Lucas Siding Note: Cultural related buildings/properties were determined to be uneffected by project related noise/vibration. Therefore, properties outside of the impact footprints were not evaluated. Note: As described in the cultural resources analysis, an additional 35 properties may require evaluation under the National Register of Historic Places criteria and may potentially qualify for protection under Section 4(f). See the cultural resources analysis for information on these properties. 