Appendix A Alternatives Screening Report Alternatives Screening Report San Luis Transmission Project   Western logoWestern Area Power Administration, Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630   Technical assistance provided by: Aspen Environmental Group 8801 Folsom Boulevard, Suite 290 Sacramento, CA 95826   Blanket Purchase Agreement No.: DE-AB65-10WN87101 Task Order No.: 1118.020m  Updated February 2015 Note: This updated report presents a new alternative for consideration in the EIS/EIR (the Billy Wright Road Alternative Corridor), documents the rationale for removing the Jasper Sears Road Alternative Corridor, and revises the alternative corridor names to be consistent with those that will be presented in the EIS/EIR. 1. Overview of Alternatives Evaluation Process This screening report presents each potential alternative identified during the planning and scoping processes and the rationale for their retention or elimination from further consideration in the EIS/EIR. The range of alternatives considered in the screening analysis includes: • Alternatives identified by Western, Reclamation, and the Authority; • Alternatives identified during the public scoping process; and • Alternatives identified by the EIS/EIR team during review of the Proposed Project impacts and meetings with affected agencies and interested parties. 1.1 Alternatives Screening Methods The evaluation of alternatives uses a three-step screening process: Step 1: Clearly define each alternative so each can be compared with other alternatives. Step 2: Compare each alternative with the Proposed Project, using NEPA and CEQA criteria (defined below). Step 3: Based on the results of Step 2, determine the suitability of each alternative for full analysis in the EIS/EIR. If the alternative is unsuitable, eliminate it from further consideration in the EIS/EIR. 1.2 NEPA and CEQA Requirements for Alternatives After completing the steps defined above, the advantages and disadvantages of the alternatives are carefully analyzed with respect to NEPA and CEQA criteria for consideration of alternatives. Both NEPA and CEQA provide guidance on selecting a reasonable range of alternatives for evaluation in an EIS and EIR, and the requirements are similar. 1.2.1 NEPA According to the Council on Environmental Quality’s (CEQ) NEPA Regulations (40 C.F.R. 1502.14), an EIS must present the environmental impacts of the proposed action and alternatives in comparative form, defining the issues so they may be readily understood by the public and decision makers, and contributing to a basis for an informed and reasoned decision. The alternatives section shall: (a) Rigorously explore and objectively evaluate all reasonable alternatives. For alternatives that were eliminated from detailed study, briefly discuss the reasons they were eliminated. (b) Devote substantial treatment to each alternative considered in detail including the proposed action so that reviewers may evaluate their comparative merits. (c) Include reasonable alternatives not within the jurisdiction of the lead agency. (d) Include the alternative of no action. (e) Identify the agency’s preferred alternative or alternatives, if one or more exists, in the draft statement and identify such alternative in the final statement unless another law prohibits the expression of such a preference. (f) Include appropriate mitigation measures not already included in the proposed action or alternatives. The CEQ has stated that “[r]easonable alternatives include those that are practical or feasible from the technical and economic standpoint and using common sense rather than simply desirable from the standpoint of the applicant” (CEQ, 1983). 1.2.1.1 Consistency with Purpose and Need CEQ NEPA Regulations (40 C.F.R. 1502.13) require a statement “briefly specifying the underlying purpose and need to which the agency is responding in proposing the alternatives including the proposed action.” Alternatives must be consistent with Western’s purpose and need for the SLTP, which was defined as follows: Western’s transmission contract with PG&E, under which power is transmitted between Western’s Tracy Substation and the San Luis Unit, will end in spring 2016. The San Luis Unit is a key component in delivering water for municipal, industrial and irrigation supply. The purpose of the SLTP is to minimize expected power delivery cost increases for operating the San Luis Unit. 1.2.1.2 Feasibility The environmental consequences of the alternatives, including the proposed action, are to be discussed in the EIS/EIR in accordance with CEQ NEPA Regulations (40 C.F.R. 1502.16). The discussion shall include possible conflicts between the proposed action and the objectives of federal, regional, state, and local land use plans, policies and controls for the area concerned. Other feasibility factors to be considered may include cost, logistics, technology, and social, environmental, and legal factors. The feasibility factors are substantially the same as described for CEQA in Section 1.2.2.2, below. 1.2.2 CEQA An important aspect of EIR preparation is the identification and assessment of a range of potentially feasible alternatives that have the potential for avoiding or substantially lessening the impacts of a proposed project. The State CEQA Guidelines require consideration of the No Project Alternative (Section 15126.6(e)) and selection of a range of reasonable alternatives (Section 15126.6(c)). The EIR must adequately assess these alternatives to allow for a comparative analysis for consideration by decision makers (Section 15126.6(d)). The State CEQA Guidelines (Section 15126.6(a)) state that: An EIR shall describe a range of reasonable alternatives to the project, or to the location of the project, which would feasibly attain most of the basic objectives of the project but would avoid or substantially lessen any of the significant effects of the project, and evaluate the comparative merits of the alternatives. An EIR need not consider every conceivable alternative to a project. Rather it must consider a reasonable range of potentially feasible alternatives that will foster informed decision making and public participation. To comply with CEQA’s requirements, each alternative will be evaluated in three ways: • Does the alternative accomplish all or most of the project objectives? • Is the alternative potentially feasible (from economic, environmental, legal, social, technological standpoints)? • Does the alternative avoid or substantially lessen any significant effects of the Proposed Project (including consideration of whether the alternative itself could create significant effects potentially greater than those of the Proposed Project)? Each of these factors is described in more detail in the following sections. 1.2.2.1 Consistency with Project Objectives CEQA requires analysis of a range of reasonable alternatives that might feasibly attain most of the basic objectives of the project while avoiding or substantially lessening environmental impacts. The Authority identified the following objectives for the Proposed Project: . Obtain durable and long-term, cost certain and efficient transmission delivery of Central Valley Project power from federal power generation sites to the major pumping stations of the San Luis Unit to reliably deliver water to the Authority’s member agencies; . Locate and install transmission facilities in a safe, efficient, and cost effective manner that meets Project needs while minimizing environmental impacts; . Locate facilities to minimize the potential of environmental impacts resulting from damage by external sources such as geologic hazards; . Maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and rights-of-way (ROW) in order to minimize effects on previously undisturbed land and resources; and . Obtain stable and reliable transmission that meets Project needs in a cost-effective and timely manner. 1.2.2.2 Feasibility The State CEQA Guidelines (Section 15364) define feasibility as: . . . capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, social, and technological factors. According to the State CEQA Guidelines (Section 15126.6(f)(1)), among the factors that may be taken into account when addressing the potential feasibility of alternatives include site suitability, economic viability, availability of infrastructure, general plan consistency, other plans or other regulatory limitations, jurisdictional boundaries, and proponent’s control over alternative sites in determining the range of alternatives to be evaluated in the EIR. For the screening analysis, the potential feasibility of potential alternatives will be assessed taking the following factors into consideration: . Economic Feasibility. Is the alternative so costly that implementation would be prohibitive? . Environmental Feasibility. Would implementation of the alternative cause substantially greater environmental damage than the Proposed Project, thereby making the alternative clearly inferior from an environmental standpoint? . Legal Feasibility. Does the alternative have the potential to avoid lands that have legal protection that may prohibit or substantially limit the feasibility of permitting a high voltage transmission line? . Regulatory Feasibility. Is the alternative consistent with regulatory standards for transmission system design, operation, and maintenance? . Social Feasibility. Would the alternative cause significant benefit or damage to the socioeconomic structure of the community or be consistent or inconsistent with important community values and needs? . Technical Feasibility. Is the alternative feasible from a technological perspective, considering available technology? Are there any construction, operation, or maintenance constraints that cannot be overcome? 1.2.2.3 Potential to Reduce Significant Environmental Effects A key CEQA requirement for identifying and assessing alternatives is that the alternatives must have the potential to “avoid or substantially lessen any of the significant effects of the project” (State CEQA Guidelines Section 16126.6(a)). If an alternative is identified that clearly does not have the potential to provide an overall environmental advantage as compared to the Proposed Project, it is usually eliminated from further consideration. At the screening stage, it is not possible to evaluate all of the impacts of the alternatives in comparison to the Proposed Project with absolute certainty, nor is it possible to quantify impacts. However, it is possible to identify elements of an alternative that are likely to be the sources of impact and to relate them, to the extent possible, to general conditions in the subject area. 2. Alternative Descriptions and Determinations 2.1 Alternatives Retained for Analysis in the EIS/EIR 2.1.1 Corridor Alternatives Patterson Pass Road Alternative Alternative Description Western developed this alternative to reduce visual impacts to motorists along Interstate 5. As shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3 this alternative corridor would extend from about Patterson Pass in the north to near Horseshoe Road in the south. It would run parallel to the Proposed Project, but on the western side of the existing high-voltage transmission lines, farther from Interstate 5 for about 50 miles. At this point, it would cross the existing high-voltage line and run along the east side, heading southwest for about 1.3 miles to where it would join the West of Cemetery Alternative near Horseshoe Road. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives, particularly as they relate to use of existing transmission line corridors. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Visual Resources. This alternative would be located farther from Interstate 5 and therefore may be less visible to motorists in comparison to the Proposed Project.  Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and Project Objectives and is potentially feasible. It would potentially reduce visual impacts along Interstate 5. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. Butts Road Alternative Alternative Description At Butts Road, this alternative corridor would continue south on the west side of the existing transmission corridor for approximately 2.2 miles. At about McCabe Road, this alternative would turn southwest for about 4.0 miles where it would rejoin the Proposed Project corridor. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as most of the Project Objectives. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative could avoid potential land use conflicts that may occur under the Proposed Project as it would avoid the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area east of the O’Neill Forebay. Biological Resources. By avoiding the wildlife area on the east side of the O’Neill Forebay, this alternative could reduce potential impacts to habitat in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives and is potentially feasible. It could reduce potential land use conflicts and biological impacts as compared to the Proposed Project by avoiding the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. West of Cemetery Alternative Alternative Description Western developed this alternative corridor in response to comments requesting the avoidance of a proposed solar development north of the O’Neill Forebay. It was also developed to avoid the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area, which is located on the east side of the O’Neill Forebay. As shown in Figure 3, at Butts Road, this alternative would head west and then south from the existing transmission corridor and then extend around the west side of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery (Cemetery) for approximately 2.6 miles. At this point, it would begin to follow an existing PG&E 500-kV corridor for about 1.4 miles until it turns southwest, crossing State Route (SR) 152. This alternative would then head east paralleling SR 152 to the south for 2.8 miles where it would interconnect with either the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as most of the Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and ROW. For about 2.6 miles, as it extends along the west side of the Cemetery and for about one mile before it terminates at the San Luis Substation, the corridor would not be adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use This alternative would avoid potential land use conflicts that could occur under the Proposed Project as it would avoid approved solar development north of the O’Neill Forebay and the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area east of the O’Neill Forebay. Biological Resources. By avoiding the wildlife area on the east side of the O’Neill Forebay, this alternative would reduce potential impacts to habitat in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives, and is potentially feasible. It could address certain concerns and recommendations expressed in scoping comments and reduce the potential for land use conflicts associated with an approved solar development north of the O’Neill Forebay and the Wildlife Area east of the O’Neill Forebay. By avoiding the Wildlife Area, it could also reduce biological impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Alternative Description Western developed this alternative corridor to avoid the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area, which is located on the east side of the O’Neill Forebay. As shown in Figure 3, this alternative corridor would extend from the San Luis Substation, cross Highway 152, and run northeast for about one mile. At this point, it would begin to follow an existing PG&E transmission corridor for about 2.6 miles around the west side of the O’Neill Forebay to a point just north of McCabe Road. At that point, it would turn east and then turn to the southeast, around the northeast side of the Forebay, following another PG&E high-voltage transmission corridor, to a point where it terminates at the O’Neill Substation. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as most of the Project Objectives. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative could avoid potential land use conflicts that may occur under the Proposed Project as it would avoid the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area east of the O’Neill Forebay. Biological Resources. By avoiding the wildlife area on the east side of the O’Neill Forebay, this alternative could reduce potential impacts to habitat in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives and is potentially feasible. It could reduce potential land use conflicts and biological impacts as compared to the Proposed Project by avoiding the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. Los Banos to Dos Amigos Alternative Alternative Description Western developed this alternative to reduce visual impacts to motorists along Interstate 5. As shown in Figure 3, this alternative would start at San Luis Substation and would parallel SR 152 heading east for approximately 2.8 miles, to a point near the Los Banos Substation. At this point, this alternative corridor would extend approximately 6 miles south from the Los Banos Substation along the western side of the existing high-voltage transmission lines. Just north of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, this line would cross the existing high voltage transmission lines to join the Proposed Project corridor. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives, particularly as they relate to use of existing transmission line corridors. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Visual Resources. This alternative would be located farther from Interstate 5 and therefore may be less visible to motorists in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and Project Objectives and is potentially feasible. It would potentially reduce visual impacts along Interstate 5. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. Billy Wright Road Alternative Alternative Description The Billy Wright Road Alternative Corridor would connect the San Luis Substation to the Dos Amigos Substation. The northern portion of the new corridor runs adjacent to and east of the existing PG&E 500-kV transmission lines for approximately 9 miles, and west to east for approximately 4.5 miles to join the Proposed Project. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives, particularly as they relate to use of existing transmission line corridors. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative would avoid conflict with the proposed Wright Solar Park. Therefore, it could reduce potential land use conflicts. Conflicts with the Villages of Laguna San Luis Community Plan would be similar to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages Ground Disturbance. This alternative would be longer than the Proposed Project and therefore could result in increased ground disturbance. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most of the Project Objectives, and is potentially feasible. It could result in more ground disturbance than the Proposed Project, but it could reduce the potential for land use conflicts in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. 2.1.2 Voltage Alternatives 230-kV Transmission Line Alternative Description Western developed this alternative to provide the option of constructing a lower voltage transmission line in comparison to the 500-kV portion of the Proposed Project. Under this alternative, a 230-kV line would be constructed between the Tracy and San Luis substations within either the Proposed Project or the Alternative Corridors. The 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos substations, as well as the 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill substations, are the same as the Proposed Project. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Ground Disturbance and Visual Resources. This alternative would require towers that would be shorter and have a smaller disturbance area than those of the Proposed Project. Therefore, it could reduce ground disturbance and visual impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project. In addition, less substation expansion and modification at the Tracy and Los Banos substations would be needed in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and Project Objectives, and is potentially feasible. It would potentially reduce ground disturbance and visual impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. 500-kV Transmission Line Operated at 230-kV Alternative Description Western developed this alternative to provide operating flexibility. Under this alternative, a 500-kV line would be constructed between the Tracy and Los Banos substations within either the Proposed or Alternative corridors. However, it would be operated at 230-kV. The 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos substations, as well as the 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill substations, are the same as the Proposed Project. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need as well as the Project Objectives. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Noise and EMF. This alternative could reduce corona noise and EMF in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental disadvantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Retained for Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and Project Objectives, and is potentially feasible. It could potentially reduce corona noise and EMF in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, this alternative is retained for analysis in the EIS/EIR. 2.2 Alternatives Eliminated from Analysis in the EIS/EIR Mountain House Road 500-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative to minimize the length of the Project and reduce impacts to houses in the Mountain House Developments. As shown in Figure 1, this alternative corridor would exit the Tracy Substation and extend due south for about 0.9 mile along Mountain House Road, then turn southeast for approximately 0.8 mile through agricultural fields before intersecting the Proposed Project at the existing transmission corridor. This corridor would be about 0.2 mile shorter than the Proposed Project. Several landowners expressed opposition to this alternative corridor in scoping comments based on concerns related to noise, property devaluation, electric and magnetic fields (EMF), visual resources, agricultural operations, proximity to the Mountain House Elementary School, and others. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors ROW. All of this corridor would be located within agricultural fields and not adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility A portion of this alternative would be located on the eastern side of Mountain House Road, less than 100 feet from the existing Mountain House Elementary School, which is located on the western side of Mountain House Road. The distance between the alternative corridor ROW and the Mountain House Elementary School may be incompatible with the California Department of Education guidelines for school siting1. Due to possible EMF concerns, these guidelines state that there must be 350 feet from the edge of an easement for a 500-550 kV line to any part of a school property line. The Project would require up to a 250-foot-wide ROW easement for a 500-kV transmission line within the 500-foot alternative corridor. As such, this alternative may be infeasible. 1 http://www.cde.ca.gov/ls/fa/sf/schoolsiteguide.asp#highvoltage Environmental Considerations Advantages Air Quality, Noise, and Soil Erosion. This alternative would be 0.2 mile shorter than the Proposed Project, which would result in slightly shorter and less-intense construction impacts related to air quality, noise, and soil erosion. Disadvantages Agricultural Resources. This alternative would bisect agricultural fields where there are no existing transmission lines. This would result in more interference with agricultural operations in comparison to the Proposed Project, which would run along property boundaries and an existing transmission line. Noise, and Health and Safety. This alternative would run along Mountain House Road, across the street from rural houses and the Mountain House Elementary School. Closer to residential receptors and school visitors; potentially increased construction traffic and noise, and increased EMF concerns in comparison to the Proposed Project. Visual Resources. Given its location adjacent to Mountain House Road, this alternative would be more visible to residents and school visitors than the Proposed Project, which would be about 0.5 mile east of the road and adjacent to an existing transmission line. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives. In comparison to the Proposed Project; however, it would result in greater agricultural and visual impacts and construction disturbance to nearby residents. Also, it may be regulatorily infeasible. Therefore, this alternative will not be fully analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Grant Line Road 500-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative corridor to minimize canal crossings. As shown in Figure 1, it would deviate from the Proposed Project and the existing transmission line corridor to remain along the east side of the Delta-Mendota Canal for about 0.7 mile. This short alternative segment would be about the same length as the Proposed Project, but would be about 0.25 mile closer to a new residential community along Grant Line Road in unincorporated Tracy. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and ROW. For about 0.7 mile near Grant Line Road, the corridor would be located within agricultural fields and not adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative would avoid two crossings of the Delta-Mendota Canal, thereby reducing any potential for conflicts with canal operation and maintenance activities. Disadvantages Visual Resources. This alternative would be located about 0.20 miles from an existing residential community in unincorporated Tracy. It would be more visible to residents than the Proposed Project, which would be about 0.25 mile farther west and adjacent to an existing transmission line. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives, and is potentially feasible. In comparison to the Proposed Project, it would require fewer canal crossings and therefore result in less potential for conflicts with canal operations; however, it would be nearer to houses outside of any existing transmission corridor and therefore result in greater visual impacts. Due to its potential for greater environmental impacts, this alternative will not be fully analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 500-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative in response to comments requesting an alternative that uses the corridor between the Delta-Mendota Canal and Interstate 580, to avoid houses west of the Proposed Project near Patterson Pass Road. The California Aqueduct runs down the center of this corridor and therefore, more specifically, the route will be located between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580. This alternative also avoids impacts to the Tracy Hills conservation easements located west of Interstate 580. As shown in Figure 1, this corridor would deviate from the Proposed Project just south of the California Aqueduct and would continue south for about 7.3 miles between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 until it turns southwest, across Interstate 580, to rejoin the Proposed Project. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and ROW. The full extent of this alternative would be located within agricultural fields or open space and not adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility This alternative is not technically feasible due to engineering constraints between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580, just south of the intersection of Interstate 580 and Mountain House Road. In some areas, the spacing between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 is only 21 to 100 feet wide, which would not allow sufficient space for construction, operation, and maintenance of a transmission line. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative would avoid existing conservation easements west of Interstate 580. Therefore, it would eliminate the potential for land use conflicts that could result from an incompatibility of the Proposed Project with existing wildlife or land management plans. Biological Resources. By avoiding the conservation easements west of Interstate 580, this alternative would reduce potential impacts to habitat in comparison to the Proposed Project.   Disadvantages Visual Resources. This alternative would increase visual impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project as it would introduce new transmission infrastructure to an area previously without transmission lines. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives. It would address public comments regarding the proximity of the Proposed Project to houses near Patterson Pass Road. It would reduce land use and biological resources impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project. However, this alternative would be outside of any existing transmission corridor, thereby resulting in greater potential visual impacts than the Proposed Project. It would be technically infeasible as certain locations between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 are too narrow to allow for construction, operation, and maintenance of a transmission line. This alternative is infeasible due to engineering constraints and therefore will not be fully analyzed in the EIS/EIR. East of Delta-Mendota Canal 500-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative corridor to address public comments about the proximity of the Proposed Project to houses near Patterson Pass Road. It would provide another option to the Delta- Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 Alternative. As shown in Figure 1, it would deviate from the Proposed Project 0.1 mile south of Interstate 205 and continue southeast on the east side of the Delta-Mendota Canal for about 3 miles. It would then cross the California Aqueduct and extend southeast, traversing agricultural fields, between the Delta-Mendota Canal and the California Aqueduct for about 1.3 miles before crossing the California Aqueduct to join the Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 Alternative. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative would meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and ROW. All of this alternative would be located within agricultural fields or open space and not adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility This alternative is not technically feasible due to engineering constraints. About 0.75 mile southeast of where the alternative corridor deviates from the Proposed Project, the alternative would pass between the Delta-Mendota Canal and existing cell towers. The spacing between the Delta-Mendota Canal and the existing cell towers is about 150 feet wide, which would not allow sufficient space for construction, operation, and maintenance of a transmission line. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative would avoid conservation easements along the Interstate 580 corridor. Therefore, it would avoid the potential for land use conflicts that could result from incompatibility of the Proposed Project with existing wildlife or land management plans.  Biological Resources. By avoiding the conservation easements along Interstate 580, this alternative would reduce potential impacts to habitat in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages Visual Resources. This alternative may increase visual impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project as it would introduce new transmission infrastructure to an area without transmission lines. Agricultural Resources. This alternative would cross agricultural areas where there are no existing transmission lines. This would potentially result in more interference with agricultural operations in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives. It would address public comments about the proximity of the Proposed Project to houses in the vicinity of Patterson Pass Road. It would potentially reduce land use and biological resources impacts, but potentially increase visual and agricultural impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project. This alternative is infeasible due to engineering constraints; therefore it will not be fully analyzed in the EIS/EIR. West of Cemetery 2 500-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative corridor to avoid approved solar development and to reduce visual impacts to visitors of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. It would provide another option to the West of Cemetery Alternative that is farther from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. As shown in Figure 3, this alternative would extend south from the West of Cemetery Alternative at about 1.4 miles northeast of the Cemetery. This corridor would follow a valley, behind a ridge line, until it turns east to rejoin the West of Cemetery Alternative about 1 mile southeast of the Cemetery. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and ROWs. All of this corridor would be located within the foothills and not adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility This alternative is potentially technically infeasible due to the ruggedness and steepness of the terrain. The nature of the terrain would result in access challenges for crews and equipment during construction, operation, and maintenance.   Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative would avoid potential land use conflicts by avoiding approved solar development north of the O’Neill Forebay. Visual Resources. This alternative would be located behind a ridgeline and farther from the Cemetery in comparison to the Proposed Project and would therefore reduce potential visual impacts to Cemetery visitors.  Disadvantages Water Quality and Soil Erosion. This alternative would require new access roads on steep terrain potentially resulting in increased soil erosion and water quality impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives. It would reduce potential land use conflicts and visual impacts. However, due to the ruggedness of the terrain this alternative would potentially cause soil erosion and water quality impacts, and may be technically infeasible. Therefore, it will not be fully analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Forebay 500-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative corridor to shorten the length of the Project and maximize use of existing transmission corridors. This alternative would provide another option to the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative. As shown in Figure 3, this alternative would deviate from the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative where that alternative turns southwest towards the San Luis Substation. This alternative would continue southeast following two existing PG&E 500-kV transmission lines across the southeastern portion of the O’Neill Forebay to the Los Banos Substation. A 0.7-mile segment of this alternative would cross the O’Neill Forebay in the existing transmission corridor. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives, particularly as they relate to use of existing transmission line corridors. All of this corridor would follow an existing transmission corridor. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages This alternative would potentially have no environmental advantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages Recreation. This alternative would cross the O’Neill Forebay in a popular recreational area and may temporarily interfere with recreational activities in this portion of the Forebay. Water Quality and Soil Erosion. Expansion of the islands would result in potential water quality and soil erosion impacts in the Forebay. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and Project Objectives. It would maximize the use of existing transmission line corridors and ROW. However, construction in the Forebay would result in potential water quality, soil erosion, and recreation impacts. This alternative would have no environmental advantages in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, this alternative will not be fully analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Jasper Sears Road 230-kV Corridor Alternative Description Western developed this alternative in response to scoping comments about potential land use conflicts of the Proposed Project with proposed solar development (Wright Solar Park), and current and proposed residential development (The Villages of Laguna San Luis), south of the Los Banos Substation. Scoping comments suggested an alternative alignment along Jasper Sears Road to minimize conflicts to The Villages of Laguna San Luis. This alternative corridor would exit the Los Banos Substation from the south and follow Jasper Sears Road and Western’s existing 500-kV transmission line for about 9 miles before turning due east for about 5.3 miles to join the Proposed Project. Consideration of NEPA/CEQA Criteria Purpose and Need, Project Objectives This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most Project Objectives; however, it would not maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and ROW. For about 5.3 miles from where the corridor turns east to where it joins the Proposed Project, the corridor would not be adjacent to existing transmission ROW. Feasibility This alternative is potentially feasible. Environmental Considerations Advantages Land Use. This alternative would avoid conflict with proposed solar development (Wright Solar Park), and minimize conflict with current and proposed residential development (The Villages of Laguna San Luis) south of the Los Banos Substation in comparison to the Proposed Project. Disadvantages Land Use. This alternative would conflict with the future Agua Fria development, southeast of the Los Banos Substation. Ground Disturbance. This alternative would be longer than the Proposed Project and therefore would result in increased ground disturbance. Determination Eliminated from Analysis. This alternative could meet the Purpose and Need and most of the Project Objectives, and is potentially feasible. Similar to the Billy Wright Road Alternative, this alternative would avoid proposed solar development; however, it would conflict with the planned Agua Fria development. It would result in more ground disturbance than the Proposed Project. Therefore, this alternative will not be analyzed in the EIS/EIR.   Figure 1 of the Alternatives Screening Report cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Tracy East Delta-Mendota Canal Tracy Alameda County Land Ownership CDFW California Dept. of Parks and Recreation 205 580 C a l i fo r n i a A q u e d u c t Tracy San Joaquin County Tracy Existing Substation Proposed New Substation Alternative Corridors Retained Patterson Pass Road Alternative Alternatives Screening Report 0 1 2Miles Proposed Project City Boundary County Boundary Existing Transmission Lines 69 kV 115 kV 230 kV 500 kV Alternative Corridors Eliminated Mountain House Road 500-kV Grant Line Road 500-kV East Of Delta-Mendota Canal 500-kV Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 500-kV Figure 1 Figure 2 of the Alternatives Screening Report cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Butts Rd Santa Clara County Tracy Modesto Empire West Modesto San Joaquin County Ceres West Modesto Bystrom Riverdale Park Shackelford Bret Harte Grayson Westley Keyes Alameda County Patterson St l anislaus County D e l t a -M e n d o ta C a n a Newman Land Ownership USFWS CDFW California Dept. of Parks and Recreat BLM ion Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct Gustine Merced County Santa Clara County Proposed Project Alt tive Corridors Ret ined Alternatives Screening Report 0 3 6Miles City Boundary County Boundary Existing Transmission Li 69 kV 115 kV 230 kV 500 kV nes Patterson Pass Road Alternati erna a ve Figure 2 Figure 3 of the Alternatives Screening Report cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area O'Neill Forebay San Lui Reservosir San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery O'Neill Forebay Wildlife Area Horseshoe Rd 152 33 McCabe Rd Butts Rd Jasper Sears Rd Los Banos West San Luis Los Banos Merced County Land Ownership USFWS CDFW California Dept. of Parks and Recreation Los Banos Reservoir 5 33 165 D e l t a -M e n d o ta C a n a l Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct Dos Amigos Los Banos Existing Substation Proposed New Substation Alternatives Screening Report Alternative Corridors Retained Patterson Pass Road Alternative Butts Road Alternative 0 1.5 3Miles Proposed Project City Boundary County Boundary Existing Transmission Lines 69 kV 115 kV 230 kV 500 kV Figure 3 Billy Wright Road Alternative Los Banos to Dos Amigos Alternative West of Cemetery Alternative West of O'Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Forebay 500-kV West Of Cemetery 2 500-kV Alternative Corridors Eliminated Jasper Sears Road Appendix B Scoping Report San Luis Transmission Project Scoping Report  SLTP logoWestern logoAspen logoPrepared for:  Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630  Prepared by:  Aspen Environmental Group 8801 Folsom Boulevard, Suite 290 Sacramento, California 95826  Blanket Purchase Agreement No.: DE-AB65-10WN87101 Task Order No.: 1118.020m March 4, 2014  Contents 1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1 1.1 Purpose of Scoping ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1 1.2 Summary of Proposed Project ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2 1.3 Scoping Report Organization ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3 2. Project Scoping ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 3 2.1 Notice of Intent ........................................................................................................................................................................................................ 3 2.2 Notice of Preparation .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3 2.3 Scoping Meetings .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 4 2.4 Agency Consultation ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 5 2.5 Scoping Comment Submittal ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5 2.6 Outreach ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................ 5 3. Summary of Public and Agency Comments ............................................................................................................... 5 4. Next Steps in EIS/EIR Process ....................................................................................................................................................... 11 Tables Table 1. Public Scoping Meetings .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4 Table 2. Newspaper Advertisement ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4 Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary .................................................................................................................................................................... 6 Table 4. EIS/EIR Events/Documents...................................................................................................................................................................... 11 Appendices Appendix A Notice of Intent Appendix B Notice of Preparation Appendix C Newspaper Advertisements Appendix D Postcard Notice Appendix E Comment Card    1. Introduction This scoping report summarizes the public scoping effort conducted for the proposed San Luis Transmission Project (Project or SLTP). In compliance with the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the Western Area Power Administration (Western), an agency of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), and the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a California joint powers agency, intend to prepare a joint Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the SLTP. Western is the Federal lead agency under NEPA and the Authority is the CEQA lead agency. The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is a cooperating agency under NEPA. The EIS/EIR will evaluate the potential environmental impacts associated with the proposed Project and will identify mitigation measures to reduce these impacts, where possible. To assist in the development of the scope of the EIS/EIR, Western and the Authority held a 60-day public scoping period to allow the public and regulatory agencies an opportunity to comment on the scope of the EIS/EIR and to identify issues that should be addressed in the document. This report documents the scoping process and summarizes the comments received from the public, community organizations, and governmental agencies during the public scoping period. Comments received during the scoping process are part of the public record as documented in this scoping report. The comments received during the public scoping process have been reviewed and considered by Western and the Authority in determining the appropriate scope of issues to be addressed in the SLTP EIS/EIR. 1.1 Purpose of Scoping The process of determining the focus and content of the EIS/EIR is known as scoping. Scoping helps to identify significant issues as well as the range of actions, alternatives, environmental effects, and mitigation measures to be analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Scoping also eliminates from detailed study those issues that are not pertinent to the final decision on the proposed Project. The scoping process was not intended to resolve differences of opinion regarding the proposed Project or evaluate its merits. Instead, the process allows all interested parties to express their views regarding problems, issues, and opportunities associated with the proposed Project. This ensures that all opinions and comments related to the environmental review process for the proposed Project are considered in the environmental analysis. Members of the public, Federal, state, regional and local agencies, and other interested parties participated in the scoping process by providing comments or recommendations regarding issues to be investigated in the EIS/EIR. The purpose of the scoping process for the SLTP EIS/EIR was to: . Inform the public and relevant public agencies about the proposed Project, NEPA and CEQA requirements, and the environmental review process; . Identify potentially significant issues for consideration in the EIS/EIR; . Identify possible mitigation measures for consideration in the EIS/EIR; . Identify alternatives to the proposed Project for evaluation in the EIS/EIR; and . Compile a mailing list of agencies, organizations, and individuals interested in future Project meetings and notices. 1.2 Summary of Proposed Project Western has a statutory responsibility to deliver Federal power to federally authorized projects including the San Luis Unit (SLU), a part of the Central Valley Project (CVP). Reclamation submitted a transmission request to Western to interconnect several key SLU facilities to Western's CVP transmission system. Reclamation requested that Western consider various transmission service arrangements so Reclamation can continue to economically deliver Federal water when the current transmission service contract with Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) expires. Western must respond to Reclamation's transmission request consistent with Western's Open Access Transmission Tariff and existing laws. The Authority, a Reclamation contractor that operates and maintains part of the SLU, has a direct interest in this requested transmission service between Western's Tracy Substation and the O’Neill pumping plant of the SLU. Western proposes at a minimum to construct, own, operate, and maintain a new 230-kV transmission line approximately 62 miles in length between Western’s Tracy Substation and Western’s San Luis Substation and a new 70-kV transmission line approximately 5 miles in length between the San Luis and O’Neill substations. Western also will consider other transmission construction options including: . a new 500-kV transmission line approximately 62 miles in length operated at 230-kV between Western’s Tracy and San Luis substations; . a new 500-kV transmission line operated at 500-kV approximately 62 miles in length between the Tracy Substation and PG&E’s Los Banos Substation; and . a new 230-kV transmission line approximately 18 miles in length between the San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation. Additional components of the proposed Project would include constructing new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western’s Tracy 230-kV Substation or new 500-kV breaker terminal bays at the Tracy 500-kV Substation; new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western’s San Luis 230-kV Substation or new 500-kV breaker terminal bays at PG&E’s Los Banos Substation. Western may also build new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western’s Dos Amigos 230-kV Substation and a new 230/70-kV transformer bank and interconnection facilities at the San Luis Substation. The proposed Project also would include the following facilities and improvements: . Right-of-way easements for the transmission lines with a typical width of approximately 125 to 175 feet for 230-kV line and 200 to 250 feet for the 500-kV line. . Tubular or lattice steel structures will be used to support the transmission lines. For the 230-kV line, structures typically would be between 100 and 200 feet tall depending on site-specific conditions. A few taller structures may be required in some locations to address engineering constraints. . Access roads, including improvements to existing roads, new overland access, and new unpaved temporary roads to access the proposed Project facilities and work areas during construction and operation. . Ancillary facilities, such as communications facilities (e.g. overhead fiber optic ground wires, regeneration facilities) for access control and protection. 1.3 Scoping Report Organization This scoping report includes four main sections and appendices, as described below: . Section 1 provides an introduction to the report, describes the purpose of scoping, and provides a brief overview of the proposed Project. . Section 2 provides information on the scoping meetings and notification materials, including the NEPA Notice of Intent (NOI) and CEQA Notice of Preparation (NOP). . Section 3 summarizes the comments and issues raised during the scoping comment period. . Section 4 provides the next steps in the EIS/EIR environmental review process. . Appendices include copies of the NOI, NOP, newspaper advertisement, postcard notice, and scoping comment card. 2. Project Scoping The 60-day public scoping comment period began on November 22, 2013 when the NOI was published in the Federal Register and the NOP was filed with the California State Clearinghouse (SCH# 2013112059). The 60-day public scoping comment period ended on January 21, 2014. 2.1 Notice of Intent To comply with NEPA (40 C.F.R section 1501.7), Western published a NOI to prepare a joint EIS/EIR for the proposed Project in the Federal Register on November 22, 2013 (see Appendix A). Portions of the proposed Project may affect floodplains and wetlands, so the NOI also serves as a notice of proposed floodplain or wetland action in accordance with DOE floodplain and wetland environmental review requirements. The NOI initiates public scoping for the EIS/EIR, provides information about the proposed Project, and invites other agencies and the public to provide comments on the scope and content of the EIS/EIR. 2.2 Notice of Preparation On November 22, 2013, the Authority issued a NOP, consistent with CEQA Guidelines section 15082. The NOP summarizes the proposed Project, states its intention to prepare a joint EIS/EIR, and requests comments from interested parties (see Appendix B). The NOP includes information on the date, time, and location of the public scoping meetings. In addition, the NOP includes a summary of potential Project impacts, instructions for obtaining additional Project information, and information on how to provide comments. 149 notices were distributed to Federal, state, and local responsible agencies, elected officials, and other key stakeholders, as follows: . 75 local agencies . 8 state agencies . 6 Federal agencies . 21 organizations . 39 elected officials 2.3 Scoping Meetings Western, Reclamation, and the Authority held two public scoping meetings on January 8 and 9, 2014 (see Table 1). The scoping meetings provided an opportunity for the public and agencies to obtain more information on the proposed Project, learn more about the NEPA and CEQA environmental review processes, and provide scoping comments. Table 1. Public Scoping Meetings Date and Time Location No. of People Signed in Wednesday January 8, 2014 5:00 pm to 8:00 pm Tracy Tracy Transit Center, 50 East Sixth Street, Tracy, CA 95376 26 Thursday January 9, 2014 5:00 pm to 8:00 pm Santa Nella Hotel Mission De Oro 13070 South Highway 33 Santa Nella, CA 95322 15 Notification Postcards To provide additional notification of the proposed Project and encourage participation in the scoping process, Western and the Authority conducted two separate postcard mailings. The postcards announced the start of the public scoping period and provided information on the date, time, and location of each public scoping meeting (see Appendix D). The postcards also provided an overview map of the Project area, a brief summary of the proposed Project, how to provide scoping comments, and how to obtain additional information on the proposed Project. The postcard was mailed on November 22, 2013 to all landowners within and adjacent to the proposed Project area as well as any agencies and organizations that did not receive a copy of the NOP. The same postcard was mailed again on January 3, 2014 to all 361 contacts on the Project mailing list including Federal, state, and local agencies, organizations, and individuals. Newspaper Advertisements An advertisement announcing the proposed Project and the scoping comment period was published in 5 newspapers (see Table 2). The advertisement provided information on the date, time, and location of each public scoping meeting, an overview map of the Project area, and a brief summary of the proposed Project. It also provided information on how to provide scoping comments, and how to obtain information on the proposed Project (see Appendix D).  Table 2. Newspaper Advertisements Publication Type Advertisement Dates Circulation Los Banos Enterprise Legal December 20, 2013 Los Banos, Dos Palos, Santa Nella The Modesto Bee Legal December 20, 2013 Stanislaus County Patterson Irrigator Legal December 19, 2013 City of Patterson The Record Legal December 13, 2013 San Joaquin County Table 2. Newspaper Advertisements Publication Type Advertisement Dates Circulation Tracy Press Legal December 13, 2013 City of Tracy 2.4 Agency Consultation The NOP was sent to potentially affected agencies and the State Clearinghouse to provide notice of and information about the proposed Project. Consultation meetings with agencies will be an on-going process throughout EIS/EIR preparation. 2.5 Scoping Comment Submittal Western and the Authority provided several comment methods to encourage public participation. Comments could be submitted by mail, electronic mail (email), fax, and by providing a written comment at the scoping meeting. Comment cards with Western’s address were made available at the scoping meetings (see Appendix E). The following information for comment submittal was included in the NOI, NOP, newspaper advertisement, and postcard: Mail: Mr. Don Lash, NEPA Document Manager Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630 Electronic Mail (email): SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov Fax: (916) 353-4772 2.6 Outreach Western provided additional opportunities for the public to obtain information outside of the scoping meetings. The Project website was updated with Project information during the public comment period. Information on this outreach effort is described below. Internet Website Information about the proposed Project is available on Western’s website (http://www.wapa.gov/sn/environment/SanLuisTransmissionProject.asp) and the Project website (www.sltpeis-eir.com). The websites provide electronic versions of Project documents including the NOP, NOI, and Project-related maps. The website will remain a public information resource for the proposed Project and will announce public meetings and document availability. 3. Summary of Public and Agency Comments All comments received during the public scoping comment period were reviewed for this report and will be considered in preparation of the EIS/EIR (see summary in Table 3). A total of 21 unique commenters (8 individuals, 4 organizations, and 9 agencies) submitted 21 comment documents (letters, emails, faxes, and comment cards). Within these comment documents, a total of 81 individual scoping comments were submitted.  Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary Date From Summary of Comments Government Agencies December 30, 2013 San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District David Warner Director of Permit Services . Provides a list of current Federal and state air quality designations for the San Joaquin Air Pollution District. . Suggests Project-related criteria pollutant emissions be identified and quantified. . Suggests that construction emissions should be quantified and compared to significance thresholds. . Suggests that stationary and mobile sources should be analyzed separately for operation. . Recommends mitigation for emissions during construction and operation. . Suggests the proposed Project be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it would produce nuisance odors. Notes that nuisance odors are subjective, therefore, the District has not established thresholds of significance. . Suggests health impacts be evaluated to determine if emissions of toxic air contaminates (TACs) will pose significant health risk to sensitive receptors. Provides additional sources of information regarding TACs. . Provides a list of additional recommendations of air-quality related discussions to include in the EIS/EIR. States that this list is neither exhaustive nor exclusive and provides a phone contact and website for further information. . Provides a list of District rules and regulations that the proposed Project may be subject to. . Specifically states that the proposed Project will be subject to District Rule 9510 because it is expected to exceed the applicability threshold. Provides guidelines on District Rule 9510 and a website link regarding compliance with the Rule. . Recommends that a copy of the District’s comments be provided to the Project proponent. January 13, 2014 Stanislaus County, Jami Aggers, Director of Environmental Resources and Parks and Recreation . States that the proposed Project crosses property owned and leased out by the County and requests the avoidance or minimization impacts to the lease holders. . Requests the County be compensated if new easements are required. . Requests contact in advance to discuss these comments, access, and possible impacts. . Suggests new power lines be installed parallel to existing lines to minimize impacts. . Notes that cooperation with the County regarding compensation for easements or property access for the proposed Project may need County Board authorization. January 15, 2014 Environmental Protection Agency, Ann McPherson Environmental Review Office . Provides a detailed discussion and recommendations on the following subject matters for the EIS/EIR: – Statement of Purpose and Need – Alternatives Analysis – Water Resources – Biological Resources, Habitat, and Wildlife – Invasive Species – Air Quality – Climate Change – Hazardous Materials/Hazardous Waste/Solid Waste – Cumulative and Indirect Impacts – Coordination with Tribal Governments Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary Date From Summary of Comments – Environmental Justice and Impacted Communities – Coordination with Land Use Planning Activities – Public Health and Safety (specifically “Valley Fever”) January 15, 2014 Central Valley Region Water Quality Control Board, Trevor Cleak, Environmental Scientist . Provides the following list of permits that may be required by the Project proponent: – Construction Storm Water General Permit – Phase I and II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Permits – Industrial Storm Water General Permit – Clean Water Act Section 404 Permit – Clean Water Act Section 401 Permit-Water Quality Certification – Waste Discharge Requirements – Low or Limited Threat General NPDES Permit . Provides a summary and web link and a contact number available for further information for each permit listed above. January 16, 2014 San Joaquin County Department of Public Works, Amy Spitzer, Assistant Planner . Requests a San Joaquin County Watercourse Encroachment Permit be obtained for work done on Corral Hollow Creek and within 25 feet of the top of its bank. . Requests the Central Valley Flood Protection Board Encroachment Permit be obtained for work done on Lone Tree Creek and within 30 feet of the top of its bank. January 17, 2014 Alameda County, Bruce Jensen, Senior Planner . Expresses belief that Alameda County is an affected agency and therefore the proposed Project is subject to the policies of the East County Area Plan. Provides a web link to the Plan. Indicates that the proposed Project is consistent with the Plan and requests that the EIS/EIR clearly describe this consistency. . Provides the Plan’s goals as well as recommendations on preparing the EIR consistent with the Plan for each of the following issues: – Open space – Agriculture – Watersheds – Water quality – Sensitive viewsheds – Biological resources – Cultural resources – Noise – Air quality January 21, 2014 Stanislaus County Tera Chumley, Senior Management Consultant . Indicates that the County has begun the CEQA process for the proposed Crows Landing Airport expansion which would be located in proximity to the proposed Project and provides the following comments: – Expresses concern that the proposed steel structures and conductors of the proposed Project may negatively impact the development and use of the proposed Crows Landing Airport. Provides an attachment of the Draft Airport Layout Plan. – Requests full consideration of the Crows Landing Airport with respect to its location and anticipated aeronautical operations. . Requests the proposed Project follow the requirements of Section 21.08.020(C) of the Stanislaus County Zoning Ordinance General Provisions. . Suggests the EIS/EIR identify and evaluate the addition of new access roads to the transmission right-of-ways. . Suggests visual impacts be included in the EIS/EIR. Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary Date From Summary of Comments January 22, 2014 Merced County, James Holland, Planner III . States that the proposed Project scope and alternatives were identified effectively in the materials that were provided at the scoping meetings. . Suggests the purpose of the proposed Project is not clearly identified in the scoping materials and recommends that considerable emphasis be given to demonstrate the need for the Project. . Requests that the No Action alternative be fully considered. . Recommends that if an alternative requires acquisition of additional ROW, the proposed location and amount of land be clearly identified. . Requests full evaluation of potential growth-inducing impacts. January 24, 2014 California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Jeffrey Single, Regional Manager . Indicates the proposed Project crosses several pristine habitat types which support special-status species. Provides a list of these habitat types and the special-status species that may be impacted. . Recommends focused biological surveys be conducted at the appropriate times of the year and by qualified biologists. . Recommends that results from the surveys be used to define speciesspecific avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures that should be included in the EIS/EIR. . Indicates potential impacts to and specific mitigation recommendations for nesting birds, riparian habitat and wetlands, Fully Protected raptors, Swainson’s hawk, California tiger salamander, blunt-nosed leopard lizard, San Joaquin kit fox, and burrowing owl. Organizations January 10, 2014 Connelly Ranch, Mark V. Connelly, Attorney, Connolly Law Building . Offers mitigation opportunities at the Connelly Ranch and provides a website with detailed information about the Ranch. . Provides information regarding several past projects in which the Ranch provided mitigation habitat. . Provides an attachment with a map showing the location of a mitigation easement granted to the San Joaquin Council of Governments. . Describes the location, size, and setting of the Ranch. . Provides information on habitat available at the Ranch as well as the species it supports. January 16, 2014 Frontier Renewables (Represented by GTB Consulting) Greg Blue, Principal, GTB Consulting Balduin Hesse, President and CEO, Frontier Renewables . Expresses support of the proposed 62 mile 230-kV transmission line between Tracy and San Luis substations and 5 mile 70-kV transmission line between San Luis and O’Neill substation. . Expresses opposition to a portion of the proposed Project, the 18 mile 230-kV transmission line between San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation, because it will intersect Frontier’s Wright Solar Park. . Suggests the 18 mile section would be detrimental to the Wright Solar Park project and may cause a delay in the Wright Solar Park project schedule. . Provides a map of the Park. . Indicates that Frontier is undergoing the permitting process and CEQA review for the Park with a Draft EIR expected to be released on April 1, 2014. Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary Date From Summary of Comments January 21, 2014 Sun Power Corporation (Represented by Allen Matkins LLC) Barry Epstein, Attorney, Allen Matkins LLC . Indicates the proposed Project including both the Preferred Corridor and the Alternate Corridor will interfere with and intersect SunPower Corporation’s approved Quinto Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Project. . Requests Western and the Authority identify different alignments of the proposed Project before proceeding with the environmental review. . Provides information on the location, background and phases of the Quinto Solar PV Project. . Indicates a Purchase Power Agreement is in place for the solar project and construction is anticipated to begin in the next few months. January 21, 2014 AKT Developments (Represented by Thomas Law Group) Christopher Butcher, Attorney, Thomas Law Group . Suggests the NOI and NOP provide an inadequate description of the proposed Project. Provides details on the inadequacies of the Project Description. . Requests Western and the Authority issue a clarified NOI and NOP. . Suggests the proposed Project will result in significant impacts to residential areas, biological resources, and renewable energy production and provides a description of these impacts. . Requests the EIS/EIR consider alternatives to avoid significant impacts. . Provides specific recommendations on alternatives to be considered including a Jasper Sears Road Alternative Alignment, utilizing existing corridors and providing space between existing transmission corridors and the proposed corridors. . Notes that the scoping comments provided in the letter were limited due to the inadequacy of the Project Description and map provided in the NOI and NOP. January 21, 2014 Pacific Gas and Electric, David T. Kraska, Director and Council . Identifies the two following potential conflicts with PG&E approved or existing facilities: – Construction of a 230-kV switch station and the reconductoring of its 230-kV Los Banos-Westley transmission line to support interconnection of SunPower Corporation’s Quinto Solar Photovoltaic Project. – Two existing gas transmission pipelines located along Highway 5 corridor between Los Banos and Dos Amigos . . Requests that alternative corridors are fully considered in the EIS/EIR. Individuals January 10, 2014 Geraldine Jensen . Describes the current condition on the commenter’s property and adjacent parcels west of the proposed Project as three parallel high voltage transmission lines and a Shell Oil pipeline. . States that each infrastructure project described above has existing access roads and requests the use of existing access roads for the proposed Project when possible to minimize costs and environmental damage. January 13, 2014 Eugene Sparks . Suggests the proposed Project would negatively affect personal property values. . Proposes the proposed Project be moved to a corridor along the canal and highway and suggests this will be more cost effective and less impactful to personal property. January 14, 2014 James S. Obanion . Suggests increasing the size of the existing towers rather than purchasing new right-of-ways. Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary Date From Summary of Comments January 19, 2014 Antemio A. Preciado . Expresses opposition to the project. . Requests compensation for their affected property. . Indicates there are power lines already crossing their property. . Indicates they were unable to attend the Santa Nella scoping meeting due to other commitment. January 21, 2014 Donn Campion . Requests the public scoping meetings be re-initiated and the public be provided a reasonable timeframe to submit comments. . Expresses discontent with scoping efforts and how the scoping meetings were conducted. . Suggests the information provided to the public was inadequate. January 21, 2014 Gordon L. and Marianne Griffith . Expresses concern about the proposed Project. . Proposes the proposed Project follow the land between Highway 580 and the canal as an alternative to traversing private property. . Indicates they are unable to distinguish a difference between the proposed Project and the alternative routes. . Expresses concern about the amount of electricity emitted by surrounding towers and lines. . Indicates that they were previously forced to move out of their home due to electromagnetic fields. . Indicates that the Project is not proposed to cross their property. . Expresses concern regarding the health and safety of the Mountain House Elementary School community. January 21, 2014 Dolores and Gary Kuhn . Expresses concern about encroachment, cumulative EMF effects, and cumulative effects on agriculture from existing infrastructure on their property (two canals, three pipelines, one proposed highway, five transmission lines) in combination with the proposed Project. . Suggests transmission lines have visual and environmental effects on agricultural practices and that crop farming methods have to be altered to accommodate the lines. . Suggests an increased fire hazard in areas with flammable brush and grass. . Expresses concern that EMF surrounding power lines may contribute to an increased risk of cancer. Provides two web links to articles regarding health risks associated with EMF. . Suggests noise levels will increase as a result of the proposed Project. . Indicates previously experiencing noise from power lines associated with wet weather conditions. . Suggests a decrease of property value attributable to the presence of transmission lines. . Suggests Western purchase their property. . Suggests that their personal contribution to the public has been fulfilled by paying taxes. . Notes that they do not receive power from any of the existing power facilities adjacent to their property. . Suggests that limits have been established for locating any part of a school site property line near the edge of easements near highvoltage transmission lines. Provides a link to the California Department of Education website. . Requests research be conducted on the public safety of transmission lines associated with the effects of earthquakes. January 21, 2014 Douglas J. and Geraldine P. Mathews . Expresses concern regarding kit foxes, condors, tule elk, EMF, and visual impacts. . Prefers an alternative route farther from their property. . Suggests the proposed Project will affect property resale value. Table 3. Scoping Comment Summary Date From Summary of Comments January 21, 2014 Robert J. and Anne D. Watson . States a strong preference for the “preferred corridor”. . Describes an existing impact from transmission lines to two parcels on the west side of the canal and suggests the use of the “preferred corridor” will minimize impacts to them. . States an intention to sell one of their parcels and suggests the “alternative corridor” will significantly decrease its value. January 28, 2014 Phyllis H. Castello . Requests compensation for landowners for a fee title purchase or an easement for access roadways, temporary loss of production, and temporary or permanent relocation of an irrigation system as a result of the proposed Project. . Recommends using fence lines or property boundaries and avoiding bisecting fields when selecting preferred routes.  4. Next Steps in EIS/EIR Process While scoping is the initial step in the environmental review process, additional opportunities to comment on the EIS/EIR will be provided. The public will have an opportunity to comment on the Draft EIS/EIR and Western and the Authority will hold public meetings on the Draft EIS/EIR. Table 4 presents the anticipated schedule for the EIS/EIR, and identifies where in the process the public and agencies can provide additional input into the environmental review process. Table 4. EIS/EIR Events/Documents Event/Document Purpose Approximate Date Draft EIS/EIR Release of Draft EIS/EIR Presents impacts and mitigation for the proposed Project February 2015 Public Review Period 45-day public review period on the Draft EIS/EIR February through March 2015 Draft EIS/EIR Public Hearings Allows for public comment on the draft document March 2015 Final EIS/EIR Release of Final EIR Presents revisions to the Draft EIS/EIR and responses to comments on the Draft EIS/EIR November 2015 Record of Decision Western approves the EIS and issues a Decision on the Project February 2016 Notice of Decision The Authority certifies EIS/EIR and issues a Decision on the Project February 2016    Appendix A Notice of Intent  U.S. Department of Energy logoDepartment of Energy Western Area Power Administration P.O. Box 281213 Lakewood, CO 80228-8213 NOV 072013, MEMORANDUM FOR CLARA BARLEY, GC-71, WASHINGTON, DC /1. FROM: MARK GABRIEL ADMINISTRATOR SUBJECT: Publication ofNotice signaturein the Federal Regis! Please anange for the publication ofthe attached Notice ofintent for the San Luis Transmission Line Project in the Federal Register. If you have any questions, please contact Shellie Scott at (202) 586-5581. Attachment cc: Director, Office ofNEPA Policy and Compliance, GC-54, Washington, DC Assistant General Counsel for Environment, GC-51, Washington, DC Assistant General Counsel for Legislative and Regulatory Law, GC-71, Washington, DC (w/copy of attachment) APPROVED AS TO LEGAL SUFFICIENCY APPROVBF>4fL .~ DISAPPROVED:/ _____________ DATE: _ _:_QJ_,_-J.::...:"-"='-<..--"-b_"--,__(_1--f_,_-+---2-_u/-'':)"'----- 6450-01-P DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY Westem At·ea Power Administration Notice oflntent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement for the San Luis Transmission Project, Alameda, Merced, San Joaquin and Stanislaus Counties, California (DOE/EIS-0496) AGENCY: Western Area Power Administration, DOE. ACTION: Notice of Intent to Prepare an Enviromnental Impact Statement and to Conduct Scoping Meetings; Notice ofFloodplain and Wetlands Involvement. SUMMARY: Western Area Power Administration (Western) is a power marketing administration within the U.S. Department ofEnergy. Western has a statutory responsibility to make the necessary arrangements to deliver federal power to federally authorized projects including the San Luis Unit (SLU), a part ofthe Central Valley Project (CVP). The U.S.Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) submitted a transmission request to Western to interc01mect several key SLU facilities to Western's CVP transmission system. Reclamation requested Western to consider various transmission service arrangements so Reclamation can continue to economically deliver federal water when the current transmission service contract with the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) expires. Western must respond to Reclamation's transmission request consistent with Western's Open Access Transmission Tariff and existing laws. The San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a Reclamation contractor that operates and maintains a part ofthe SLU, has a direct interest in this requested transmission service between Western's Tracy Substation and several key pumping and generating facilities of the SLU. Western determined an environmental impact statement (EIS) is the appropriate level of review under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Western will prepare the EIS in accordance with NEP A, the DOE NEP A Implementing Procedures, and the Council on Environmental Quality regulations for implementing NEP A. Western will be the lead federal agency for the NEP A EIS review process, and Reclamation will be a cooperating agency. Western intends to prepare a joint EIS/environmental impact rep ott (EIR) for the proposed San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP) in coordination with the Authority. The Authority will be the lead agency for the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) EIR review process. Pottions of the proposed action may affect floodplains and wetlands, so this Notice oflntent (NOI) also serves as a notice of proposed floodplain or wetland action in accordance with DOE floodplain and wetland environmental review requirements. DATES: Western invites public comments on the scope ofthe SLTP EIS during a 60day public scoping period beginning with publication ofthis notice and ending on [INSERT DATE 60 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION OR JANUARY 21, 2014, WHICHEVER IS LATER]. See Public Participation in the SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION section for the public scoping meeting dates and locations. ADDRESSES: Written comments on the scope ofthe EIS/EIR and requests to be added to the EIS/EIR distribution list may be submitted by any of the following methods: • Electronic comments via the project Web site at www.sltpeis-eir.com. • Email to: SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov. • U.S. Mail to: Mr. Donald Lash, NEPA Document Manager, Western Area Power Administration, 114 Parkshore Drive, Folsom, CA 95630. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information or to have your name added to our mailing list, contact Mr. Donald Lash, NEP A Document Manager, Western Area Power Administration, 114 Parkshore Drive, Folsom, CA 95630, telephone (916) 353-4048, facsimile (916) 353-4772, email at SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov. · For general information on the DOE NEPA process, contact Ms. Carol M. Borgstrom, Director, Office ofNEPA Policy and Compliance (GC-54), U.S. Depatiment ofEnergy, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC· 20585, telephone (202) 586-4600, voicemail at (800) 472-2756, or email at askNEPA@hq.doe.gov. For information related to Reclamation's participation, contact Mr. Russell Grimes, Chief, Enviromnental Compliance and Conservation, Bureau ofReclamation, MidPacific Region, 2800 Cottage Way, Sacramento, CA 95818, telephone (916) 978-5051, email at rwgrimes@usbr.gov. For information related to the Authority's pat1icipation and the CEQA process, contact Ms. Frances Mizuno, General Manager, San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority, 15990 Kelso Road, Byron, CA 94514, telephone (209) 832-6200. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 1. Background Western is a federal power marketing adminish·ation within the DOE that markets and delivers federal electric power (mostly hydroelectric power) to federal preference customers defined to include municipalities, rural electric cooperatives, public utilities, irrigation districts, federal and state agencies, and Native American tribes in 15 western and central states, including California. Western is responsible for making the necessary atl'angements to deliver federal power to federally authorized projects. Reclamation is the largest wholesaler of water in the country, supplying more than 31 million people, and providing one out of five Westem farmers (140,000) with irrigation water for 10 million acres of farmland. Reclamation is also the second largest producer ofhydroelectric power in the western United States with 53 power plants that provide more than 40 billion kilowatt hours ammally and generate nearly a billion dollars in power revenues. Reclamation's mission is to assist in meeting the increasing water demands of the West while protecting the environment and the public's investment in these sttuctures. Reclamation emphasizes fulfilling its water delivery obligations, water conservation, water recycling, and reuse goals; developing patinerships with customers, states, and Native American tribes; and finding ways to address the competing needs for limited water resources. The Authority is a California joint powers agency, comprised of water agencies representing approximately 28 federal and exchange water service contractors within the western San Joaquin Valley, San Benito and Santa Clara counties. One of the primary purposes of establishing the Authority was to assume the operation and maintenance responsibilities of certain Reclamation CVP facilities, and to do so at an optimum level and at a lower cost than Reclamation. The Authority also has the mission ofpursuing additional reliable water supply for its member districts and delivering the water with a reliable system in a cost efficient manner. In 1960, Congress authorized construction of the SLU as pati of the CVP and also as part of the State of California Water Project. Reclamation owns the SLU and the State of California, Depatiment of Water Resources operates the Gianelli Pump/Generation and the Dos Amigos Pumping Plant pottion of the SLU under contract with Reclamation for use by both agencies. Some features are joint-use facilities ofthe federal and the state govermnents. The principal purpose of the federal portion of the SLU facilities is to fumish approximately 1.25 million acre-feet of water as a supplemental irrigation supply to some 600,000 acres located in the westem potiion of Fresno, Kings, and Merced counties. Reclamation is the federal agency responsible for executing and managing water contracts with state water authority agencies. Since 1965, PG&E has provided transmission service between the Tracy Substation and the SLU over PG&E's transmission lines. The PG&E contract expires on March 31, 2016. PG&E has stated it will not renew the existing contract under the same terms and conditions; however, PG&E has. indicated service is available from the Califomia Independent System Operator (CAISO). Such service is expected to increase Reclamation's costs the first year by at least $8,000,000. In anticipation ofPG&E's termination of the contract, Reclamation submitted a transmission service request to West em. Reclamation requested Western to consider various transmission service anangements so Reclamation can continue to economically deliver federal water when the PG&E contract expires. 2. Purpose and Need for Agency Action Western must respond to Reclamation's request for transmission service consistent with Western's Open Access Transmission Tariff and existing laws. Reclamation must evaluate options to economically pump, store, convey, and deliver federal water through the SLU. The Authority must continue to deliver water with a reliable system in a cost efficient manner. 3. Proposed Action and Altematives Western proposes at a minimum to construct, own, operate, and maintain a new 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission line about 62 miles in length between Western's Tracy Substation and Western's San Luis Substation and a new 70-kV transmission line about 5 miles in length between the San Luis and 0 'Neill Substations. Western also will consider other transmission construction options including: a new 500-kV transmission line about 62 miles in length operated at 230-kV between Western's Tracy and San Luis Substations; a new 500-kV transmission line operated at 500-kV about 62 miles in length between the Tracy Substation and PG&E's Los Banos Substation; and a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between San Luis Substation and Dos Amigos Substation. Western proposes to parallel existing transmission facilities whenever practicable. Additional components ofthe proposed project would include constructing new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western's Tracy 230-kV Substation or new 500-kV breaker terminal bays at the Tracy 500-kV Substation; new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western's San Luis 230-kV Substation or new 500-kV breaker terminal bays at PG&E's Los Banos Substation. Western also may build new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western's Dos Amigos 230-kV Substation and a new 230/70-kV transformer bank and intercmmection facilities at San Luis Substation. The proposed project would include the following facilities and improvements: • Right-of-way easements for the transmission lines with a typical width of about 125 to 175 feet for 230-kV lines and 200 to 250 feet for the 500-kV line. • Tubular or lattice steel structures used to support the transmission lines. For the 230-kV line, structures typically would be between 100 and 200 feet tall depending on site-specific conditions while a few taller structures may be required in some locations to address engineering constraints. The 500-kV structures would be larger. • Access roads, including improvements to existing roads, new overland access, and new unpaved temporary roads to access the proposed project facilities and work areas during construction and operation phases. • Ancillary facilities, such as communications facilities (e.g., overhead fiber optic ground wires, regeneration facilities) for access control and protection. Western will evaluate other potential alternatives, including obtaining transmission service from a local public utility or private agency, such as PG&E or the CAISO. Western will consider a no action alternative. Under the no action/no project alternative, Western will continue to receive transmission service for the SLU under contract with PG&E. Under NEPA, the no action/no project alternative would serve as a baseline against which to measure the environmental effects of the proposed action alternatives. For purposes of impact analysis under NEPA, the environmental baseline consists of the existing physical conditions in the vicinity of the project at the time of issuance of this NO I. Other alternatives may be identified through the EIS scoping process. 4. Notice of Floodplain or Wetlands Involvement Floodplains and wetlands may be in the project area. Since the proposal may involve action in floodplains or wetlands, Western is providing this notice ofproposed floodplain or wetland action. The EIS will include an assessment of impacts to floodplains and wetlands. If needed, Western would prepare a floodplain statement of findings following DOE regulations for compliance with floodplains and wetlands enviromnental review requirements. 5. Preliminary Identification of Environmental Issues Western proposes to analyze potential short-term enviromnental impacts, such as those from construction, and potential long-term enviromnental impacts of operating and maintaining the transmission line. DOE's guidance for the preparation of an EIS recommends the use of a sliding-scale approach when evaluating enviromnental impacts. This approach would focus the analysis and discussion of impacts on significant enviromnental issues in proportion to the level of the potential impacts. Western identified the following preliminary list of impact areas for evaluation in the EIS: • Land Use, Recreation, and Visual Resomces o Water Use and Water Quality • Surface Water Features including Rivers, Floodplains, and Wetlands • Fish, Wildlife, and Vegetation, including Critical Habitat • Socioeconomics • Enviromnental Justice • Historic and Cultural Resources • Geology, Soil, and Mineral Resources • Human Health and Electric and Magnetic Fields • Construction-Related Impacts, including Access, Traffic, and Noise This list is not intended to be all-inclusive or to imply a predetermination of impacts. Western invites interested stakeholders to suggest specific issues, including possible mitigation measures, within these general categories, or other categories not included above, to be considered in the EIS. 6. Public Participation The purpose ofthe scoping process is to identifY alternatives and potential environmental impacts that Western should analyze in the EIS. Western will hold two public scoping meetings at the following dates, locations, and times to provide the public with an opportunity to present comments, ask questions, and discuss the scope of the San Luis Transmission Project EIS/EIR with Western, Reclamation, and the Authority. • Wednesday, January 8, 2014, 5:00 p.m.-8:00p.m. at Tracy Transit Center, 50 East Sixth Street, Tracy, CA 95376. • Thursday, January 9, 2014, 5:00 p.m.-8:00p.m. at Hotel Mission De Oro, 13070 South Highway 33, Santa Nella, CA 95322. Western also will announce the public scoping meetings in local news media and by posting on the project environmental Web site at www.sltpeis-eir.com and on the DOE NEP A Web site at http:/ /energy.gov/nepa!Public-comment-oppot1unities at least 15 days before the meeting. The scoping meetings will be conducted as informal open house meetings to facilitate discussions between project officials and the public, and to allow interested people to attend as their schedules allow. The public will have the oppottunity to view maps and project information and present comments on the scope of the SLTP EIS. Representatives from Western, Reclamation, and the Authority will be available to answer questions and provide additional information to meeting attendees. In addition to providing comments at the public scoping meetings, stakeholders may submit written comments as described in the ADDRESSES section. Western will consider all comments postmarked or recdved during the public scoping period identified in the DATES section. Western will coordinate with appropriate federal, state, and local agencies, and potentially affected Native American tribes during the preparation ofthe EIS/EIR. Agencies with legal jurisdiction or special expetiise are invited to patiicipate as cooperating agencies in preparation of the EIS, as defined in 40 CFR 1501.6. Designated cooperating agencies have responsibilities to support the NEP A process, as specified in 40 CFR 1501.6(b). Western will contact tribes and inform them ofthe planned EIS. Govermnent-to-govermnent consultations will be conducted in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Govermnents (65 FR 67249); the President's memorandum of April29, 1994, Govermnent-toGovermnent Relations with Native American Tribal Govermnents (59 FR 22951); DOEspecific guidance on tribal interactions; and applicable natural and cultural resources laws and regulations. Western expects to publish the draft EIS by the end of2014. The U.S. Enviromnental Protection Agency will publish a Notice ofAvailability ofthe Draft EIS in the Federal Register, which will begin a minimum45-day public comment period. Western will announce how to comment on the Draft EIS and will hold at least one public hearing during the conunent period. People who would like to receive a copy of the Draft EIS should submit a request as provided in the ADDRESSES section. For those requesting to be added to the distribution list, you are encouraged to download the EIS and other documents from the above Web site; however, if you prefer to be mailed a copy, please specify the format of the EIS that you would like to receive (CD or printed) and a preference for either the complete EIS or the Summary only. Western will maintain information about the process including documents, meeting information, and important dates on the project Web site given above. The EIS and other project information will be available for download from the project Web site. Please visit the project Web site for current information. Dated: NOV OJ. 2013_ signatureMark A. Gabriel Administrator  Appendix B Notice of Preparation  Notice of Preparation Of a Joint Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report  Including  Notice of Public Scoping Meetings/Request for Scoping Comments On the Preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report  For the San Luis Transmission Project  November 22, 2013 To: Al Interested Parties A. Introduction The San Luis and Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a California joint powers agency, comprised of water agencies representing approximately 28 federal and exchange water service contractors within the western San Joaquin Valley, San Benito and Santa Clara counties, and Western Area Power Administration (Western), an agency of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), intend to prepare a joint Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and Environmental Impact Report (EIR) referred to as an EIS/EIR for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP). The Authority is the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) lead agency and Western is the federal lead agency under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). The Authority and Western will prepare the Draft and Final EIS/EIR to comply with both CEQA and NEPA. The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is a cooperating agency under NEPA. Western proposes at a minimum to construct, own, operate, and maintain a new 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission line about 62 miles in length between Western’s Tracy Substation and Western’s San Luis Substation and a new 70-kV transmission line about 5 miles in length between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Western also will consider other transmission construction options including a new 500-kV transmission line about 62 miles in length operated at 230-kV between Western’s Tracy and San Luis Substations; a new 500-kV transmission line operated at 500-kV about 62 miles in length between the Tracy Substation and PG&E’s Los Banos Substation; and a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between San Luis Substation and Dos Amigos Substation. Proposed corridor locations would traverse through Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. This Notice of Preparation (NOP) of an EIS/EIR provides: . a brief description of the proposed SLTP; . a summary of potential project impacts; . the times and locations of public scoping meetings; . information on how to provide comments; and . instructions for obtaining additional project information. Concurrent with publication of this NOP, Western published a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare an EIS for the SLTP in the Federal Register. The Authority and Western intend to prepare a joint EIS/EIR and will conduct a public scoping process, during which public comments will be received on the scope of the EIS/EIR, the proposed action, alternatives, and other issues to be addressed in the EIS/EIR. B. Project Description and Location Since 1965, the United States has had a contract with PG&E to transmit power between Western’s Tracy Substation and Reclamation's San Luis Unit facilities near Santa Nella and Los Banos, including but not limited to the Gianelli Pump-Generating Plant, Dos Amigos Pumping Plant and the O’Neill Pump-Generating Plant (SLU). Reclamation requested that Western investigate options for transmission service so Reclamation can continue to economically pump, store, release and convey and deliver federal water resources through the SLU facilities under its existing and future renewal water service contracts when the current contract with PG&E expires in 2016. Western must respond to Reclamation's request consistent with Western's Open Access Transmission Service Tariff and existing laws. Reclamation's water contractors have a direct interest in Western's transmission service arrangements to serve the SLU facilities and are represented by the Authority. One of the primary purposes of the Authority is to operate and maintain certain Reclamation Central Valley Project (CVP) water pumping/conveyance facilities, including the O’Neill Pumping Plant. The Authority and its member agencies are responsible for payment of the cost associated with the delivery of the CVP water including the costs associated with power transmission. The Authority's interest is to ensure reliable and cost effective electrical transmission to allow the continued cost-effective delivery of CVP water supplies to its member agencies. Another primary purpose of the Authority is to represent the common interests of its member agencies by assisting them with ensuring water is available for beneficial use within their service area. Western proposes at a minimum to construct, own, operate, and maintain a new 230-kV transmission line about 62 miles in length between Western’s Tracy Substation and Western’s San Luis Substation and a new 70-kV transmission line about 5 miles in length between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Western also will consider other transmission construction options including: . a new 500-kV transmission line about 62 miles in length operated at 230-kV between Western’s Tracy and San Luis Substations; . a new 500-kV transmission line operated at 500-kV about 62 miles in length between the Tracy Substation and PG&E’s Los Banos Substation; and . a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between San Luis Substation and Dos Amigos Substation. Additional components of the proposed project would include constructing new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western’s Tracy 230-kV Substation or new 500-kV breaker terminal bays at the Tracy 500-kV Substation; new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western’s San Luis 230-kV Substation or new 500-kV breaker terminal bays at PG&E’s Los Banos Substation. Western may also build new 230-kV breaker terminal bays at Western’s Dos amigos 230-kV Substation and a new 230/70-kV transformer bank and interconnection facilities at San Luis Substation. The proposed project also would include the following facilities and improvements: . Right-of-way easements for the transmission lines with a typical width of about 125 to 175 feet for 230-kV lines and 200 to 250 feet for the 500-kV line. . Tubular or lattice steel structures used to support the transmission lines. For the 230-kV line, structures typically would be between 100 and 200 feet tall depending on site-specific conditions. A few taller structures may be required in some locations to address engineering constraints. . Access roads, including improvements to existing roads, new overland access, and new unpaved temporary roads to access the proposed project facilities and work areas during construction and operation phases. . Ancillary facilities, such as communications facilities (e.g. overhead fiber optic ground wires, regeneration facilities) for access control and protection. Proposed and alternative corridors have been identified based on currently available information that avoid, to the extent possible, residential and known environmentally-sensitive areas. Western and the Authority will evaluate other potential alternatives, including obtaining transmission service from a local public utility or private agency or the California Independent System Operator. Western and the Authority will consider a no action/no project alternative. Under the no action/no project alternative, Western will continue to receive transmission service for the SLU under the existing contract with PG&E. Under CEQA, the no action/no project alternative would serve as a baseline against which to measure the environmental effects of the proposed action alternatives. For purposes of impact analysis under CEQA, the environmental baseline consists of the existing physical conditions in the vicinity of the project at the time of issuance of this NOP. C. Potential Environmental Efects The EIS/EIR will discuss the potential environmental effects of the proposed SLTP, and will identify mitigation measures to avoid or substantially reduce any potentially significant adverse effects, to the extent feasible. It also will discuss the potentially significant environmental impacts of the alternatives to the transmission line route and the proposed mitigation to reduce those impacts. Based on preliminary analysis, construction and operation of the proposed SLTP may result in the following environmental effects: . Land use, recreation, and visual resources . Water use and water quality . Surface water features including rivers, floodplains, and wetlands . Fish, wildlife, and vegetation, including critical habitat . Socioeconomics . Environmental justice . Historic and cultural resources . Geology, soil, and mineral resources . Human health and electric and magnetic fields . Construction-related impacts, including access, traffic, and noise . Growth-inducing effects No determinations have been made as to the significance of these potential impacts. Such determinations will be made in the EIS/EIR after the issues are thoroughly analyzed. The Authority and Western invite interested parties to suggest specific issues within these general categories, or other issues not included above, to be considered in the EIS/EIR. The EIS/EIR also will analyze the cumulative impacts of the proposed SLTP in combination with other present and planned projects in the area.  D. Public Scoping Pursuant to both CEQA and NEPA, the main intent of the EIR and EIS scoping process is to initiate the environmental review process for the project and to solicit input from affected governmental agencies and the public on the scope and content of the environmental document (i.e., the joint EIS/EIR). According to State CEQA Guidelines Section 15060(d), the lead agency for a project may forego the detailed initial review of a project and begin work on the preparation of an EIR if the lead agency is able to determine that an EIR would clearly be required for the project. Because of the large-scale nature of the SLTP and its potential impacts on the environment, an Initial Study was not prepared and the Authority, in coordination with Western, will proceed with preparation of an EIS/EIR. A public scoping process will help to identify the range of actions, alternatives, environmental effects, and mitigation measures to be analyzed in depth in the EIS/EIR, and to eliminate from detailed study those issues that are not pertinent to the final decision on the proposed project. Members of the public, affected federal, State, and local agencies, interest groups, and other interested parties may participate in the scoping process by providing written comments or recommendations concerning the issues to be analyzed in the EIS/EIR. E. Public Scoping Metings Open-house public scoping meetings will be held on January 8 and January 9, 2014 (see specific dates, times and locations in the table below). The purpose of the scoping meetings is to provide information about the proposed SLTP, review project maps, answer questions, and take written comments from interested parties. The scoping meetings will not be used to resolve differences concerning the merits of the project or to anticipate the ultimate decision on the proposed project. The dates and locations for the public scoping meetings are provided in the table below. Each meeting is scheduled to begin at 5:00 p.m. with an open-house format during which attendees are invited to speak one-on-one with SLTP representatives and cooperating agency staff. Attendees are welcome to come and go at their convenience throughout the meeting. All meeting locations will be wheelchair accessible. Please call Aspen Environmental Group at (916) 379-0350x17 if you are in need of additional accommodations, including translation services. Public Scoping Meetings Date Location/Address Wednesday, January 8, 2014 5:00 – 8:00 PM Tracy Transit Center 50 East Sixth Street, Tracy, CA 95376 Thursday, January 9, 2014 5:00 – 8:00 PM Hotel Mission De Oro 13070 S. Highway 33, Santa Nella, CA 95322 F. Scoping Coments At this time, the Authority and Western are soliciting comments regarding any issues and alternatives that should be considered in the preparation of the EIS/EIR. Suggestions for submitting scoping comments are presented at the end of this section. Written comments must be postmarked or sent by no later than January 21, 2014. All written comments may be submitted in a variety of ways: (1) by mail, (2) by electronic mail (email), (3) by fax, or (4) by attending a Public Scoping Meeting (see times and locations above) and/or by providing a written comment at the meeting. Instructions for each method of comment submittal are provided below. By Mail: If you send comments by mail, please use first-class mail and be sure to include your name and return address (please write legibly). All written comments on the scope of the SLTP EIS/EIR must be sent to: Mr. Don Lash NEPA Document Manager Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630 By Electronic Mail: E-mail communications are welcome; however, please remember to include your name and return address in the email message. Email messages must be sent to SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov. By Fax: Faxed comments must be sent to (916) 353-4772. Your name and return address must be included in the fax. Suggestions for Effective Participation in Scoping: Following are some suggestions for preparing and providing the most useful information for the SLTP EIS/EIR scoping process. . Review the description of the proposed SLTP. . Review the potential environmental effects. . Attend the scoping meetings. . Submit written comments. . Suggest mitigation measures. . Suggest alternatives. G. Agency Coments We are seeking comments from all CEQA Responsible and Trustee Agencies and all other public agencies with jurisdiction by law with respect to the project as to the scope and content of the environmental information to be included in the EIS/EIR. Agency responses should identify the issues to be considered in the EIS/EIR, including significant environmental issues, alternatives, mitigation measures, and whether the responding agency will be a responsible or trustee agency, and the basis for that determination. Due to the time limits mandated by state and federal laws, your response must be sent at the earliest possible date, but must be postmarked by no later than January 21, 2014. Please send your comments to: Mr. Don Lash NEPA Document Manager Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630 H. Aditional Project Information Internet Website: In addition to notice to be given in the manner required by law, information about the environmental review process will be posted on the Internet at: www.sltpeis-eir.com. This site will be used to post all public documents during the environmental review process and to announce upcoming public meetings. Additional project information will be posted at: http://www.wapa.gov/sn/environment/. This figure, titled, "Project Overview," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. "S "S "S "S "SO'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy Merced County Stanislaus County Santa Clara County San Joaquin County Alameda County San Benito County Fresno County Contra Costa County Calaveras CountyTuolumne County Madera Copyright: ©2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ San Luis Transmission Project Project Overview 0 6 12Miles November 2013 I "S Substations Proposed Corridor Alternative Corridor County Project Area Appendix C Newspaper Advertisements  Western Area Power Administration (Western), a power marketing administration within the U.S. Department of Energy, is proposing to construct and operate a new transmission line between Tracy power substation in Tracy, CA and the San Luis Reservoir power substation in Santa Nella, CA. The San Luis Transmission Project would interconnect several of the key Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) San Luis Unit (SLU) water facilities of the Central Valley Project (CVP) within Western’s CVP transmission system. The proposed project includes: • constructing a new 62-mile long 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission line between the Tracy and San Luis substations • constructing a new 5-mile long 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O'Neill substations • constructing new access roads and improving existing access roads • constructing ancillary facilities, such as overhead fiber optic groundwire and substation improvements Other transmission construction options include: a new 500-kV transmission line about 62 miles in length operated at 230-kV between the Tracy and San Luis substations; a new 500-kV transmission line operated at 500-kV about 62 miles in length between the Tracy and Los Banos substations; and a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between San Luis and Dos Amigos substations. Western determined an environmental impact statement (EIS) is the appropriate level of review under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Western will be the lead federal agency for the NEPA EIS review process, and Reclamation will be a cooperating agency. Western intends to prepare a joint EIS/environmental impact report (EIR) for the proposed SLTP, in coordination with the San Luis & Delta- Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a California joint powers agency that operates and maintains the SLU facilities for Reclamation. The Authority will be the lead agency under the California Environmental Quality Act. Your input is sought to help Western, Reclamation, and the Authority identify potential impacts and alternatives to be analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Come to the open-house public scoping meetings: Wednesday, January 8, 2014, 5 - 8 p.m. Tracy Transit Center 50 East Sixth Street Tracy, CA 95376 Thursday, January 9, 2014, 5 - 8 p.m. Hotel Mission De Oro 13070 South Highway 33 Santa Nella, CA 95322 Public Scoping Meetings for the San Luis Transmission Project For more information visit: www.sltpeis-eir.com or www.wapa.gov/sn/environment For translation services, call 916-379-0350 x17 Send us your comments: Provide you comments at the open house, by email, by fax, or by mail. Send comments by January 21, 2014 to: Western Area Power Administration Donald Lash, NEPA Document Manager 114 Parkshore Drive, Folsom, CA 95630 Email: SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov Fax: 916-353-4772 Wednesday, January 8, 2014, 5 – 8 p.m. and Thursday, January 9, 2014, 5 – 8 p.m.  Appendix D Postcard Notice  Public Scoping Meetings for the San Luis Transmission Project Western Area Power Administration (Western), a power marketing administration within the U.S. Department of Energy, is proposing to construct and operate a new transmission line between Tracy power substation in Tracy, CA and the San Luis Reservoir power substation in Santa Nella, CA. The San Luis Transmission Project would interconnect several of the key Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) San Luis Unit (SLU) water facilities of the Central Valley Project (CVP) within Western’s CVP transmission system. The proposed project includes: • constructing a new 62-mile long 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission line between the Tracy and San Luis substations • constructing a new 5-mile long 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O'Neill substations • constructing new access roads and improving existing access roads • constructing ancillary facilities, such as overhead fiber optic groundwire and substation improvements Other transmission construction options include: a new 500-kV transmission line about 62 miles in length operated at 230-kV between the Tracy and San Luis substations; a new 500-kV transmission line operated at 500-kV about 62 miles in length between the Tracy and Los Banos substations; and a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between San Luis and Dos Amigos substations. Western determined an environmental impact statement (EIS) is the appropriate level of review under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Western will be the lead federal agency for the NEPA EIS review process, and Reclamation will be a cooperating agency. Western intends to prepare a joint EIS/environmental impact report (EIR) for the proposed SLTP, in coordination with the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a California joint powers agency that operates and maintains the SLU facilities for Reclamation. The Authority will be the lead agency under the California Environmental Quality Act. Your input is sought to help Western, Reclamation, and the Authority identify potential impacts and alternatives to be analyzed in the EIS/EIR. Come to the open-house public scoping meetings: Wednesday, January 8, 2014, 5 - 8 p.m. Tracy Transit Center 50 East Sixth Street Tracy, CA 95376 Thursday, January 9, 2014, 5 - 8 p.m. Hotel Mission De Oro 13070 South Highway 33 Santa Nella, CA 95322 Send us your comments: Provide you comments at the open house, by email, by fax, or by mail. Send comments by January 21, 2014 to: Western Area Power Administration Donald Lash, NEPA Document Manager 114 Parkshore Drive, Folsom, CA 95630 Email: SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov Fax: 916-353-4772 For translation services, call 916-379-0350 x17 For more information visit: www.sltpeis-eir.com or Wednesday, January 8, 2014, 5 – 8 p.m. and Thursday, January 9, 2014, 5 – 8 p.m. www.wapa.gov/sn/environment IMPORTANT NOTICE – PUBLIC MEETING FOR TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT Logos for SLTP, U.S. Department of Energy, Western, Bureau of Reclamation, and San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority Appendix E Comment Card    SLTP logoPublic Scoping Meeting Comment Form San Luis Transmission Project Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report   Please use this form to record your comments on the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report (EIR). Comments must be received by January 21, 2014, for consideration in the development of the Draft EIS/EIR. You may submit your comments in one of the following ways: 1) At the Scoping Meeting: Deposit this form in the comment box before leaving this meeting. 2) By Mail: Mail this form to: Mr. Donald Lash NEPA Document Manager Western Area Power Administration, Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630 3) By Electronic Mail: Email your comment to SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov 4) By Fax: Fax your comments, along with your name and address, to 916-353-4772 Please indicate if you would like to withhold your name and address from public review or from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)? [ ] NO [ ] YES Name: Organization/Affiliation: Address: City, State, Zip Code: Comments:             Visit www.SLTPEIS-EIR.com for project information. Bureau of Reclamation logoU.S. Department of Energy logoSan Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority logoWestern logoAppendix C Biological Survey Report Final Biological Survey Report San Luis Transmision Project Western logo Western Area Power Administration, Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630  Technical asistance provided by: Aspen logo Aspen Environmental Group 8801 Folsom Boulevard, Suite 290 Sacramento, CA 95826  May 2015 Contents 1. Introduction .............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1-1 2. Study Methods ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2-1  2.1 Regulatory Requirements ................................................................................................................................................................... 2-1  2.1.1 Federal Endangered Species Act ............................................................................................................................... 2-1  2.1.2 Migratory Bird Treaty Act................................................................................................................................................ 2-1  2.1.3 Federal Clean Water Act .................................................................................................................................................. 2-1  2.1.4 Federal Noxious Weed Act of 1974 ......................................................................................................................... 2-2  2.1.5 California Endangered Species Act .......................................................................................................................... 2-2  2.1.6 California Fully Protected Species ............................................................................................................................ 2-3  2.1.7 Native Plant Protection Act ........................................................................................................................................... 2-3  2.1.8 California Streambed Alteration Notification/Agreement ................................................................... 2-3  2.1.9 California Laws and Codes Governing Noxious Weeds ........................................................................... 2-3  2.2 Biological Studies ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2-4  2.3 Personnel and Survey Dates ............................................................................................................................................................. 2-6  2.4 Agency Coordination and Professional Contacts ............................................................................................................. 2-6  2.5 Limitations that May Influence Results ................................................................................................................................... 2-7 3. Description of Affected Environment ........................................................................................................................................... 3-1  3.1 Existing Physical and Biological Conditions .......................................................................................................................... 3-1  3.1.1 Physical Conditions ............................................................................................................................................................... 3-1  3.1.2 Biological Conditions ........................................................................................................................................................... 3-1  3.2 Regional Species and Habitats of Concern ......................................................................................................................... 3-10  3.2.1 Special-status Plants and Habitats of Concern ........................................................................................... 3-17  3.2.2 Special-status Wildlife and Fishes ......................................................................................................................... 3-23 4. Findings and Recommendations ........................................................................................................................................................ 4-1  4.1 Wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State ........................................................................................................................ 4-3  4.1.1 Project Effects ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4-5  4.1.2 Avoidance and Minimization Measures .............................................................................................................. 4-5  4.1.3 Compensatory Mitigation ............................................................................................................................................... 4-7  4.1.4 Cumulative Effects ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-8  4.2 Special-status Vegetation Communities ................................................................................................................................. 4-8  4.2.1 Coastal and Valley Freshwater Marsh .................................................................................................................. 4-8  4.2.2 Great Valley Cottonwood Riparian Forest ......................................................................................................... 4-8  4.2.3 Northern Claypan Vernal Pool ..................................................................................................................................... 4-9  4.2.4 Sycamore Alluvial Woodland........................................................................................................................................ 4-9  4.2.5 Valley Needlegrass Grassland ...................................................................................................................................... 4-9  4.2.6 Valley Wildrye Grassland ................................................................................................................................................. 4-9  4.2.7 Project Effects ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4-9  4.2.8 Avoidance and Minimization Measures ........................................................................................................... 4-10  4.2.9 Compensatory Mitigation ............................................................................................................................................ 4-10  4.2.10 Cumulative Effects ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-11  4.3 Special-status Plants ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4-11  4.3.1 Large-flowered Fiddleneck .......................................................................................................................................... 4-12  4.3.2 Contra Costa Goldfields ................................................................................................................................................. 4-12  4.3.3 Hoover’s Spurge ................................................................................................................................................................... 4-12  4.3.4 Hartweg’s Golden Sunburst........................................................................................................................................ 4-13  4.3.5 Greene’s Tuctoria ............................................................................................................................................................... 4-13  4.3.6 Delta button-celery ........................................................................................................................................................... 4-13  4.3.7 Mason’s Lilaeopsis ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-13  4.3.8 Alkali Milk-Vetch .................................................................................................................................................................. 4-14  4.3.9 Heartscale ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4-14  4.3.10 San Joaquin Spearscale .................................................................................................................................................. 4-14  4.3.11 Big Tarplant .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4-14  4.3.12 Beaked Clarkia ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-15  4.3.13 Round-leaved Filaree ....................................................................................................................................................... 4-15  4.3.14 Lemmon’s Jewelflower ................................................................................................................................................... 4-15  4.3.15 Recurved Larkspur ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-15  4.3.16 Spiny-Sepaled Button-Celery ..................................................................................................................................... 4-16  4.3.17 Diamond-petaled California Poppy ...................................................................................................................... 4-16  4.3.18 Woolly Rose Mallow ......................................................................................................................................................... 4-16  4.3.19 Munz’s Tidy-tips ................................................................................................................................................................... 4-16  4.3.20 Panoche Pepper-grass .................................................................................................................................................... 4-17  4.3.21 Showy Golden Madia ....................................................................................................................................................... 4-17  4.3.22 Shining Navarretia .............................................................................................................................................................. 4-17  4.3.23 Pincushion Navarretia ..................................................................................................................................................... 4-17  4.3.23 Suisun Marsh Aster ........................................................................................................................................................... 4-18  4.3.24 Caper-fruited Tropidocarpum .................................................................................................................................. 4-18  4.3.25 Delta Mudwort ...................................................................................................................................................................... 4-18  4.3.26 Wright’s Trichocoronis ................................................................................................................................................... 4-18  4.3.27 Other Special-status Plants ......................................................................................................................................... 4-19  4.3.28 Project Effects ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4-19  4.3.29 Avoidance and Minimization Measures ........................................................................................................... 4-19  4.3.30 Compensatory Mitigation ............................................................................................................................................ 4-21  4.3.31 Cumulative Effects ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-21  4.4 Special-status Wildlife and Fishes ............................................................................................................................................. 4-21  4.4.1 Conservancy Fairy Shrimp, Longhorn Fairy Shrimp, Vernal Pool Fairy Shrimp, and Vernal Pool Tadpole Shrimp ............................................................................................................................ 4-22  4.4.2 Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle ....................................................................................................................... 4-25  4.4.3 Fishes ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 4-27  4.4.4 Reptiles ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4-29  4.4.5 Amphibians .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4-45  4.4.6 Birds ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-53  4.4.7 Mammals ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-67 5. Alternatives Analysis ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5-1  5.1 Central Segment ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5-1  5.1.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants ................................................................................................... 5-3  5.1.2 Special-status Wildlife ........................................................................................................................................................ 5-3  5.2 San Luis Segment (500-kV) ................................................................................................................................................................. 5-4  5.2.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants ................................................................................................... 5-4  5.2.2 Special-status Wildlife ........................................................................................................................................................ 5-5  5.3 South Segment ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 5-6  5.3.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants ................................................................................................... 5-6  5.3.2 Special-status Wildlife ........................................................................................................................................................ 5-7  5.4 San Luis Segment (70-kV) .................................................................................................................................................................... 5-7  5.4.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants ................................................................................................... 5-8  5.4.2 Special-status Wildlife ........................................................................................................................................................ 5-8 6. Discussion and Conclusions ..................................................................................................................................................................... 6-1  6.1 Sensitive and Regulated Habitats and Special-status Plants .................................................................................. 6-1  6.2 Special-status Wildlife ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6-1 7. Literature Cited, References, and Persons Contacted ................................................................................................. 7-1  7.1 Literature Cited and References .................................................................................................................................................... 7-1  7.2 Persons Contacted ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7-11 Tables Table 1 Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area ........................................................................................... 3-17 Table 2 Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area .................................................................... 3-23 Table 3 SLTP Environmental Protection Measures Related to Biological and Water/Wetland Resources ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-1 Table 4 Comparison of Habitat Types Among Proposed and Alternative Corridors ........................................ 5-2 Table 5 Estimated Lengths of Proposed and Alternative Corridors ............................................................................... 5-4 Figures Figure 1 Project Location .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1-2 Figure 2a Project Segments ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1-3 Figure 2b Corridor Alternatives – Central Segment ......................................................................................................................... 1-4 Figure 2c Corridor Alternatives – San Luis Segment........................................................................................................................ 1-5 Figure 2d 70-kV Corridor Alternatives – San Luis Segment ........................................................................................................ 1-6 Figure 2e Corridor Alternatives – South Segment ............................................................................................................................. 1-7 Figure 3 Biological Resources (presented separately) Figure 4 CNDDB Occurrences ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-11 Figure 5 Critical Habitat ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-16 Figure 6a Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability ........................................................................................................ 4-32 Figure 6b Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability ........................................................................................................ 4-33 Figure 6c Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability ........................................................................................................ 4-34 Figure 6d Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability ........................................................................................................ 4-35 Figure 6e Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability ........................................................................................................ 4-36 Appendices Appendix A Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives Appendix B List of Affected and Adjacent Quads Appendix C Habitat Codes Appendix D Plants and Wildlife Seen During Spring 2014 and Spring 2015 Reconnaissance Surveys Appendix E Project Area Photos Appendix F Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Table; Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Memo 1. Introduction Western proposes to construct, own, operate, and maintain about 95 miles (153 kilometers) of new transmission lines through Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties along the foothills of the Diablo Range in the western San Joaquin Valley. Western also would upgrade or expand its existing substations, make the necessary arrangements to upgrade or expand existing Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) substations, or construct new substations to accommodate the interconnections of these new transmission lines. Collectively, these proposed activities are referred to as the San Luis Transmission Project (project). The project location is shown in Figure 1. A brief overview of the project is provided below; the full project description is provided in Appendix A. Project elements include: . A 500-kV transmission line: a single-circuit 500-kV transmission line, about 65 miles (105 kilometers) long, terminating at the existing, expanded, or new substations in the Tracy and Los Banos areas. . 230-kV transmission lines: a single-circuit 230-kV transmission line, about 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) long, connecting the San Luis Substation and the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation and a single-circuit 230-kV transmission line, about 20 miles (32 kilometers) long, connecting the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations. . A 70-kV transmission line: a single-circuit 70-kV transmission line, about 7 miles (11 kilometers) long, connecting the San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Much of the project would be located adjacent to existing high-voltage transmission-line rights of way along the foothills west of Interstate 5 (I-5). Western proposes to construct two new 500-kV substations: Tracy East Substation and Los Banos West Substation. The Tracy East Substation would be adjacent to and east of the existing Tracy Substation with a footprint of up to 50 acres (20 hectares). The Los Banos West Substation would be adjacent to and west of the existing Los Banos Substation with a footprint of up to 50 acres (20 hectares). The existing Tracy, Los Banos, San Luis, and/or Dos Amigos substations may be expanded to add new or modify existing 230-kV or 500-kV terminal bays. Western would also construct a 230/70-kV transformer bank and associated facilities at the San Luis Substation. The project would also include ancillary facilities, such as communication facilities, improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads to facilitate construction. Western would acquire the necessary easements and fee land for the project. Once constructed, operating and maintaining the line to ensure its safe and reliable functioning would include periodic aerial, ground, and climbing inspections of towers; maintaining vegetation around towers; maintaining access roads; and maintaining associated structures, hardware, and equipment. Operation and maintenance (O&M) activities are described in detail in Exhibit 1 of Appendix A. In addition to the proposed corridor, a total of six corridor alternatives have been developed for the project (refer to Appendix A for details and locations of corridors). They were developed based on whether or not the alternatives (1) meet most of the project objectives/purpose and need; (2) are considered feasible; and (3) avoid or substantially lessen potential significant effects of the project. Figure 2 illustrates the location of the following six corridor alternatives: . Patterson Pass Road Alternative . Butts Road Alternative . West of Cemetery Alternative . Los Banos to Dos Amigos 230-kV Alternative . Billy Wright Road 230-kV Alternative . West of O'Neill Forebay Alternative Figure 1 of Appendix C, titled “Project Location," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy Figure 1. Project Location 0 5 10Miles Substation Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Los Angeles Sacramento Fresno Project Location San Francicso OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 7/8/2014 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Figure 2a of Appendix C, titled “Project Segments," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Los Banos Tracy East Los Banos West South Segment San Luis Segment Central Segment North Segment O'Neill San Luis Dos Amigos Tracy 5 580 205 120 33 152 99 0 5 10 OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/17/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 2a. Project Segments Miles Proposed New Substations Existing Substations Tracy East Substation Area* Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Tracy * Proposed new Tracy East Substation would occupy up to 50 acres within this areaFigure 2b of Appendix C, titled “Corridor Alternatives - Central Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.5 580 99 152 0 3 6 OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/17/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Patterson Pass Road Alternative Proposed Project Other Corridors Figure 2b. Corridor Alternatives Central Segment Miles San Luis Segment Central Segment North SegmentFigure 2c of Appendix C, titled “Corridor Alternatives - San Luis Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.5 152 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos 0 1 2 Existing Substations Los Banos West Substation Area* Corridor Alternative Proposed Project Other Corridors 5 152 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos West of Cemetery Proposed Project Corridor Alternative OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/17/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 2c. Corridor Alternatives San Luis Segment Miles South Segment Central Segment San Luis Segment South Segment Central Segment San Luis Segment 5 152 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Butts Road Alternative South Segment Central Segment San Luis Segment * Proposed new Los Banos West Substation would occupy up to 50 acres within this areaFigure 2d of Appendix C, titled “70-kV Corridor Alternatives - San Luis Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.5 152 33 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos 0 1 2Miles 5 152 33 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos West of O'Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Proposed Project 70-kV Corridor OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/17/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 2d. 70-kV Corridor Alternatives San Luis Segment Central Segment San Luis Segment South Segment Central Segment San Luis Segment South Segment Existing Substations Corridor Alternative Proposed Project Other CorridorsFigure 2e of Appendix C, titled “Corridor Alternatives - South Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.5 33 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos 0 2.5 5Miles Figure 2e. Corridor Alternatives South Segment 5 33 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos 5 33 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Billy Wright Road Alternative San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Proposed Project Corridor OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/17/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI South Segment San Luis Segment South Segment San Luis Segment South Segment San Luis Segment Proposed Project Corridor Alternative Other Corridors Existing Substations2. Study Methods 2.1 Regulatory Requirements 2.1.1 Federal Endangered Species Act The federal Endangered Species Act (FESA) protects plants and wildlife that are listed as endangered or threatened by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Marine Fisheries Service (NOAA Fisheries). Section 9 of FESA prohibits the “take” of endangered wildlife, which is defined as “harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, collect, or attempt to engage in such conduct” (50 CFR 17.3). For plants, this statute governs removing, possessing, maliciously damaging, or destroying any listed plant on federal land and removing, cutting, digging-up, damaging, or destroying any listed plant on non-federal land in knowing violation of state law (16 USC 1538). Under Section 7 of FESA, federal agencies are required to consult with the USFWS if their actions, including permit approvals or funding, could adversely affect a listed species (including plants) or its critical habitat. Through consultation and preparation of a biological opinion, the USFWS may issue an incidental take statement allowing take of the species that is incidental to another authorized activity, provided the action will not jeopardize the continued existence of the species. Section 10 of FESA provides for issuance of incidental take permits to private parties provided a habitat conservation plan is developed. 2.1.2 Migratory Bird Treaty Act The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA), originally passed in 1918, implements the commitment of the U.S. to four bilateral treaties, or conventions, for the protection of a shared migratory bird resource. The original treaty prompting the passage of the MBTA was the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds signed in 1916 by the U.S. and Great Britain on behalf of Canada for the protection "of the many species of birds that traverse certain parts of the U.S. and Canada in their annual migration." The primary motivation for negotiation of the 1916 treaty and the passage of the MBTA was to stop the "indiscriminate slaughter" of migratory birds by market hunters and others. The MBTA was subsequently amended as the U.S. signed similar treaties with Mexico (1936, amended 1972 and 1999), Japan (1972), and Russia (1976). The Canadian treaty was amended in December 1995 to allow traditional subsistence hunting of migratory birds. Under the MBTA it is unlawful to pursue, hunt, take, capture, kill, possess, sell, purchase, barter, import, export, or transport any migratory bird, or any part, nest, or egg or any such bird, unless authorized under a permit issued by the Secretary of the Interior. Some regulatory exceptions apply. Take is defined in regulations as: “pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or attempt to pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect.” The MBTA protects more than 1,000 bird species, more than 800 of which occur in the U.S.; however, not all birds in the U.S. are protected by the MBTA. 2.1.3 Federal Clean Water Act The purpose of the federal Clean Water Act (CWA) is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters.” Section 404 of the CWA prohibits the discharge of dredged or fill material into “waters of the United States” without a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). Waters of the U.S. may include rivers, streams, estuaries, territorial seas, ponds, lakes, and wetlands. Wetlands are defined as those areas “that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions” (33 CFR 328.3 7b). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) also has authority over wetlands and may override a USACE permit. Substantial impacts to wetlands may require an individual permit. Projects that only minimally affect wetlands may meet the conditions of one of the existing nationwide permits. A water-quality certification or waiver pursuant to section 401 of the CWA is required for section 404 permit actions; in California this certification or waiver is issued by one of nine Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCB). 2.1.4 Federal Noxious Weed Act of 1974 . Defines a noxious weed as any living stage of a plant that can directly or indirectly injure crops, other useful plants, livestock, poultry, or other interests of agriculture including irrigation, navigation, the fish and wildlife resources of the U.S., or public health; . Regulates the sale, purchase, and transportation of noxious weeds into or through the U.S.; . Regulates the inspection and quarantine of areas suspected of infestation and provides for the disposal or destruction of infested products, articles, means of conveyance, or noxious weeds; . Provides for fines of up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment up to one year for violation of the regulation; and . Requires Federal agencies to work with state and local agencies to develop and implement noxious weed management programs on Federal lands. Other Aplicable Federal Regulations, Guidance, and Executive Orders EO 13112, Invasive Species. This EO requires Federal agencies to: “prevent the introduction of invasive species”; “detect and respond rapidly to and control populations of such species in a cost-effective and environmentally sound manner”; “monitor invasive species populations accurately and reliably, provide for restoration of native species and habitat conditions in ecosystems that have been invaded”; “conduct research on invasive species and develop technologies to prevent introduction and provide for environmentally sound control of invasive species”; and “promote public education on invasive species and the means to address them.” National Aquatic Invasive Species Act of 1996. This Act prescribes actions to combat invasive aquatic species. Non-indigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990. This Act establishes a program to prevent the introduction of, and to control the spread of, introduced aquatic nuisance species. 2.1.5 California Endangered Species Act The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) generally parallels the main provisions of the federal ESA, but unlike its federal counterpart, CESA also applies take prohibitions to species proposed for listing, called “candidates” by the state. Section 2080 prohibits the take, possession, purchase, sale, import or export of endangered, threatened, or candidate species unless otherwise authorized by permit or in the regulations. Take is defined in section 86 as to “hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill, or attempt to hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill.” CESA allows for take incidental to otherwise lawful actions. State lead agencies are required to consult with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) to ensure that any action they undertake is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered or threatened species or result in destruction or adverse modification of essential habitat. 2.1.6 California Fuly Protected Species California first began to designate species as “fully protected” prior to the creation of CESA and FESA. Lists of fully protected species were initially developed to provide protection to those animals that were rare or faced possible extinction, and included fish, amphibian, reptile, bird, and mammal species. Most fully protected species have since been listed as threatened or endangered under CESA and/or FESA. The regulations that implement the statute for fully protected species (Fish and Game Code1 sections 3511, 4700, 5050, and 5515) provide that fully protected species may not be taken or possessed at any time. Further, the CDFW prohibits any state agency from issuing incidental take permits for fully protected species, except for necessary scientific research. 1 Though on January 1, 2013, the California Department of Fish and Game changed its name to California Department of Fish and Wildlife, its regulations are still called Fish and Game Code. 2.1.7 Native Plant Protection Act The state Native Plant Protection Act (NPPA) of 1977 (Fish and Game Code sections 1900-1913) was created with the intent to “preserve, protect and enhance rare and endangered plants in this state.” The NPPA is administered by the CDFW. The Fish and Game Commission has the authority to designate native plants as “endangered” or “rare” and to protect endangered and rare plants from take. The California Endangered Species Act of 1984 (Fish and Game Code sections 2050-2116) provided further protection for rare and endangered plant species, but the NPPA remains part of Fish and Game Code. 2.1.8 California Streambed Alteration Notification/Agrement Section 1602 of California Fish and Game Code requires that a streambed alteration application be submitted to the CDFW for “any activity that may substantially divert or obstruct the natural flow or substantially change the bed, channel, or bank of any river, stream, or lake.” The CDFW reviews the proposed actions and, if necessary, submits to the applicant a proposal for measures to protect affected fish and wildlife resources. The final proposal that is mutually agreed upon by the Department and the applicant is the streambed alteration agreement. Often, projects that require a streambed alteration agreement also require a permit from the USACE under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. In these instances, the conditions of the section 404 permit and the streambed alteration agreement may overlap. 2.1.9 California Laws and Codes Governing Noxious Weds The following is a digest of the most important laws affecting noxious weeds in California. For the most part, they are derived from the laws for pests in general. The laws are found in the California Food and Agriculture Code. This information is available from the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) website in the section entitled “Encycloweedia” at: http://www.cdfa.ca.gov/plant/ipc/ encycloweedia/winfo_weedlaws.htm. California Code of Regulations – State Regulations  Food and Agriculture (Title 3)  Plant Industry (Division 4)  Entomology and Plant Quarantine (Chapter 3)  Insect Pest Control (Subchapter 5)  Rodent and Weed Control and Seed Inspection (Chapter 5)  Weed Free Areas and Weed Eradication Areas (Chapter 6)  Alligatorweed (Article 5)  Hydrilla (Article 7)  Noxious Weed Species (Subchapter 6)  Pesticides and Pest Control (Division 6) California Law – State Laws  California Food and Agricultural Code  Exotic Species Introductions (Division 1, Part 1, Chapter 3, Section 403)  Plant Quarantine and Pest Control Other Legal Resources Bills  AB 984 Tamarisk plant control September 29, 2006  California Invasive Plant Council (Cal-IPC)  AB 2631 proposes creation of a California Invasive Species Council, June 2004 California Department of Food and Agriculture  California Weed Laws  Plant Health and Pest Prevention Services – Regulations  Pest Exclusion Branch Legislative Counsel of California National Plant Board  State Plant Quarantine Summaries University of California-Davis, Information Center for the Environment  CALWEED Database, California Noxious Weed Control Projects Inventory Environmental Law Institute  Status and Trends in State Invasive Species Policy: 2002-2009 (May 2010). 2.2 Biological Studies Studies conducted to evaluate the potential for project effects to sensitive habitats and special-status plants and animals are briefly described below. . A California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB–CDFW, 2015a) records search was conducted to identify sensitive habitats and special-status plants and animals that are known to occur within a ninequadrangle2 area of all quads associated with the project (43 quads were included). A list of quads for which records were searched and a summary table of all species and habitats found are provided in Appendix B. . A list of federally protected plants and animals was generated for each quad on which the project lies, including Clifton Court Forebay, Midway, Tracy, Lone Tree Creek, Solyo, Westley, Patterson, Orestimba Peak, Newman, Howard Ranch, San Luis Dam, Volta, Los Banos Valley, Ortigalita Peak NW, and Charleston School. 2 U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle, or “quad,” as shown on topographic maps produced by the USGS. . A list of special-status plants was generated from the California Native Plant Society (CNPS) on-line electronic inventory of rare and endangered plants of California, 8th edition (CNPS, 2014) for each quad on which the project lies. . Google Earth aerial imagery of the project area and its surroundings was reviewed extensively for both accessible and inaccessible portions of the project area. . eBird.org, an online, real-time database of bird sightings launched in 2002 by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology and National Audubon, was reviewed for occurrence records of special-status birds. . Habitat-level reconnaissance field surveys were conducted as described below. . The following documents related to local conservation easements or conservation plans were reviewed. – Preserve Management Plan for the Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve (SJCOG, 2011). – Programmatic Biological Opinion for the East Alameda County Conservation Strategy (USACE File Number 2011-00230S) (USFWS, 2012c). – San Joaquin County Multi-species Habitat Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000). . Species experts were consulted and an extensive literature review on regionally occurring specialstatus species was conducted. . Scoping letters were reviewed, including species lists provided within them. Comprehensive lists of regionally occurring sensitive habitats and special-status plants and animals were compiled from the sources described above and are presented in section 3 below. Habitat-level reconnaissance surveys were conducted to assess the potential for or actual presence of sensitive habitats and special-status plants and animals in the proposed project and alternative corridors. All habitat types were mapped according to the list of preliminary vegetation types of California, as first described in the Preliminary Description of the Terrestrial Natural Communities of California, Nongame Heritage Program, produced by CDFW (Holland, 1986). A list of habitat codes and their definitions are provided in Appendix C. For special-status plants, habitat suitability was based on a review of the general and micro-habitat preferences contained in the CNDDB, the CNPS Online Inventory of Rare and Endangered Plants (8th Edition–CNPS, 2014), and The Jepson Manual (Baldwin et al., 2012). Protocol surveys were not conducted for any plant or animal, and wetlands were not delineated. Rainfall in winter and spring 2013–2014 and 2014–2015 was significantly below normal but rainfall late in the season (March and April) of 2014 provided enough moisture for the majority of plants to flower. The April 2014 survey was well timed for identification of plant species; however, by May vegetation was dry and the likelihood of detection of special-status plants was reduced. The Billy Wright Road alternative corridor was very dry during the March 2015 survey, but most plants were still identifiable. Pursuant to right-of-entry considerations on the largely private land-holdings crossed by the SLTP, proposed and alternative corridors were walked, driven and spot-checked, or assessed visually from public access points. Habitat types were characterized on detailed field maps where possible. Right-ofentry was not granted for all parcels and for areas where no public access was available for visual assessment, desktop review with Google Earth aerial imagery was used to map habitats. During field surveys, all plants observed were recorded. Wildlife and their sign (dens, scats, nests, carcasses, skulls, prey remains) were also recorded when detected by either sight or song. A list of plants and wildlife seen during spring 2014 and spring 2015 reconnaissance surveys is provided in Appendix D. Habitat maps and wildlife and rare-plant observations are presented as Figure 3; however, because Figure 3 comprises 54 maps, it is provided as a separate attachment. 2.3 Personel and Survey Dates Reconnaissance surveys were conducted by botany/wetland experts Jane Valerius and Zoya Akulova- Barlow, and by wildlife biologists Lawrence Hunt, PhD, and Anne Wallace. Two teams, each with one wildlife biologist and one botanist/wetland ecologist, conducted surveys. Surveys in 2014 were divided into two phases based primarily on right of entry. Phase I surveys were conducted April 9–15 and April 28–29, 2014, on those parcels for which right of entry had been granted by early April. Phase I surveys were completed by all four biologists. Phase II surveys were conducted May 16–20, 2014, by Zoya Akulova-Barlow and Anne Wallace and included those parcels for which additional right of entry had been granted, as well as areas where alternative corridors had been added or expanded. Reconnaissance surveys were conducted on March 27–29, 2015, for the Billy Wright Road alternative; these surveys were conducted by Lawrence Hunt and Zoya Akulova-Barlow. 2.4 Agency Cordination and Profesional Contacts On February 10, 2014, a draft memorandum (memo) was submitted to the USFWS outlining Western’s proposed approach to surveys and permitting for biological resources protected under FESA. An initial consultation meeting was held on February 13, 2014, to discuss the memo. Follow-up questions were presented to USFWS biologists by email or telephone, and a final memo was submitted in mid-March 2014. On February 28, 2014, a draft memo was submitted to CDFW outlining Western’s proposed approach to surveys and permitting for biological resources protected under CESA. On June 10, 2014, Brian L Cypher, PhD, Associate Director and Research Ecologist, California State University–Stanislaus, Endangered Species Recovery Program, was contacted by telephone for information on the potential presence of giant kangaroo rat (Dipodomys ingens) in the project area. He provided feedback and recommended contacting Dr. Tim Bean at Humboldt State and Mike Westphal with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). On June 10, 2014, Tim Bean, PhD, Assistant Professor, Department of Wildlife, Humboldt State University, was contacted by telephone (and, later, email) for information on the potential presence of giant kangaroo rat in the project area. He provided feedback and guidance on assessing presence using satellite imagery and sent a copy of a paper awaiting publication. On June 10 and 30, 2014, Mike Westphal, BLM Wildlife Biologist, was contacted by telephone (voicemail) and email for his expertise on giant kangaroo rat. On June 30 in a telephone conversation, he provided his assessment of the potential for giant kangaroo rat occurrence in the southern part of the project area. On June 10, 2014, Jeff Alvarez, MS, Herpetologist, The Wildlife Project, was contacted by email for his expertise on Alameda whipsnake; he responded on June 11. He was contacted by email again on June 23, 2014, with a question on California red-legged frog. On February 4, 2015, a second consultation meeting was held with USFWS outlining results of 2014 reconnaissance surveys and plans for 2015 surveys. On February 24, 2015, a second consultation meeting was held with CDFW outlining results of 2014 reconnaissance surveys and plans for 2015 surveys, and soliciting direction on our approach for avoiding impacts to the blunt-nosed leopard lizard. On March 25, 2015, a third consultation meeting was held with CDFW to further discuss our approach for avoiding impacts to the blunt-nosed leopard lizard. 2.5 Limitations that May Influence Results Pursuant to right-of-entry considerations on the largely private land-holdings crossed by the project, portions of the project area were not visited and most of the unvisited areas were not visible from public access points. Protocol surveys were not conducted for any species. Wetlands were not delineated and rare-plant surveys were not conducted, although rare plants were noted where detected during spring 2014 and spring 2015 surveys. 3. Description of Afected Environment For this report, the project area is defined as the area encompassed by the proposed and alternative corridors between Tracy Substation on the north and Dos Amigos Substation on the south. Reference is at times made to resources found outside the project area; they may be within 1 mile of the project area or within the nine-quad search area1 around a given location. 1 As mentioned in section 2, the term nine-quad search area refers to a CNDDB search of all quads surrounding the quads on which the project lies. Because of the size of the project, the CNDDB search was, in fact, a search of 43 quads, and the term nine-quad search refers to an area within an equivalent distance of any location in the project area. 3.1 Existing Physical and Biological Conditions 3.1.1 Physical Conditions The project area is located in western San Joaquin Valley along the foothills of the Diablo Range. In general, the area encompasses primarily open space characterized by terrain of varying steepness and sparse vegetation. West of the project area terrain becomes increasingly steep and east of the project area lies flat agriculture lands. The project area roughly parallels I-5, the Delta-Mendota Canal, and the California Aqueduct. Climate in the region is temperate, with mild winters and hot, dry summers. The project area traverses portions of Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. From the north, the project area begins about 5 miles (8 km) northwest of the city of Tracy at the Tracy Substation. From here it extends south through agricultural lands and scattered development for about 6 miles (10 km) before turning southeast paralleling I-5 for about 50 miles (80 km) through private lands that are largely rural and undeveloped. The project area skirts O’Neill Forebay on either the east or west side. This portion of the project area is primarily open space designated for recreational use and wildlife conservation. Several areas of residential and commercial development and scattered agriculture lands lie to the east of the project area near the Forebay. South of O’Neill Forebay, the project area continues through rural and undeveloped private lands with scattered development and agriculture lands along the eastern edge of the corridor, before crossing over I-5 and terminating at the Dos Amigos Substation. Appendix E provides representative photos of the project area. 3.1.2 Biological Conditions The sections below present the plant communities found in the project area and the general wildlife that are expected to use them. Appendix D presents a list of all plant species seen and a list of all wildlife species seen, heard, or otherwise detected during spring 2014 and spring 2015 reconnaissance surveys. Plant community designations are based on the vegetation codes used in Western’s O&M GIS Database, (refer to Appendix C for a list of codes and definitions). 3.1.2.1 Plant Comunities Riparian Great Valley Forest (Rgf). The riparian great valley forest mapping unit (Rgf) corresponds to the great valley cottonwood riparian forest type as described by Holland (1986). The great valley cottonwood riparian forest is also a special-status vegetation community type with an S2.1 ranking (defined in Table 1 below). This vegetation type is a dense, broad-leafed, winter-deciduous riparian forest dominated by cottonwood (Populus fremontii) and willow (Salix spp.), and occurs on fine-grained alluvial soils near perennial or nearly perennial streams that provide subsurface irrigation even when the channel is dry (Holland, 1986). Within the project area this vegetation community type occurs along major drainages, including Corral Hollow, Lone Tree, and Salado creeks. The Rgf mapping unit was used to map another special-status community type, sycamore alluvial woodland, which is found along Orestimba creek. Sycamores (Platanus racemosa) are dominant and the trees are mostly well-spaced. Understory vegetation includes mule fat (Baccharis salicifolia), willows, California sagebrush (Artemisia californica), and non-native grasses such as hare barley (Hordeum murinum ssp. leporinum). Riparian Great Valley Scrub (Rgs). The riparian great valley scrub mapping unit (Rgs) corresponds to the great valley willow scrub type as described by Holland (1986). This vegetation type is a shrubland type dominated by shrubby willows such as arroyo willow (Salix lasiolepis) and narrow-leaved willow (Salix exigua), and supports few if any cottonwood trees. The great valley willow scrub type was mapped along several unnamed intermittent drainages and also in isolated patches along Mountain House Creek and was also observed outside of the project area adjacent to Del Puerto Creek. Other species associated with this type include shrub understory species such as mulefat, Himalayan blackberry (Rubus armeniacus), and herbaceous species such as rabbit’s-foot grass (Polypogon monspeliensis), nut sedge (Cyperus eragrostis), rushes (Juncus spp.), sedges (Carex spp.), curly dock (Rumex crispus), and brass buttons (Cotula coronopifolia). Elderberry, Isolated (Ebis). One area with elderberry (Sambucus nigra ssp. caerulea) shrubs was mapped along Salado Creek. The elderberries occurred within the larger great valley cottonwood riparian forest along the creek banks. This is not a separate vegetation community type since it is essentially a part of the riparian tree community. However, since elderberries can support the federally listed valley elderberry longhorn beetle (Desmocerus californicus dimorphus), these shrubs are discussed further in the wildlife section. Grassland, Non-native Annual (Gnn). The non-native grassland mapping unit (Gnn) corresponds to the non-native grassland type as described by Holland (1986). This is the most common and widespread vegetation community in the project area. Plant species associated with this type are wild oats (Avena barbata, A. fatua), soft brome (Bromus hordaeceus), ripgut brome (Bromus diandrus), red brome (Bromus madritensis), weedy brome (Bromus caroli-henrici), hare barley, Mediterranean barley (Hordeum marinum ssp. gussoneanum), ryegrass (Festuca perennis), rattail fescue (Festuca myuros), and Harding grass (Phalaris aquatica). One very invasive grass species, medusa-head (Elymus caput-medusae), was also observed in several areas within the project area. Non-native forbs species in this type include filarees (Erodium spp.), charlock mustard (Sinapis arvensis), shortpod mustard (Hirschfeldia incana), milk thistle (Silybum marianum), wild radish (Raphanus sativus), white horse-nettle (Solanum elaeagnifolium), hairy vetch (Vicia villosa), tocalote (Centaurea melitensis), Russian thistle (Salsola tragus), common groundsel (Senecio vulgaris), and London rocket (Sisymbrium irio). Native forbs also occur among nonnative forbs and include fiddleneck (Amsinckia menziesii), blow wives (Achyrachaena mollis), tall stephanomeria (Stephanomeria virgata), Ithuriel’s spear (Triteleia laxa), red maids (Calandrinia ciliata), purple owl’s clover (Castilleja exserta), small-headed matchweed (Gutierrezia microcephala), California poppy (Eschscholzia californica), vinegar weed (Trichostema lanceolatum), and sacred datura (Datura wrightii). Many of the non-native grassland areas were grazed and some had been disked. Grassland, Native Perennial (Gnp). The native perennial grassland mapping unit (Gnp) includes two special-status native grassland types: valley needlegrass grassland and valley wildrye grassland. Valley needlegrass grassland is characterized by the presence of at least 5 percent absolute cover or 10 percent relative cover of purple needle grass (Nasella pulchra) (Sawyer et al., 2009). Valley needlegrass grassland is a special-status vegetation type with an S3.1 ranking. Other grasses associated with this type include non-native species such as red brome, wild oats, and hare barley. Native and non-native forbs also occur in this type. Valley wildrye grassland is characterized by the presence of 50 percent or greater relative cover by creeping wildrye (Elymus triticoides) (Sawyer et al., 2009). Valley wildrye grassland is a special-status vegetation type with an S2.1 ranking. This type typically occurs along creeks and drainages and can also be a seasonal wetland type since creeping wildrye is a facultative wetland plant. However, the soils and hydrology of the site would also have to meet the wetland criteria for this type to also qualify as a seasonal wetland type. Other plants associated with this type include non-native grasses and forbs as described in the non-native grassland type. Within the project area Elymus triticoides was noted during surveys as occurring within an area mapped as seasonal wetland (Wse) along the south bank of Corral Hollow Creek within the Patterson Pass Road A alternative corridor. One grassland area that is not a special-status type was dominated by plants associated with alkaline soils. Plant species associated with this type include inland saltgrass (Distichlis spicata) as the dominant species along with alkali heath (Frankenia salina) and big saltbush (Atriplex lentiformis). The significance of this area is that some of the special-status plants that could occur within the project area are associated with alkaline soils. Wildflower Fields (Wldf). Several areas were mapped as wildflower fields (Holland, 1986) because they were different enough from the grassland types to be called out as a separate vegetation type. This type differs from the grassland types in that herbaceous forb species are dominant, rather than grasses, and in most areas the vegetation is relatively sparse with bare ground comprising up to 50 percent of the overall ground cover. As described by Holland (1986), wildflower field is an herb-dominated type noted for conspicuous annual wildflower displays and the plant species’ dominance varies from site to site and year to year. They typically occur on droughty sites low in nutrients and are associated with grasslands or oak woodlands. The first wildflower field type was dominated by foothill plantain (Plantago erecta). Non-native grasses have only 5 to10 percent of absolute cover in this type and can include wild oats and red brome. Soils are typically rocky, or often friable, sometimes with gypsum crystals. The vegetation is short, less than 1 foot (0.3 meters) tall. Co-dominant non-native and native forb species include red stemmed filaree (Erodium cicutarium), charlock mustard, sticky tarweed (Holocarpha virgata), Douglas’ microseris (Microseris douglasii ssp. douglasii), common peppergrass (Lepidium nitidum), dwarf peppergrass (Lepidium latipes), and q-tips (Micropus californicus). This wildflower field vegetation type is habitat for three special-status species: round-leaved filaree (California macrophylla—CRPR2 Rank 1B.1), hogwallow starfish (Hesperevax caulescens—CRPR Rank 4.2), and small-flowered morning-glory (Convolvulus simulans—CRPR Rank 4.2). These three species occupy the same habitat type within the project area and often are found growing together in the same area. Note that CRPR ranks are defined in Table 1 below. 2 CRPR = California rare plant rank The second kind of wildflower field had Fitch’s spikeweed (Centromadia fitchii) as the dominant herb and a third kind of wildflower field had an herbaceous species of buckwheat (Eriogonum sp.) dominant and was located on a rocky slope comprising volcanic soils. The spikeweed and buckwheat are not special-status plants. Other plant species noted in these areas include oats, red brome, red stem filaree, and sticky tarweed. Coyote Brush Scrub (Cbsc). Coyote brush scrub occurs in several locations within the project area. Coyote brush (Baccharis pilularis) was either sparse or dense but is the dominant and defining species. A few mesquites (Prosopis glandulosa var. torreyana) and big saltbush (Atriplex lentiformis) grow together with coyote brush. Other species occurring in this vegetation type are ripgut brome, gum plant (Grindelia sp.), perennial pepperweed (Lepidium latifolium), fiddleneck, small melilot (Melilotus indicus), winecup clarkia (Clarkia purpurea ssp. quadrivulnera), seaside heliotrope (Heliotropium curassavicum), horehound (Marrubium vulgare), and field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis). Agricultural Fields (Agor, Agps, Aggr, Agvn). This mapping unit includes areas planted in orchards (Agor), irrigated pastures (Agps), grain fields planted with hay or alfalfa (Aggr), and vineyards (Agvn). Most of the agricultural areas occur in the northern portion of the project area. Many were also irrigated and the irrigation ditches and canals were mapped separately (see below). A variety of fruits and nuts are grown in the San Joaquin Valley and include cherries, apricots, nectarines, peaches, plums, pluots, winegrapes, walnuts, almonds, and pistachios, although not all of these occur within the project area or within 1 mile. If identifiable at the time of the survey the type of crop was noted. If not identifiable, it was just designated as Aggr or Agor. Other (Oth). A few areas that did not fall into any of the other vegetation types were noted. These include eucalyptus (Eucalyptus sp.) groves and areas that were noted as planted trees, such as planted pines (Pinus spp.), oaks (Quercus spp.), and eucalyptus. One area was a site that was probably associated with mitigation because, although the plant species were native, they were obviously planted and not in a natural setting. At Corral Hollow Creek the other (Oth) habitat type was applied to small areas of native California sagebrush (Artemisia californica) where this native habitat type occurs within and adjacent to the cottonwood riparian forest community. Another area mapped as other (Oth) was a debris pile consisting of old branches and pieces of wood. This was noted in the event that it might be considered habitat for sensitive wildlife species. Barren (Bar). Barren habitat occurs scattered throughout the project area and generally consists of roads, road shoulders, dirt parking lots, and areas that were predominantly rock, gravel, bare soils, or sand. Sometimes bare areas were created as a result of grazing. Most surface substrates in this unit included asphalt, gravel, and dirt. Vegetation is typically absent, although sparse cover (1 to 5 percent cover) of ruderal species such as English plantain (Plantago lanceolata), filarees, prickly lettuce (Lactuca serriola), oats, soft brome and ryegrass may be present. Some native plants may also occur such as sticky tarweed, gum plant, and foothill plantain. Commercial (Com). Areas mapped as commercial included buildings and paved parking lots or other developed areas. This type is devoid of vegetation unless landscaped, ornamental plants were planted associated with the development. 3.1.2.2 Wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State Waters, River (Warv). Rivers or creeks that were perennial or intermittent and were greater than 20 feet (6 meters [m]) wide were mapped as rivers (Warv). Within the project area the following drainages were mapped as rivers: Mountain House Creek, Patterson Run, Corral Hollow Creek, Lone Tree Creek, Hospital Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Salado Creek, Crow Creek, Orestimba Creek, Garzas Creek, Romero Creek, San Luis Creek, Los Banos Creek, and Ortigalita Creek. Ortigalita Creek crosses the two San Luis to Dos Amigos alternative corridors, and appears to be approximately 150 feet (46 meters) wide with possible seasonal wetland vegetation. This evaluation is based on a desktop review as this area was not accessible at the time of the surveys. Corral Hollow Creek, Mountain House Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Lone Tree Creek, and Salado Creek had some water within the channel at the time of surveys. These creeks also supported freshwater marsh communities within the channel and a cottonwood-willow riparian tree and shrub community along the banks to top of bank. Elderberry shrubs were observed along Salado Creek and are further described in the wildlife section. These creek drainages, except for Salado Creek, also had populations of perennial pepperweed or white top (Lepdium latifolium), an invasive noxious weed species growing in and along the creek channel. Hospital Creek, Garzas Creek, Romero Creek, and Crow Creek are wide, braided creek channels and were dry at the time of the surveys. Hospital and Garzas creeks range from approximately 200 to 400 feet (61 to 122 meters) in width, whereas Romero Creek ranges from 20 to 50 feet (6 to 15 meters) in width and Crow Creek ranges from 30 to 40 feet (9 to 12 meters) in width. These creeks also lacked any wetland or riparian vegetation. Vegetation associated with these channels was primarily upland plants. The invasive plant perennial pepperweed was present at Romero Creek. Orestimba Creek was dry at the time of the survey but this creek supports a sycamore alluvial valley woodland riparian community, which is a special-status vegetation community type. Sycamore (Platanus racemosa) provides an open to moderately closed canopy. Mulefat was a common component of the tree understory. Los Banos Creek within the project area has been channelized as it drains out of Los Banos Reservoir. At this location Los Banos Creek was observed as having some limited emergent vegetation and algae in the water. All of the areas mapped as Warv qualify as waters of the U.S. and state and would come under the jurisdiction of the USACE, RWQCB, and CDFW. Waters, Intermittent Creek (Waci) and Ephemeral Creek (Wace). Areas mapped as intermittent creek (Waci) or ephemeral creek (Wace) occur as natural drainages less than 20 feet (6 meters) wide and typically much less. Intermittent drainages range between 5 to 15 feet (1.5 to 4.6 meters) wide and generally lack any wetland vegetation. Ephemeral drainages are more incised, shallow to deep drainages that typically range from 1 to 5 feet (0.3 to 1.5 meters) wide, and can either have non-wetland vegetation or lack any vegetation. Dominant species that occur in these drainage types are oats, filarees (Erodium cicutarium, E. moschatum), bromes (Bromus hordaceus, B. diandrus), hare barley, Mediterranean barley, ryegrass, and a variety of non-native weedy species such as shortpond mustard, yellow star thistle (Centaurea solstitialis), and curly dock. Native species noted in these areas include Baltic rush, California poppy, and vinegar weed. Most of the named, blue-line drainages that did not qualify as riverine habitat were mapped as intermittent creek (Waci). Named intermittent drainages within the project area include Martin Creek, Arkansas Creek, Mustang Creek, Ingram Creek, Salt Creek, Ortigalita Creek, and Little Salado Creek. Salt Creek in the project corridor was observed to have many species associated with alkaline soils. Species noted in this area included iodine bush (Allenrolfea occidentalis), alkali heath, ball saltbush (Atriplex fruticulosa), and alkali pepperweed (Lepidium dictyotum). The intermittent creeks and drainages within the project area and within 1 mile of the project area are subject to federal and state regulation. Some of the ephemeral drainages may not be jurisdictional under the USACE but would be considered by the state agencies as waters of the state and subject to regulation by the RWQCB and possibly by CDFW. Aqueducts and Irrigation Ditches and Canals (Waot, Waic, Wadr, Wot). The project area crosses the Delta-Mendota Canal and the California Aqueduct (Waot) near the intersection of I-205 and I-580, and crosses the Aqueduct again below the O’Neill Forebay. These canals are man-made, concrete-lined channels and although water levels may fluctuate seasonally, the channels are never dry. These aqueducts do not support riparian tree and shrub cover or emergent wetland vegetation. They are strictly open-water channels. The proposed and alternative corridors also cross several irrigation ditches and canals that are used to irrigate hay and alfalfa fields. These are either vegetated or unvegetated and some are concrete lined while others are constructed earthen channels. The Delta-Mendota Canal was constructed as part of the Central Valley Project and its purpose is to supply water to the San Luis Reservoir for storage, and to replace water in the San Joaquin River that is diverted into the Madera Canal and Friant-Kern Canal at Friant Dam. The canal begins at the C. W. “Bill” Jones Pumping Plant (formerly the Tracy Pumping Plant), which raises water 197 feet (60 meters) from the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta. The canal runs south along the western edge of the San Joaquin Valley parallel to the California Aqueduct for most of its route, but diverges to the east after passing the Dos Amigos Substation. Water is pumped from the canal into the O’Neill Forebay by the O’Neill Pumping Plant and then into San Luis Reservoir by the William R. Gianelli Pumping-Generating Plant. The Delta-Mendota Canal is operated by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the San Luis Delta Mendota Water Authority. The canal passes through parts of Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, Merced, and Fresno Counties. The Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct is a system of canals, tunnels, and pipelines that conveys water collected from the Sierra Nevada and Central Valley of northern and central California to southern California. The aqueduct begins at the San Joaquin–Sacramento River Delta at the Banks Pumping Plant, which pumps from the Clifton Court Forebay. Water is pumped to the Bethany Reservoir and from there the aqueduct flows by gravity to the O’Neill Forebay at the San Luis Reservoir. From O'Neill Forebay, it flows to the Dos Amigos Pumping Plant and south. The California Department of Water Resources (DWR) operates and maintains the California Aqueduct. The waters of the Delta-Mendota and California Aqueducts are not jurisdictional since they were constructed in uplands and are not natural drainages. The irrigation ditches and canals within the project area are located mostly in the Tracy area in the northern portion of the project area. Ditches mapped as drainages (Wadr) were earth-lined channels and often had wetland vegetation growing within the channel. These ditches tend to be narrow and shallow, whereas areas mapped as irrigation canal (Waic) were wider and deeper. Some of the irrigation canals were concrete lined and some were earth lined, and some had wetland vegetation growing in the channel although they tend to be unvegetated. It appears that vegetation is periodically removed as part of the maintenance of the irrigation ditches and canals to accommodate water volume and flow. Areas that did not fit into one of the other categories were mapped as “waters, other” (Wot). This category includes drainages that were not associated with an irrigation system for agriculture and did not appear to be a part of a natural drainage system and did not support any wetland vegetation. The irrigation ditches and canals, although man-made and constructed primarily in uplands, could be considered jurisdictional by the USACE if they support wetland vegetation and if they connect hydrologically to a natural creek or navigable waters. The RWQCB could exert jurisdiction over irrigation ditches and canals as waters of the state. However, CDFW would not exert jurisdiction as they are not natural channels. Lakes (Walk), Ponds (Wapd), and Impoundments (Waim). Areas mapped as lakes (Walk) were large and greater than 6 feet (1.8 meters) in depth. Areas mapped as ponds (Wapd) were small and less than 6 feet (1.8 meters) deep. Ponds that were created as a result of impounding water within a drainage, such as stock ponds and man-made ponding features, were mapped as impoundments (Waim). Three areas were mapped as lakes and all are located in the southern portion of the project area. They include O’Neill Forebay, Los Banos Reservoir, and San Luis Reservoir. Areas mapped as ponds, including stock ponds and man-made ponds, are small ponded areas less than 6 feet (1.8 meters) deep. Many of these ponds have some emergent wetland vegetation around the pond edge. However, the ponds tend to be unvegetated in the center either because the duration of ponding or water depth preclude vegetation establishment, or because ponds are increasingly trampled by livestock as they dry. Areas mapped as Walk, Wapd and Waim likely qualify as waters of the U.S. and state and would come under the jurisdiction of the USACE, RWQCB, and CDFW. Ponds that are not associated with a natural drainage, and are therefore not hydrologically connected to a waters of the U.S., may not have any federal jurisdiction as defined by the USACE. Freshwater Marsh (Wfm). The freshwater marsh (Wfm) mapping unit corresponds with the coastal and valley freshwater marsh as defined by Holland (1986). The coastal and valley freshwater marsh is a special-status vegetation type with an S2.1 ranking. Within the project area this type is dominated primarily by cattails (Typha spp.) and may include rushes, sedges and bulrush (Schoenopletcus spp.). The freshwater marsh type occurs as a fringe of permanently flooded emergent marsh at and below the ordinary high water of Corral Hollow, Mountain House, Lone Pine, and Salado creeks and flooded portions of roadside ditches and in some of the irrigation ditches. There are also some isolated freshwater marsh areas that may be remnant portions of drainages that have been filled. Portions of this habitat may be seasonally or infrequently exposed during low water or in drought years. Freshwater marsh is a wetland type and all wetlands are subject to federal and state regulation. If they are hydrologically isolated then there is no federal jurisdiction since the USACE can only take jurisdiction when there is a connection to a waters of the U.S. However, the state RWQCB does not have the same restriction and can exert jurisdiction over isolated wetlands under the state Porter-Cologne Act. Vernal Pools (Wvp) and Swales (Wsw). Areas mapped as vernal pools and swales are seasonal wetlands that occur as depressions within grassland habitat. An area was mapped as a vernal pool or swale if it also had a restrictive layer such as a hard pan or clay pan in the lower soil profile that creates water ponding for a sufficient length of time to support wetland vegetation and supported plant species typically associated with vernal pools. Areas mapped as vernal pools within the project area also qualify as Northern claypan vernal pool, which is a special-status vegetation type with an S1.1 ranking. Plants associated with this type include Fremont's goldfield (Lasthenia fremontii) or coyote thistle (Eryngium sp.) as a dominant species. Associated plants include woolly marbles (Psilocarpus tenellus), popcornflower (Plagiobothrys stipitatus), pale sack clover (Trifolium depauperatum var. amplectens), ryegrass, sand pygmyweed (Crassula connata), and daggerleaf cottonrose (Logfia gallica). Vernal pools are a wetland type and all wetlands are subject to federal and state regulation. If they are hydrologically isolated then there is no federal jurisdiction since the USACE can only take jurisdiction when there is a connection to a waters of the U.S. However, the state RWQCB does not have the same restriction and can exert jurisdiction over isolated wetlands under the state Porter-Cologne Act. Seasonal Wetlands (Wse). Areas mapped as seasonal wetlands (Wse), but not as vernal pools, occur as shallow to deep depressions, in ditches or intermittent drainages, or above man-made levees, and can include wetland adjacent to ponds. Some seasonal wetlands were mapped along and within the major creek drainages such as at Patterson Run, Corral Hollow Creek, and Del Puerto Creek. Plants associated with this vegetation type include rushes, curly dock, rabbit’s foot grass, swamp monkeyflower (Mimulus guttatus), bird’s-foot trefoil (Lotus corniculatus), lambsquarters (Chenopodium album), cheeseweed (Malva parviflora), and perennial pepperweed. Areas mapped as Wse do not support vernal pool plant species and do not have a restrictive soil layer such as a clay pan or hard pan. All wetlands are subject to federal and state regulation. If they are hydrologically isolated then there is no federal jurisdiction since the USACE can only take jurisdiction when there is a connection to a waters of the U.S. However, the state RWQCB does not have the same restriction and can exert jurisdiction over isolated wetlands under the state Porter-Cologne Act. 3.1.2.3 Invasive Species Noxious weeds include species designated as federal noxious weeds by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, species listed by the California Department of Food and Agriculture, and other exotic pest plants designated by the California Invasive Plant Council. Roads, highways, railways, utility corridors, and related construction projects are some of the principal dispersal pathways for noxious weeds. The introduction and spread of pest plants adversely affect natural plant communities by displacing native plant species that provide shelter and forage for wildlife species. A number of invasive species were observed within the various habitats. The main noxious weeds noted include giant reed (Arundo donax), perennial pepperweed, Italian thistle (Carduus pycnocephalus), winged thistle (Carduus tenuiflorus), tocalote, yellow star thistle, bull thistle (Cirsium vulgare), stinkwort (Dittrichia graveolens), and milk thistle. One very invasive grass species, medusa-head grass, was also observed in some of the non-native grassland areas. There were numerous other non-native, invasive species but they are less noxious and invasive than the species listed above based on the California Invasive Plant Council (Cal-IPC) ranking and listing system. Giant reed and perennial pepperweed are associated with wetland areas, and perennial pepperweed was observed in many locations throughout the project area. Locations of notable stands were primarily associated with creeks. Perennial pepperweed was observed at Corral Hollow, Mountain House, Del Puerto, and Lone Tree Creeks, and in many other locations. Giant reed was observed only at Corral Hollow Creek. 3.1.2.4 General Wildlife Resources From a general wildlife perspective, habitats in the project area can be combined into a few distinct categories. Grassland/brush habitats comprise native and non-native grassland, wildflower fields, coyote brush scrub, and most “other” types. These habitats also include ephemeral and intermittent creeks; while these habitat types may convey water during rainy periods and may be jurisdictional, they support only upland vegetation. The other distinct categories are riparian and wetland habitats, openwater habitats (such as lakes, rivers, impoundments, and irrigation canals), and agricultural areas. Wildlife commonly associated with grassland/brush habitats include western fence lizard (Sceloporis occidentalis), northern Pacific rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus oreganus), gopher snake (Pituophis catenifer), California toad (Anaxyrus boreas halophilus), California horned lark (Eremophila alpestris actia), western meadowlark (Sturnella neglecta), common raven (Corvus corax), Say’s phoebe (Sayornis saya), western kingbird (Tyrannus verticalis), black-tailed hare (Lepus californicus), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), non-native red fox (Vulpes vulpes), and coyote (Canis latrans). Riparian habitats in the project area comprise a few narrow stands of riparian forest, including a stand of sycamore alluvial woodland in Orestimba Creek, and riparian scrub; these generally support ashthroated flycatcher (Myiarchus cinerascens), American kestrel (Falco sparverius), black phoebe (Sayornis nigricans), great horned owl (Bubo virginianus), Bullock’s oriole (Icterus bullockii), brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater), and house finch (Carpodacus mexicanus). Wetlands are made up primarily of freshwater marsh, seasonal wetland, and vernal pool, although the character of these types is very different, and during spring 2014 surveys, the vernal pools and seasonal wetlands were all dry. Freshwater marsh supports Sierran treefrog (Pseudacris sierra), marsh wren (Cistothorus palustris), great blue heron (Ardea herodias), Virginia rail (Rallus limicola), and red-winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus), and where it is associated with open water, mallard (Anas platyrhynchos), American coot (Fulica americana), and common muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus). Open-water habitats include lake, river, impoundment, pond, irrigation canal, and aqueduct, although most of the rivers in spring of 2014 were dry, and most are probably intermittent even in the wettest years. Lake habitats were found at O’Neill Forebay and Los Banos Reservoir. Wildlife using these features include fishes such as bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus), common carp (Cyprinus carpio), largemouth bass (Micropteris salmoides), and white crappie (Pomoxis annularis), and birds such as American wigeon (Anas americana), bufflehead (Bucephala albeola), Canada goose (Anser canadensis), and mallard. Rivers that contained drying pockets of standing water were Corral Hollow Creek, Salado Creek, and Del Puerto Creek. These supported larvae of California toad, American bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeiana) adults and larvae, and western pond turtle (Emys marmorata). Irrigation canals were seen to support American bullfrog. The Delta-Mendota Canal and California Aqueduct were often used by mallard, coot, and double-crested cormorant (Phalacrocorax auritus), and bridges over these canals supported nesting cliff swallows (Petrochelidon pyrrhonota) and, in one case, nesting rock pigeons (Columba livia). Banks of these large canals often support higher densities of small mammals than surrounding habitats (USFWS, 2010c). Agricultural areas include grain fields, pasture, orchard, and vineyard, and these habitats were found to be supporting red-winged blackbird, Brewer’s blackbird (Euphagus cyanocephalus), western meadowlark, and foraging barn swallow (Hirundo rustica), and would also be good foraging habitat for raccoon (Procyon lotor) and striped skunk. While agricultural areas may be used for foraging or even nesting by some wildlife species, and rice fields have become essential habitats for giant garter snake, they are primarily not equivalent to the native or naturalized uplands that provide the functions and values required by upland special-status species. There were no Holland (1986) woodland habitat types in the project area with the exception of an “other” type, a eucalyptus grove containing scattered ornamental pines (Pinus spp.), found in two locations. This type was observed to support Eurasian collared dove (Streptopelia decaocto), great horned owl, Say’s phoebe, American kestrel, house finch, mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), and others. One small grove was supporting at least 10 species of nesting birds during spring 2014 surveys. 3.1.2.5 Migration Coridors Wildlife movement includes migration (usually one direction per season), inter-population movement (long-term genetic exchange), and small travel pathways (daily movement corridors within an animal’s territory). While small travel pathways usually facilitate movement for daily home range activities such as foraging or escape from predators, they also provide connection between outlying populations and the main corridor, permitting an increase in gene flow between populations (Zuidema et al., 1997). Linkages between habitat types can extend for miles between primary habitat areas and occur on a large scale throughout California. They facilitate movement between populations located in discrete areas and those located within larger areas. Even where patches of pristine habitat are fragmented, such as occurs with coastal scrub and many other California habitats, movement between wildlife populations is facilitated through habitat linkages, such as migration corridors and movement corridors (Zuidema et al., 1997). CDFW (CDFW, 2014b) commented during scoping that the area north of San Luis Reservoir to south of Los Banos Reservoir (in the San Luis and South segments on Figure 2a) is a critical migration corridor for San Joaquin kit fox for continued existence and genetic diversity of the northern kit fox population. The Santa Nella area east of O’Neill Forebay and west of I-5 is identified as a critical migratory “pinch-point.” The creation of San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay resulted in a substantial barrier to north–south movement, exacerbated by busy highways (state routes 152 and 33, and I-5) and urban development. Other species in the region, such as tule elk (Cervus canadensis nannodes), are also impeded by these existing features. However, because impacts to habitat from the project are primarily short-term and create no barriers to movement, the project would not contribute substantially to regional cumulative impacts resulting from interference with wildlife movement. The project’s contribution to cumulative wildlife movement impacts will not be considerable under CEQA. 3.2 Regional Species and Habitats of Concern In this report, special-status species and sensitive habitats are those plants, animals, and vegetation communities found on the CNDDB, CRPR, and USFWS species lists, or otherwise known to occur in the region, for which general geographic range and habitat overlaps with the project area and that are: (1) listed, proposed for listing, or candidates for listing as threatened or endangered under federal or state endangered species acts, (2) California species of special concern, (3) California fully protected species, (4) found on California Rare Plant Rank (CRPR)3 lists 1B.1, 1B.2, and 2, and/or (5) have a state rank of S1, S2, or S3. Species and habitats that do not fall into at least one of these classifications are not discussed further with the following exception: two CRPR Rank 4 plants were identified during surveys and are discussed below. 3 Formerly known as California Native Plant Society (CNPS) Lists; additional detail on rank definitions provided in Table 1 below. Figure 4 provides a general overview of CNDDB records within the nine-quad search area for all project quads (see Appendix B for additional detail). Figure 5 shows areas of critical habitat for federally listed species relative to project corridors.  Figure 4a of Appendix C, titled "CNDDB Occurrences," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 4b of Appendix C, titled "CNDDB Occurrences," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 4c of Appendix C, titled "CNDDB Occurrences," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 4d of Appendix C, titled "CNDDB Occurrences," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 4e of Appendix C, titled "CNDDB Occurrences," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 5 of Appendix C, titled “Critical Habitat," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy Figure 5. Critical Habitat 0 5 10Miles Tracy OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/8/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI, USFWS Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Contra Costa Goldfields Large-Flowered Fiddleneck Critical Habitat Species South Central Coast Steelhead Central Coast Steelhead Alameda Whipsnake Longhorn Fairy Shrim p Vernal Pool Fairy Shrimp Delta Smelt California Red-Legged Frog California Tiger Salamander Greene's tuctoria Hoover's spurge 3.2.1 Special-status Plants and Habitats of Concern Table 1 below presents 38 special-status plants and 11 special-status or sensitive vegetation communities that were reviewed for potential to occur within the project areabased on a search of the CNDDB, CRPR, and USFWS databases for the quadrangles within and surrounding the project area. Of the 38 species reviewed, eight were considered to not have the potential to occur based on lack of habitat; of the 11 vegetation communities reviewed, five were considered to not be present. Table 1. Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence (No, Low, Moderate, High)/ Rationale5 Amsinckia grandiflora Large flowered fiddleneck FE/SE/1B Cismontane woodland and valley and foothill grassland. Blooms April to May. Elevation: 275–550m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, and San Joaquin Counties. Low. Potential grassland habitat in project area. Known from fewer than 5 natural occurrences. Astragalus tener var. tener Alkali milk-vetch —/—/1B Playas, valley and foothill grassland (alkaline clay), vernal pools in alkaline areas. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 1–60m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and vernal pool habitat in project area. Recorded occurrences near Byron/ Livermore and Clifton Court Forebay. Atriplex cordulata var. cordulata Heartscale —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, meadows and seeps, valley and foothill grasslands (sandy) in saline or alkaline areas. Blooms April to October. Elevation: 0–560m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in project area. Recorded occurrences from Clifton Court Forebay. Atriplex joaquiniana San Joaquin spearscale —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, meadows and seeps, valley and foothill grasslands. Blooms April to October. Elevation: 1–835m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in project area. Recorded occurrences from Byron, Bryon Hot Springs, Mtn House Rd, and Clifton Court Forebay. Blepharizonia plumosa Big tarplant —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland, usually on clay soils. Blooms July to October. Elevation: 30–505m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, and San Joaquin, Solano and Stanislaus Counties High. Potential grassland habitat in project area. Recorded occurrences from Tracy, Tesla, Corral Hollow, and many other locations near project area. California macrophylla Round-leaved filaree —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland on clay soils. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 15–1200m. Known from many counties including Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Merced, and San Joaquin. Observed. Habitat in project area. This species was observed within the project area along with Convolvulus simulans and Hesperevax caulescens. Caulanthus lemmonii Lemmon’s jewelflower —/—/1B Pinyon and juniper woodland, valley and foothill grassland. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 80–1220m. Known from Alameda, Fresno, Merced, San Joaquin, and other counties. High. Potential grassland habitat in project area. Recorded occurrences from between Tesla and Corral Hollow, Corral Hollow and Los Banos. Table 1. Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence (No, Low, Moderate, High)/ Rationale5 Chamaesyce hooveri Hoover’s spurge FT//1B Vernal pools on volcanic mudflow or clay substrate. Blooms July to October. Elevation 25–250m. Known from Butte, Colusa, Glenn, Merced, Stanislaus, Tehama and Tulare Counties. Low. Potential vernal pool habitat in project area on clay substrate but no volcanic mudflow vernal pools observed. There are no records for this species within the 9-quadrangle search for the project. Clarkia rostrata Beaked clarkia —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland on north-facing slopes, sometimes on sandstone. Blooms April to May. Elevation 60–500m. Known from Merced, Mariposa, Stanislaus, and Tuolumne Counties. Low. Potential grassland habitat in project area. There are no records for this species within the 9-quadrangle search for the project. Convolvulus simulans Small-flowered morning-glory —/—/4 Chaparral (openings), coastal scrub, valley and foothill grassland on clay soils or serpentinite seeps. Blooms March to July. Elevation: 30–700m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and other counties. Observed. Grassland habitat in project area. This species was found along with California macrophylla within the project area. Delphinium californicum ssp. interius Hospital Canyon larkspur —/—/1B Chaparral, cismontane woodland (mesic), coastal scrub in wet boggy meadows, openings in chaparral and in canyons. Blooms April to June. Elevation: 195–1095m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin and other counties. No. No potential habitat in project area. CNDDB record from a 1938 collection. Delphinium recurvatum Recurved larkspur —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland in alkaline soils. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 3–790m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Merced, San Joaquin and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in project area but limited to areas with alkaline soils. Multiple recorded occurrences in the region. Eryngium racemosum Delta button-celery —/SE/1B Riparian scrub in vernally mesic clay depressions. Blooms June to October. Elevation: 3–30m. Known from Contra Costa, Merced, San Joaquin and other counties. Moderate. Potential riparian habitat in project area. Recorded occurrence from near Grayson, 2 miles east of Westley. Eryngium spinosepalum Spiny-sepaled button celery —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland, vernal pools. Blooms April to May. Elevation: 80–255m. Known from Contra Costa, Merced and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and vernal pool habitat in project area. Recorded occurrence from Byron Airport. Eschscholzia rhombipetala Diamond-petaled California poppy —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland on alkaline and clay soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation: 0–975m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Colusa, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo and Stanislaus Counties. High. Potential grassland habitat in project area but limited to alkaline and clay soils. Recorded occurrences from Corral Hollow near Castle Rock, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and hills south of Byron. Hesperevax caulescens Hogwallow starfish —/—/4 Valley and foothill grassland in mesic sites and on clay soils, shallow vernal pools. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 0–505m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, Fresno, Merced and other counties. Observed. Grassland habitat in project area. This species was observed within the project area in same areas as California macrophylla. Table 1. Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence (No, Low, Moderate, High)/ Rationale5 Hibiscus lasiocarpos var. occidentalis Woolly rose mallow —/—/1B Freshwater marshes and swamps, often in riprap on sides of levees. Blooms June to September. Elevation: 0–120m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin and other counties. Low. Limited potential habitat in project area. Recorded occurrences from Clifton Court Forebay. Lasthenia conjugens Contra Costa goldfields FE/—/1B Cismontane woodland, alkaline playas, valley and foothill grassland, vernal pools in mesic sites. Microhabitat is vernal pools, swales and low depressions in open grassy areas. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 0–470m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Mendocino, Monterey, Marin, Napa, Santa Barbara, Santa Clara, Solano and Sonoma Counties. Low. Potential grassland and marginal vernal pool habitat in project area and limited areas with alkaline soils. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB quad search. Layia munzii Munz’s tidy-tips —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, valley and foothill grassland on hillsides in white-grey alkaline soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation 150–700m. Known from Fresno, Kern, San Benito, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Low. Limited potential habitat in project area based on microhabitat of white-grey alkaline soils. Lepidium jaredii ssp. album Panoche peppergrass —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland on white or grey clay lenses on steep slopes, incidental in alluvial fans and washes, prefers clay and gypsum soils. Blooms February to June. Elevation 185–275m. Known from Fresno, San Benito and San Luis Obispo Counties. Low. Limited potential habitat in project area based on microhabitat preference. Leptosyne hamiltonii Mt. Hamilton coreopsis —/—/1B Cismontane woodland in rocky areas. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 550–1300m. Known from Alameda and other counties. No. No habitat in project area. Known from Mt. Hamilton Range. Lilaeopsis masonii Mason’s lilaeopsis —/SR/1B Brackish or freshwater marshes and swamps, riparian scrub. Blooms April to November. Elevation: 0–10m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin and other counties. Low. Typical habitat lacking in project area. Recorded occurrences from Clifton Court Forebay and other areas. Limosella australis Delta mudwort —/—/2B Freshwater or brackish marshes and swamps, riparian scrub usually on mud banks. Blooms May to August. Elevation: 0–3m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin and other counties. Low. Limited habitat in project area. Known from Victoria Canal. Madia radiata Showy golden madia —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland mostly on adobe clay in grassland or around shrubs. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 25–1215m. Known from Contra Costa, Fresno, Kings, Kern, Monterey, San Joaquin and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in project area but limited to adobe clay soils. Recorded occurrences from lower Hospital Canyon, mouth of Big Panoche Canyon, Corral Hollow and Tumey Hills. Malacothamnus hallii Hall’s bush-mallow —/—/1B Chaparral, coastal scrub. Blooms May to October. Elevation: 10–760m. Known from Contra Costa, Merced, Stanislaus, and other counties. No. No habitat in project area. Table 1. Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence (No, Low, Moderate, High)/ Rationale5 Monardella leucocephala Merced monardella —/—/1A Valley and foothill grassland; requires moist subalkaline sands associated with low elevation grassland. Blooms May to August. Elevation 35–100m. No. This species is presumed extinct. The mircohabitat requirements for this species area lacking in project area. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB search. Navarretia nigelliformis ssp. radians Shining navarretia —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland, vernal pools, sometimes clay. Blooms April to July. Elevation: 76–1000m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and vernal pool habitat in project area. Known occurrence from Billie Wright Rd NE of Los Banos Valley. Navarretia myersii ssp. myersii Pincushion navarretia —/—/1B Vernal pools, often acidic. Blooms April to May. Elevation 20–330m. Known from Amador, Calaveras, Merced, Placer, and Sacramento Counties. Low. Vernal pool habitat in project area but not acidic soils. No records in CNDDB search. Phacelia ciliata var. opaca Merced phacelia —/—/3 Valley and foothill grassland on adobe or clay soils of valley floors, open hills or alkaline flats. Blooms February to May. Elevation: 60–100m. Known from Merced County. Very low. Limited potential grassland habitat in project area. No known occurrences within CNDDB search area. Phacelia phacelioides Mt. Diablo phacelia —/—/1B Chaparral, cismontane woodland, on rock outcrops and talus slopes, sometimes on serpentinite. Blooms April to May. Elevation: 500–1370m. Known from Contra Costa, Stanislaus and other counties. No. No habitat in project area. Pseudobahia bahiifolia Hartweg’s golden sunburst FE/SE/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland on acidic clay soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation 15–150m. Known from Fresno, Madera, Merced, Stanislaus, Tuolumne and Yuba Counties. Low. No acidic clay soils in project area. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB search area. Sidalcea keckii Keck’s checkerbloom FE/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland — occurs on grassy slopes in blue oak woodland. Blooms April to June. Elevation: 75–650m. Known from Fresno and Merced Counties. No. No blue oak woodland in project area. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB search area. Senecio aphanactis Chaparral ragwort —/—/2B Chaparral, cismontane woodland, coastal scrub, sometimes in alkaline soils. Blooms January to April. Elevation: 15–800m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Merced and other counties. No. No habitat in project area. Strepthanthus insignis ssp. lyonii Arburua Ranch jewelflower —/—/1B Coastal scrub, sometimes serpentinite. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 230–855m. Known from Merced County. No. No habitat in project area. Symphyotrichum lentum Suisun Marsh aster —/—/1B Brackish and freshwater marshes and swamps. Blooms May to November. Elevation: 0–3m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin and other counties. Low. Limited habitat in project area. No known occurrences within 1 mile of project area. Table 1. Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence (No, Low, Moderate, High)/ Rationale5 Trichocoronis wrightii var. wrightii Wright’s trichocoronis —/—/2B Meadows and seeps, marshes and swamps, riparian forest, vernal pools. Microhabitat is mud flats of vernal lakes, drying river beds, alkali meadows. Blooms May to September. Elevation: 5–435m. Known from Merced County and presumed extirpated from San Joaquin County. Low. Microhabitat not present or very limited in project area. Tropidocarpum capparideum Caper-fruited tropidocarpum —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland, alkaline hills on alkaline clay soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation: 1–455m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, San Joaquin and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in project area but limited to alkaline clay soils. Recorded occurrences from Mountain House, Byron, Livermore and Tracy. Tuctoria greenei Green’s tuctoria FE/SR/1B Vernal pools. Blooms May to September. Elevation 30–1070m. Known from Merced County. Presumed extirpated from Fresno, Madera, San Joaquin and Stanislaus Counties. Very Low. Limited potential vernal pool habitat in project area but no known occurrences within CNDDB search area. SPECIAL-STATUS / SENSITIVE VEGETATION COMMUNITIES Alkali Meadow S2.1 Dense to fairly open growth of perennial grasses and sedges, usually low growing but occasionally with tufts up to 1 m high growing and flowering from late spring to early fall. Occurs on fine-textured more or less permanently moist alkaline soils. Characteristic species include Allenrolfea occidentalis, Anemopsis californica, Carex spp., Distichlis spicata, Juncus ssp., Sporobolus airoides, etc. (Holland, 1986). No. No areas mapped in project area. Alkali Seep S2.1 Low growing perennial herbs, usually forming a relatively complete cover, growing through the year in areas with mild winters. Characteristic species include Distichlis spicata, Nitrophila occidentalis, Potomogeton latifolius, p. pectinatus, Ruppia maritima, Zannichellia palustris, Najas marina (Holland, 1986). No. No habitat in project area. Cismontane Alkali Marsh S1.1 Dominated by perennial, emergent herbaceous monocots up to 2 m tall with most growth and flowering in the summer. More alkaline than Coastal Brackish Marsh. Characteristic species include Anemopsis californica, Distichlis spicata, Carex spp., Elymus triticoides, Frankenia grandifolia, Juncus spp. Pluchea purpurascens, Salicornia virginica, Typha spp. (Holland, 1986). No. No habitat in project area. Coastal and Valley Freshwater Marsh S2.1 Dominated by perennial, emergent monocots to 4–5m tall, often forming completely closed canopies. Schoenoplectus spp. and Typha spp. Dominate. Occurs in sites that lack significant current and that are permanently flooded by freshwater (Holland, 1986). Observed. Freshwater marsh areas mapped in project area. Table 1. Special-status Plant Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence (No, Low, Moderate, High)/ Rationale5 Great Valley Cottonwood Riparian Forest S2.1 A dense, broad-leafed, winter deciduous riparian forest dominated by Populus fremontii and Salix gooddingii. Occurs in fine-grained alluvial soils near perennial or nearly perennial streams that provide subsurface irrigation even if the channel is dry (Holland, 1986). Observed. Habitat present and mapped in project area. One recorded CNDDB occurrence from Quinto Creek north of San Luis Reservoir. Great Valley Valley Oak Riparian Forest S1.1 A medium to tall broad-leafed winter deciduous, closed-canopy riparian forest dominated by Quercus lobata. Understory species include Fraxinus latifolia, Juglans hindsii and Platanus racemosa. Restricted to the highest parts of floodplains, most distant from or higher above active river channels (Holland, 1986). No. No habitat in project area. Northern Claypan Vernal Pool S1.1 Depressions in grassland with vernal pool plants such as Eryngium spp., Plagiobothrys spp., Lasthenia spp., Psilocarphus spp., etc. Often more or less saline (Holland, 1986). Observed. Vernal pool habitat mapped in project area. Sycamore Alluvial Woodland S1.1 Open to moderately closed, winter deciduous broad-leafed riparian woodland overwhelmingly dominated by well-spaced Platanus racemosa. Aesculus californica and Sambucus mexicana are widely spaced in the subcanopy. Understory is usually non-native grasses or Baccharis viminea. Occurs in braded, depositional channels of intermittent streams, usually with cobbly or bouldery substrate (Holland, 1986). Observed. Sycamore Alluvial woodland habitat mapped in project area at Orestimba Creek. CNDDB occurrence from Los Banos Creek west of Los Banos Reservoir; Orestimba Creek NW of Newman. Valley Needlegrass Grassland S3.1 Grassland dominated by perennial, tussockforming Nasella pulchra. Native and introduced annuals occur between the perennials, often exceeding the bunchgrasses in cover. Usually on fine-textured (often clay) soils, moist or even waterlogged during winter, but very dry during summer (Holland, 1986). Observed. Habitat present in project area in limited sites within non-native grassland areas. Valley Sink Scrub S1.1 Low, open to dense succulent shrublands dominated by alkali-tolerant chenopods, especially Allenrolfea occidentalis or several Sueada species (Holland, 1986). No. No habitat in project area. Valley Wildrye Grassland S2.1 A dense sod prairie dominated by Elymus triticoides with greater than 50percent cover. Occurs in moist sites at low elevations, often adjacent to stands of riparian forest or freshwater marsh. Soils are frequently subalkaline and/or seasonally overflowed (Holland, 1986). Observed. Habitat present in project area in limited areas. One occurrence noted at Corral Hollow Creek. 1 - Critical habitat only reported if within 1 mile of APE. 2 - Federal listing FE = federally endangered FT = federally threatened 3 - State listing–status codes SE = state endangered ST = state threatened SR = state rare 1A = CRPR Rank 1A: Plants presumed extirpated in California and either rare or extinct elsewhere. 1B = CRPR Rank 1B: Plants that are rare, threatened or endangered in California and elsewhere. 2B = CRPR Rank 2B: Plants that are rare, threatened or endangered in California but more common elsewhere. 3 = CRPR Rank 3: Plants about which more information is needed – a review list. 4 = CRPR Rank 4 Plants with a limited distribution – a watch list. Threat rank of 0.1 (e.g., 1B.1) indicates a plant seriously endangered in California (high degree/immediacy of threat), 0.2 indicates a plant fairly endangered in California (moderate degree/immediacy of threat), 0.3 indicates a plant not very endangered in California (low degree/immediacy of threats or no current threats known). All CRPR 1A and some CRPR 3 plants lacking threat information receive no threat-rank extension 4 - Vegetation communities with an S1 to S3 code are considered to be rare and threatened throughout their range (Sawyer et al., 2009). S1 vegetation communities have fewer than 6 viable occurrences statewide and/or up to 518 hectares. S2 vegetation communities have 6 to 20 viable occurrences statewide and/or more than 518–2,590 hectares. S3 vegetation communities have 21–100 viable occurrences statewide and/or more than 2,590–12,950 hectares. Those with an additional threat rank of 0.1 are considered to be very threatened. 5 - Likelihood of occurrence: no, low, moderate, and high accounts for habitat presence and quality and geographic range 3.2.2 Special-status Wildlife and Fishes Table 2 presents the special-status wildlife and fish species for which project-related impacts were considered. A total of 47 species of invertebrate, fish, reptile, amphibian, bird, and mammal, plus migratory birds, are considered in this document. Of these, six will not be discussed further because they are not expected to occur in the project area: green sturgeon, Central Valley spring-run chinook, Sacramento River winter-run chinook, Fresno kangaroo rat, riparian brush rabbit, and riparian woodrat. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 INVERTEBRATES Conservancy fairy shrimp Branchinecta conservatio FE * Inhabits relatively large, turbid cool-water vernal pools in the Central Valley. Occurs primarily in six disjunct populations in Tehama, Butte, Solano, Glenn, Merced, and northern Ventura Counties. Yes. Not known to occur and suitable habitat not known to be present, but cannot be ruled out. Longhorn fairy shrimp Branchinecta longiantenna FE * Found in clear to highly turbid clay or grassbottomed vernal pools, pools in swales, clear pools in sandstone depressions, and roadside ditches. Known occurrences highly disjunct: 8–10 locations in Merced, Contra Costa, Alameda, and San Luis Obispo Counties, including Altamont Pass and other locations near the project. Yes. Potentially occurs in vernal and other seasonal pools and swales within project area. Valley elderberry longhorn beetle Desmocerus californicus dimorphus FT * Dependent on elderberry shrubs, which are generally found along waterways and in floodplains. Yes. Potentially occurs in elderberries found along Salado Creek; elderberries may occur in other locations not yet surveyed. Vernal pool fairy shrimp Branchinecta lynchi FT * Found in pools ranging from small, clear sandstone rock pools to large, turbid, alkaline grassland valley-floor pools. Disjunct populations found in the Central Valley from Shasta Co to Tulare Co, and in the coast ranges from northern Solano Co to Ventura Co. Yes. Potentially occurs in vernal and other temporary pools within project area. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Vernal pool tadpole shrimp Lepidurus packardi FE * Inhabits vernal pools and swales ranging from clear to highly turbid and from small to large. Inhabits sites in the Central Valley from Shasta Co to northern Tulare Co and in the central coast range from Solano Co to Alameda Co. Yes. Potentially occurs in vernal pools within project area. FISHES Green sturgeon Acipenser medirostris FT SSC Found in fresh and saltwater habitats, including deep pools in large, turbulent, freshwater rivers. Spawns in deep, fast water. Occurs in Sacramento River and tributaries, the Delta, and San Francisco, Suisun, and San Pablo bays. The project does not overlap with critical habitat. No. Project is not near suitable or occupied aquatic habitat. Species will not be discussed further in this document. Delta smelt and critical habitat Hypomesus transpacificus FT SE Found in the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta in brackish waters, also in Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers. Spawns in shallow waters. Critical habitat overlaps with the northernmost ~3 miles of the project area. No. While critical habitat overlaps with a small portion of the northern project area, the project is not near or continuous with suitable or occupied aquatic habitat. Chinook—Central Valley spring-run ESU Onchorhynchus tshawytscha FT ST This ESU migrates through estuaries and spawns in spring in cold, clean, fast-flowing rivers with gravel bottoms. Occurs in Sacramento River and its tributaries. No. Project area does not overlap with the range of this ESU. Species will not be discussed further in this document. Chinook—Sacramento River winter-run ESU Onchorhynchus tshawytscha FE SE This ESU migrates through estuaries and spawns in winter in cold, clean, fast-flowing rivers with gravel bottoms. Occurs in Sacramento River and its tributaries. No. Project area does not overlap with the range of this ESU. Species will not be discussed further in this document. Steelhead—Central Valley DPS and critical habitat Oncorhynchus mykiss FT * Anadromous form of rainbow trout found in Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers and their tributaries. Spawns in shallow, swift riffles with small gravel and cobble. The western boundary of this DPS encompasses most of the project area. Yes. Project area falls within boundaries of this DPS and steelhead are often rescued from fish facilities south of Clifton Court Forebay near the north end of project; however, the nearest occurrence outside of fish facilities is 5 mi east in the San Joaquin River. No creeks known to support this species occur in or near the project area. REPTILES Alameda whipsnake and critical habitat Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus FT ST Found in chaparral, valley-foothill riparian, and valley-foothill woodlands on south-facing slopes and ravines where shrubs form a mosaic with trees, grasslands, and rocky outcrops; may also use adjacent grasslands. Current range (2011): throughout Contra Costa County, most of Alameda County, and small portions of northern Santa Clara and western San Joaquin Counties. Yes. Occurrence records from Corral Hollow area; however, suitable mosaic habitats and riparian are extremely limited within and near project area. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Blunt-nosed leopard lizard Gambelia sila FE SE, CFP Occurs in semiarid grasslands, alkali flats, and washes; prefers flat areas with open space; avoids dense vegetation. Current range extends from northwestern Santa Barbara County and western Kern County north to central Merced County; in the project area, the northern limit corresponds roughly with Santa Nella. Yes. Occurrence records in vicinity of Los Banos Substation (Hwy 152) and south. Areas of high-quality habitat within project area. California legless lizard Anniella pulchra (sensu stricto)5 * SSC Found in sandy and loamy sand soils in saltbush scrub, chaparral, and woodland habitats on valley floor and adjacent inner coast range foothills. Range extends discontinuously throughout project area, depending on soil type and vegetation. Yes. Locality records are scattered throughout project area. Coast horned lizard Phrynosoma blainvillii * SSC Most common in lowlands along sandy washes with scattered low bushes, open areas for sunning, bushes for cover, patches of loose soil for burial, and abundant ant and insect prey. Coast ranges from Contra Costa Co south to Baja, including Sierra foothills; absent from Central Valley floor. Yes. Occurrence records in project area and potential in sandy washes associated with creeks and drainages. Giant garter snake Thamnophis gigas FT ST Found in sloughs, canals, and other small waterways with prey base of small fish and amphibians on the floor of the Central Valley. Requires grassy banks and emergent vegetation for basking, and areas of high ground protected from flooding during winter. Range extends from Chico in Butte Co south to Mendota Wildlife Area in Fresno Co. Known from Los Banos Creek. Yes. Not known from closer than ~6 miles to project area but known to occur in Los Banos Creek. Pacific pond turtle Emys marmorata * SSC Permanent or nearly permanent lakes, ponds, marshes, rivers, streams, & irrigation ditches with aquatic veg. Needs basking sites such as partially submerged logs, vegetation mats, or open mud banks. Nests in suitable uplands, such as sandy banks or grassy, open fields on unshaded, south-facing slopes with less than 25% slope. Observed. Occurrence records at several locations within 1 mile. Observed in Del Puerto Creek in 2014 and Los Banos Res in 2015. Likely to occur in suitable habitats in or near project. San Joaquin whipsnake Masticophis flagellum ruddocki * SSC Occurs in open, dry vegetative associations with little or no tree cover. Found in the coast ranges and southern San Joaquin Valley from Contra Costa south to San Luis Obispo and Kern Counties. Yes. Occurrence records within 1 mile and suitable habitat available through much of project area. AMPHIBIANS California red-legged frog and critical habitat Rana draytonii FT SSC Found in ponds, streams, and wetlands. Highly aquatic and prefers permanent, quiet pools and streams with dense vegetation. May travel in a direct route between habitats regardless of cover. Occurs in coast ranges from southern Monterey Co south to Baja. Yes. A number of occurrence records within 1 mile from Corral Hollow north, and from Los Banos Creek. Project overlaps with critical habitat for about 5 miles (Figure 5). Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 California tiger salamander—central California DPS Ambystoma californiense FT ST, SSC Annual grasslands and grassy understory of valley-foothill hardwood habitats in central and northern CA. Needs vernal pools or other aquatic habitats for breeding near uplands with underground burrows. Range from eastern foothills of Sierra west to outer coast range, from Sonoma and Yolo Counties south to Santa Barbara Co. Yes. Occurrence records in northern project area and potential where there are creeks, stock ponds, and vernal or other temporary pools adjacent to suitable uplands. Foothill yellow-legged frog Rana boylii * SSC Found in partly shaded streams and riffles with a rocky substrate. Basks on large rocks. Coast ranges from Oregon border south to Transverse Mountains of Los Angeles Co, as well as Sierra and Cascades foothills. Yes. Older occurrence records from Corral Hollow and Los Banos creeks. Low potential in all drainages in project area. Western spadefoot Spea hammondii * SSC Primarily found in grasslands but will occasionally use valley-foothill hardwood woodlands. Breeds in temporary rain pools without bullfrogs, fish, or crayfish; uses uplands when not breeding. Ranges throughout Central Valley and surrounding foothills from Redding south to southern California. Yes. Occurrence records from Salado Creek; potential in Del Puerto Creek, other creeks, and vernal and other temporary pools in project area. BIRDS Bald eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus (nesting and wintering) * SE, CFP Nests on cliffs or in large trees in mountain and foothill forests and woodlands near reservoirs, lakes, and rivers where it feeds on fish and waterfowl. In winter, also takes hares and other mammals. Resident in suitable nesting areas; winters through much of the rest of the state. Yes. Would not nest in project area and no CNDDB records but a number of winter and spring eBird reports from San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay. Burrowing owl Athene cunicularia (burrow and wintering sites) * SSC Grasslands, deserts, and along roads, canals, and edges of agricultural areas; rarely in vicinity of shrubs and trees; dens in underground burrows typically created by other animals, but also in culverts and debris piles. Found primarily in the Central Valley and other open, flat areas of the state; absent from steep terrain, foothill habitats, and higher elevations. Observed. Occurrence records and reports in or near project north of Corral Hollow Creek, an old occurrence record near Del Puerto Creek, and recent occurrence records south of O’Neill Forebay. Observed in 2014 north of Patterson Pass Rd (Fig 3). Potential in other areas but likely absent in deeply incised foothills between Corral Hollow and Highway 152. California condor Gymnogyps californianus FE SE, CFP Permanent resident of semi-arid mountain ranges surrounding the southern Central Valley. Nests in caves, crevices, behind rock slabs, or on large ledges on high cliffs; roosts on cliffs and in large trees and snags. Forages over large areas of open rangeland; obligate carrion eater. Yes. Nearest eBird record 20 mi W of Los Banos Res, nearest CNDDB record 35 miles southwest of Dos Amigos Substation, potential nesting habitat near project area between Patterson Pass Road and Corral Hollow. Not expected to nest there in near future but could expand into that area. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Golden eagle Aquila chrysaetos (nesting and wintering) * CFP Rolling foothill or coast-range terrain where open grassland turns to scattered oaks, sycamores, or large digger pines. Nests primarily in cliffs and large trees, but also transmission towers and nest platforms in open areas. Resident through much of the state, winter-only in Central Valley. Observed. Occurrence records and other reports as well as spring 2014 and 2015 observations in several locations; potential foraging through much of project area; potential nesting on existing towers and elsewhere. Least Bell’s vireo Vireo bellii pusillus (nesting) FE SE Found in lowland riparian with willows and dense understory. Nests in a variety of plants that provide concealment with dense foliage. Current range primarily southern CA but species is expanding back into historic range, which included Central Valley north to Red Bluff. 2005-07 nest records at San Joaquin River NWR, Stanislaus Co, ~6 mi east of project area, but no recent nesting there. Yes. Potential to occur in any of the dense riparian habitats within the project area. Historic records (1928- 32) in Corral Hollow and Del Puerto creeks. Loggerhead shrike Lanius ludovicianus (nesting) * SSC Prefers open, thinly wooded land or scrub savanna with clearings, including meadows, pastures, old orchards. Nests in dense shrubs or small trees with thick foliage, sometimes isolated trees. Found in suitable habitats throughout the state; absent from Sierra and Cascades and primarily forested areas. Observed. No occurrence records within 1 mile but many reports from specific locations such as Corral Hollow, Del Puerto Canyon, O’Neill Forebay, and from Patterson Pass Road north to Clifton Court Forebay. Observed in project area and likely to nest where trees and shrubs are found. Long-eared owl Asio otus (nesting) * SSC Scarce over most of its range. Nests in conifer, oak, riparian, pinyon-juniper, and desert woodlands that are either open or are adjacent to grasslands, meadows, or shrublands. Prefers dense cover. Not known to nest in the project area. Yes. Could nest around O’Neil Forebay and Salado Creek; potential also in sycamore alluvial woodland at Orestimba Creek. Modesto song sparrow Melospiza melodia heermanni (nesting) * SSC Nests in low, dense vegetation in riparian areas and freshwater marshes. Modesto population occurs east of Suisun Marsh, north to Butte and Glenn Counties, south of the greater Bay Area down to northwest Baja. Yes. Could nest in dense riparian and freshwater marshes within project area. Mountain plover Charadrius montanus (wintering) *6 SSC Winter resident on plowed fields, open grasslands with short vegetation, and open sagebrush areas in Central Valley, generally below 1000 feet and rarely near water. Avoids high, dense cover. Found in Central Valley from Sutter/Yuba co south, foothill valleys west of San Joaquin Valley, and Imperial Valley. Yes. No known occurrences or other reports within several miles, and most observations are from lower elevations than the project, but there is some potential on grazed grasslands and other open areas with minimal vegetative cover. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Northern harrier Circus cyaneus (nesting) * SSC Nests in a variety of open habitats, especially meadows, grasslands, and open rangelands in dense grasses and shrubs. Resident through much of the Central Valley and Bay Area as well as other parts of the state; may winter where it is not resident. Observed. Occurrence records around O’Neill Forebay and observed in spring 2014 near there. Suitably dense nesting habitat is limited; nesting potential highest around San Luis Res/O’Neill Forebay. Short-eared owl Asio flammeus (nesting) * SSC Requires open country with a high density of rodent prey, and herbaceous cover at least 12–15 inches tall. Rare in the project area. Yes. Could nest in dense grasslands, open fields, and freshwater marshes, especially around Mountain House Creek and O’Neill Forebay. Swainson’s hawk Buteo swainsoni (nesting) * ST Nests in riparian areas and isolated tree stands in open desert, grassland, and cropland. Forages in grasslands, pastures, and suitable grain or alfalfa fields. Primarily a summer resident of the Central Valley and northeastern California; small year-round population in the Delta. Observed. Recent nest records from Orestimba Creek and observed there in 2014; recent nest records near O’Neill Forebay and observed there in 2014. Other 2014 observations near project area and nesting potential throughout. Tricolored blackbird Agelaius tricolor (nesting colony) * SE Nests in large colonies near open water in cattail, bulrush, willow, blackberry, wild rose, nettle, and thistle, with open foraging habitat nearby. Endemic and highly colonial. Most numerous in Central Valley. In December 2014, species was emergency-listed as endangered for an initial term of 6 months (expires ~June 29, 2015). CDFW determined in March 2015 that a listing action may be warranted. No further information available as of date of this report. Observed. Recent occurrence records east of O’Neill Forebay, within proposed corridor south of Gonzaga Rd, and around the western edge of San Luis Res; slightly older occurrence records farther north. Suitable nesting habitat in a few locations and males heard singing (nesting not detected) at Mountain House Creek. This report assumes species will remain listed as endangered. White-tailed kite Elanus leucurus (nesting) * CFP Low rolling foothills/valley margins with scattered oaks; open grasslands, meadows, or marshes near isolated dense-topped trees for nesting and perching. Found throughout coastal and interior California; absent from higher elevations and heavily wooded areas. Yes. Likelihood low. One 1993 occurrence near Tracy Substation; few other reports in or near project area. Yellow-headed blackbird Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus (nesting) * SSC Nests in freshwater marshes near open water. Found in Central Valley, northeastern and eastern California, and patchily distributed in southern California. Scarce breeder in Central Valley. Yes. CNDDB records in nine-quad area are from 1919; no other reports in vicinity. Low potential to occur in freshwater marshes around O’Neill Forebay. Migratory birds MBTA Cal FGC Nesting migratory birds and their eggs and nests (including but not limited to the specialstatus birds named above) are protected by state and federal statutes. Observed. Nests of a few species of migratory birds were found in 2014 and others are likely. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 MAMMALS American badger Taxidea taxus * SSC Most abundant in drier, open stages of most habitats; uses underground dens. Resident in suitable habitat throughout the state. Yes. Presumed present and CNDDB records throughout project area. Fresno kangaroo rat Dipodomys nitratoides exilis FE SE Occurs in alkali sink and open grassland habitats on the floor of the San Joaquin Valley. Not known to occur west of I-5. No. Range of this species does not overlap with project area. Will not be discussed further in this document. Giant kangaroo rat Dipodomys ingens FE SE Inhabits grassland and shrub communities on flat to gently sloping (10–22%) terrain. Historic range included Merced Co; current range includes Fresno and San Benito Counties. Not currently known to occur in Merced Co. Yes. Unlikely but cannot be ruled out. Pallid bat Antrozous pallidus * SSC Roosts in rocky outcrops, cliffs, caves, mines, trees (including orchards), bridges, barns, porches, bat boxes, occupied and vacant buildings, and even on or near the ground. Forages over open grasslands, oak savanna grasslands, open pine forests, talus slopes, gravel roads, orchards, and vineyards. Range includes all of California. Yes. No occurrence records or other reports but potential roosting habitat occurs in rocky areas, orchards, and riparian or other trees in isolated locations through project area. Riparian brush rabbit Sylvilagus bachmani riparius FE SE Typically inhabits dense thickets of wild rose, blackberry, coyote bush, and wild grape. Rarely ventures far from dense cover. Very restricted distribution; known only from in and around Caswell Memorial State Park in San Joaquin Co and introduced to San Joaquin River NWR in Stanislaus Co. No. Range does not overlap with project area and suitable habitat not present. Will not be discussed further in this document. Riparian (=San Joaquin) woodrat Neotoma fuscipes riparia FE SSC Found in riparian areas supporting trees and brush. Nests in trees, snags, or logs, talus, or lodges in downed woody material. Known only from a single population on San Joaquin River in Caswell Memorial State Park. No. Range does not overlap with project area and suitable habitat not present. Will not be discussed further in this document. San Joaquin kit fox Vulpes macrotis mutica FE ST Dens and forages in grassland, shrubland, alkali meadow, playa, valley oak savanna, and agricultural edges with loose soils. Endemic to Central Valley; current range is San Joaquin Valley and surrounding foothills from southern Kern Co north to Contra Costa, Alameda, and San Joaquin Counties. Yes. Occurrence records and other reports of presence, including discovery of a carcass in project area during spring 2014. Presumed present but rare throughout project area. Short-nosed kangaroo rat Dipodomys nitratoides brevinasus * SSC Occupy grasslands with scattered shrubs and desert-shrub associations on friable soils on flats and gently rolling terrain; generally more numerous in lighter, friable soils. Not known to occur in the project area; general range and habitat overlap with giant kangaroo rat. Yes. Unlikely but potential in grasslands south of O’Neill Forebay. Table 2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Townsend’s big-eared bat Corynorhinus townsendii * Cand Found in a variety of habitats. Roosts in caves, mines, tunnels, and buildings, preferring sites with caves and cavernous features; also roosts in old-growth sycamore. Most common in mesic areas. Found in suitable habitats throughout California. Yes. A 1991 CNDDB record of several males just south of Corral Hollow Road ~3 miles west of project area. No known maternity or hibernating habitat within or near project area. Roosting unlikely, but potential for foraging individuals. Western mastiff bat Eumops perotis * SSC Roosts primarily in cliffs high above the ground; may also use crevices in buildings, bridges, or boulders. Most common in broad, open areas in habitats from deserts to woodlands to alpine meadows. Range principally desert southwest regions, but extends through coast ranges to SF Bay and elsewhere in California to the Oregon border. Yes. No occurrence records and suitable cliff habitat for roosting is limited but is found in two discrete areas described in text. Western red bat Lasiurus blossevillii * SSC Roosts primarily in foliage of mature trees, especially willows, cottonwoods, sycamores, and walnuts, in edge habitats adjacent to streams, open fields, orchards, and sometimes urban areas. Females riparian-dependent. Prefers edges or habitat mosaics with trees for roosting and open areas for foraging. Found throughout California from Sierra/Cascade foothills west to the coast; absent from northern California. Yes. No occurrence records and no reports of breeding or wintering within project area. Potential habitat in mature riparian throughout project area. 1 - Critical habitat only included if it overlaps with the project. 2 - Federal listing FE = federally endangered FT = federally threatened MBTA = Migratory Bird Treaty Act * = no federal status 3 - State listing–status codes SE = state endangered ST = state threatened SSC = California species of special concern CFP = California fully protected. Fully protected species may not be taken or possessed at any time and no licenses or permits may be issued for their take except for collecting these species for necessary scientific research and relocation of the bird species for the protection of livestock. Cand = candidate for listing as threatened or endangered under the California Endangered Species Act Cal FGC = species protected by California Fish and Game Code * = no state status 4 - Not all parts of proposed and alternative corridors were seen, so potential for occurrence is liberal. 5 - Recent genetic work suggests that the former single species, Anniella pulchra, is composed of multiple species-level taxa (Papenfuss and Parham, 2013). Likely form that occurs in project area is A. pulchra, but geographical limits of proposed species are unknown at this time. 6 - Mountain plover was formerly proposed for listing as threatened under the federal ESA but the proposed rule was withdrawn in May 2011. 4. Findings and Recomendations This section describes the sensitive habitat types mapped for the BSA and provides recommendations to either avoid impacts to these habitats and species or provides measures to minimize impacts to these areas. When avoidance is not feasible compensation measures are also provided. For all areas described under wetlands and waters of the U.S. and state, the following regulatory guidance applies: USACE takes jurisdiction over the ordinary high water mark of creeks and drainages including adjacent wetlands, while RWQCB and CDFW take jurisdiction over the bed and bank including any adjacent or associated riparian and wetland vegetation. All areas mapped as wetlands or waters are subject to regulation by these agencies. Table 3 below provides a list of EPMs that will be implemented during project construction, operation, and maintenance; they are part of the project description (Appendix A). Table 3. SLTP Environmental Protection Measures Related to Biological and Water/Wetland Resources* Resource EPM Biological Resources All Western and contract crews will complete biological awareness training to ensure they are familiar with project sensitive biological resources and the associated EPMs and mitigation measures. All supervisors and field personnel will have on file a signed agreement that they have completed the training, and understood and agreed to the terms. EPMs and applicable mitigation measures will be written into the contract for construction and O&M work, and contractors will be held responsible for compliance. Biological Resources Vehicle traffic will be restricted to designated access routes and the immediate vicinity of construction and O&M sites. Vehicle speeds will not exceed 15 mph on nonpublic access and maintenance roads and 10 mph on unimproved access routes. Vehicles and equipment will be parked on pavement, existing roads, and previously disturbed areas, to the maximum extent feasible. Biological Resources No pets or firearms will be permitted at project sites. Biological Resources At the end of each work day, construction and O&M workers will leave work areas and adjacent habitats to minimize disturbance to actively foraging animals, and remove food-related trash from the work site in closed containers for disposal. Workers will not deliberately or inadvertently feed wildlife. Biological Resources Nighttime construction and O&M activities will be minimized to emergency situations. If nighttime construction and O&M work is required, lights will be directed to the minimum area needed to illuminate project work areas. If nighttime work is required, a speed limit of 10 mph will be enforced on all nonpublic access roads. Biological Resources Mortalities or injuries to any wildlife that occur as a result of project- or maintenance-related actions will be reported immediately to the Western Natural Resources Department or other designated point of contact, who will instruct construction and O&M personnel on the appropriate action, and who will contact the appropriate agency if the species is listed. The phone number for the Western Natural Resources Department or designated point of contact will be provided to maintenance supervisors and to the appropriate agencies. Biological Resources Caves, mine tunnels, and rock outcrops will never be entered, climbed upon, or otherwise disturbed. Biological Resources If a pesticide label stipulates a buffer zone width for protection of natural resources that differs from that specified in a project mitigation measure or EPM, the buffer zone width that offers the greatest protection will be applied. Biological Resources At completion of work and at the request of the land owner/manager, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. Table 3. SLTP Environmental Protection Measures Related to Biological and Water/Wetland Resources* Resource EPM Biological Resources Prior to any application of herbicide, Western will query the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database, entering location information by county, township, range, and section, entering both the commercial name and the formulation of the desired pesticide, and will follow all use limitations provided to ensure compliance with applicable pesticide standards. This database is currently located at http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/endspec/prescint.htm. The measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database will supersede those in the project EPMs where they are different. Biological Resources Seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. Biological Resources Equipment will be washed prior to entering sensitive areas within the project area to control noxious weeds. The rinse water will be disposed of through the sanitary sewage system or other appropriate disposal method that minimizes the spread of noxious weeds. Biological Resources Measures described in the Suggested Practices for Avian Protection on Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2006 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2006 or more current version) and Reducing Avian Collisions with Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2012 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2012 or more current version) will be implemented during O&M activities to minimize bird mortality and injury. At such time when Western finalizes an Avian Protection Plan, Western will adhere to the guidance in that document. Biological Resources Construction and O&M excavations greater than 3 feet deep will be fenced, covered, or filled at the end of each working day, or have escape ramps provided to prevent the entrapment of wildlife. Trenches and holes will be inspected for entrapped wildlife before being filled. Any entrapped animals will be allowed to escape voluntarily before construction and O&M activities resume, or they may be removed by qualified personnel, with an appropriate handling permit if necessary. Biological Resources A hazardous-spill plan will be developed prior to construction and will remain in effect for all O&M activities. The plan will describe what actions will be taken in the event of a spill of toxic or hazardous materials. The plan will incorporate preventive measures to be implemented for vehicle and equipment staging, cleaning, maintenance, and refueling, and for containment management and storage of hazardous materials, including fuel. In the event of a contaminant spill, work at the site will immediately cease until the contractor has contained and mitigated the spill. The contractor will immediately prevent further contamination, notify appropriate authorities, notify Western’s regional environmental manager, and will mitigate damage as appropriate. Adequate spill containment materials, such as oil diaper mats and hydrocarbon cleanup kits, will be available on site at all times, as will containers for storage, transportation, and disposal of contaminated absorbent materials. Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources Erosion control measures will be implemented to prevent loss of soil. Construction will be in conformance with Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management Environmental Guidance Manual. Land Use On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads will be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the land owner/manager. Land Use Construction and operations will be conducted in a manner that prevents unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings and to preserve the natural landscape to the extent practicable. Land Use No permanent discoloring agents will be applied to rocks or vegetation to indicate limits of survey. Noise All vehicles and equipment will be equipped with required exhaust noise abatement suppression devices. Water Resources, Wetlands Runoff from the construction and O&M sites will be controlled and meet RWQCB stormwater requirements and the conditions of a construction stormwater discharge permit. A stormwater pollution prevention plan will be prepared and implemented. Water Resources and Floodplains All contaminated discharge water created by construction and O&M activities (e.g., concrete washout, pumping for work area isolation, vehicle wash water, drilling fluids) will be contained and disposed of in accordance with applicable Federal, State, and local regulations. Table 3. SLTP Environmental Protection Measures Related to Biological and Water/Wetland Resources* Resource EPM Water Resources and Floodplains All fill or rip-rap placed within a stream or river channel will be limited to the minimum area required for access or protection of existing Western facilities. Water Resources and Floodplains All equipment will be stored, fueled, and maintained in vehicle staging areas 300 feet or the maximum distance possible from any aquatic habitat (vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, seasonal wetland, seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh) and no closer than 200 feet unless a bermed (no ground disturbance) and lined refueling area is constructed and hazardous-material absorbent pads are available in the event of a spill. Vehicles and construction equipment will be inspected daily for fluid leaks before leaving staging areas during construction and O&M activities. Fluid leaks will be repaired before equipment is moved from staging areas. Water Resources and Floodplains All instream work, such as culvert replacement or installation, bank recontouring, or placement of bank protection below the high-water line, will be conducted during no-flow or low-flow conditions and in a manner to avoid impacts to water flow, and will be restricted to the minimum area necessary for completion of the work. Water Resources and Floodplains All equipment used below the ordinary high-water mark will be free of exterior contamination. Water Resources and Floodplains Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. Water Resources and Floodplains Non-biodegradable debris will be collected and removed from the ROW daily and taken to a disposal facility. Slash and other biodegradable debris will be left in place or disposed of. Water Resources and Floodplains All soil excavated for structure foundations will be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Excess soil will be removed from the site and disposed of appropriately. Areas around structure footings will be reseeded with native plants. Water Resources and Floodplains Wherever possible, new structures and access roads will be sited out of floodplains. Bridges will be used at new stream crossings wherever possible. If avoidance is not possible, Western will consult with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and obtain permits as required. Water Resources and Floodplains If wet areas cannot be avoided, Western will use wide-track or balloon tire vehicles and equipment and/or timber mats. Water Resources and Floodplains Construction vehicle movement outside of the ROW will be restricted (to the greatest extent possible) to approved access or public roads. Water Resources and Floodplains Where feasible, all construction activities will be rerouted around wet areas while ensuring that the route does not cross sensitive resource areas. *The full list of EPMs is presented in the expanded project description presented in Appendix A; the list above includes only those measures related to biological and water/floodplain resources. 4.1 Wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State Rivers or drainages that were perennial or intermittent and were greater than 20 feet (6 meters) wide were mapped as rivers (Warv). The following is a list of the named and major creeks and drainages within the project area that were mapped as rivers: . Mountain House Creek, located on Figure 3, map 3, is over 200 feet (61 meters) wide within the project area and supports riparian and freshwater marsh wetland vegetation. . Patterson Run, located on Figure 3, map 4, is a dry, wide braided channel over 200 feet (61 meters) wide with some seasonal wetland plants but mostly dry. . Corral Hollow Creek, located on Figure 3, map 8 ranges from 50 to 60 feet (15 to 18 meters) wide and supports riparian and freshwater marsh and seasonal wetland vegetation. . Lone Tree Creek, located on Figure 3, map 11, ranges from 100 to greater than 200 feet (30 to greater than 61 meters) wide and is dry, braided channel with no wetland vegetation. . Hospital Creek, located on Figure 3, map 12, is up to 500 feet (152 meters) wide and is a dry, braided channel with no wetland vegetation. . Del Puerto Creek, located on Figure 3, map 19, ranges from 100 to 150 feet (30 to 45 meters) wide and supports freshwater marsh vegetation within the creek banks. . Salado Creek, located on Figure 3, map 23, ranges from 100 to 200 feet 30 to 60 meters) wide and supports riparian, freshwater marsh, and seasonal wetland vegetation. . Crow Creek, located on Figure 3, map 25, ranges from 30 to 40 feet (9 to 12 meters) wide and is a dry channel with upland, non-native grassland species. . Orestimba Creek, located on Figure 3, map 27, ranges from 200 to 400 feet (61 to 122 meters) wide and is a dry, braided channel. Sycamore alluvial woodland riparian, a special-status vegetation type, occurs on the upper banks of this creek. . Garzas Creek, located on Figure 3, map 30, ranges from 200 to 400 feet (61 to 122 meters) wide and is a dry channel with a dry, rocky, and sandy creek bottom. Vegetation associated with this creek includes shrub species such as mulefat, California sagebrush, and mesquite along with a variety of native and non-native herbaceous forb species. . Romero Creek, located on Figure 3, map 35, ranges from 20 to 50 feet wide (6 to 15 meters) and is dry with no wetland vegetation. . Los Banos Creek, located on Figure 3, map 48, is about 30 feet (9 meters) wide and within the proposed corridor. At this location Los Banos Creek is channelized and flows into Los Banos Reservoir. Los Banos Creek within the alternative corridor (Figure 3, map 45) is a natural, wide, dry channel up to 200 feet (61 meters) wide with riparian vegetation. . Salt Creek, located on Figure 3, map 50, was mapped as a river in the San Luis to Dos Amigos corridor. At this location, Salt Creek is a dry creek channel approximately 200 feet (61 meters) wide. In the proposed corridor, Salt Creek narrows to less than 20 feet (6 meters) wide (Figure 3, map 49) and was mapped as an intermittent creek (Waci). . Ortigalita Creek, located on Figure 3, map 51, crosses the San Luis to Dos Amigos alternative corridor, and appears to be approximately 150 feet (46 meters) wide with possible seasonal wetland vegetation. This evaluation is based on a desktop review as this area was not accessible at the time of the surveys. In the proposed corridor, Ortigalita Creek (Figure 3, map 52) is an intermittent to ephemeral drainage and ends inside the corridor near a junk yard. Areas mapped as intermittent (Waci) or ephemeral (Wace) occur as natural drainages less than 20 feet (6 meters) wide. Named intermittent drainages within the project area include Martin Creek, Arkansas Creek, Mustang Creek, Ingram Creek, Salt Creek, and Ortigalita Creek. Little Salado Creek on Figure 3, map 23 has been filled or no longer occurs as drainage within the proposed and alternate routes. It is unknown whether the creek is still present outside of the project area. Area mapped as lacustrine include lakes (Walk), ponds (Wapd) and impoundments, such as stock ponds (Waim). Two areas were mapped as lakes: the O’Neill Forebay; and the San Luis Reservoir. Areas mapped as vernal pools and seasonal wetlands are both seasonal wetlands types. The vernal pool areas qualify as northern claypan vernal pool, which is a special-status vegetation community type with a S1.1 ranking. Areas mapped as freshwater marsh (Wfm) qualify as coastal and valley freshwater marsh, which is a special-status vegetation community type with a S2.1 ranking. 4.1.1 Project Efects Implementation of the EPMs will provide general protection for wetlands and waters of the U.S. and state, as well as for water quality. However, EPMs do not provide detailed guidelines for avoiding impacts to specific types of aquatic resources and would not achieve full protection of resources. Wetlands and water of the U.S. and state could be adversely affected by the project. 4.1.2 Avoidance and Minimization Measures The following measures will avoid and minimize impacts to wetlands and waters of the U.S. and state. BIO-1 During construction and O&M activities in the vicinity of vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands, Western will implement the following measures. During O&M Category A activities (see Appendix A): . Vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads unless soils are dry. Soils will be considered sufficiently dry for vehicle access when they resist compaction, and after annual plants have set seed (generally June 1 to September 30, or as determined by qualified personnel based on personal observation of the soils). For patrolling the ROW off of established roads in a pickup truck, or for inspecting hardware on structures with a bucket truck, vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands will be avoided by 50 feet (15 meters) during the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31). No avoidance will be necessary if soils are completely dry. During construction and O&M Category B and C activities (Appendix A) in the vicinity of vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands: . Vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads unless soils are dry. Soils will be considered sufficiently dry for vehicle access when they resist compaction, and after annual plants have set seed (generally June 1 to September 30, or as determined by an agency-approved biologist based on personal observation of the soils). If vegetation management activities were proposed within 250 feet ((76 meters) of a vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, or seasonal wetland, an agency-approved biologist will be present at all times to ensure the protection of the work-area limits below OR qualified personnel will clearly fence the limits of the work area, according to limits presented in the following, prior to the maintenance activity. (The herbicide restriction measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database supersede those below where they are different.) – Mixing or application of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals will be prohibited. – Herbicide application to target vegetation with hand-held applicator (cut-stump treatment) will be prohibited within 25 feet (7.6 meters) in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31) and allowed up to the edge of the pool or seasonal wetland in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). – Herbicide application with power sprayers for spot treatment and selective elimination of target species will be prohibited within 100 feet (30.5 meters) in any season. – Broadcast herbicide application by vehicle with boom for treating large or dense areas of the ROW will be prohibited within 150 feet (45.7 meters) in any season. – Manual clearing of vegetation (chainsaw, axe, clippers) will be allowed up to the edge of the pool or seasonal wetland in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31); a buffer will not be necessary in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). – Mechanical clearing of vegetation (heavy-duty mowers, crawler tractors, or chippers) will be prohibited within 100 feet (30.5 meters) in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31); a buffer will not necessary in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). . For ground-disturbing activities, a 50-foot (15-meter) wet season or 25-foot (7.6-meter) dry season buffer zone from the edge of the vernal pool or wetland will be maintained and the vernal pool or wetland will be protected from siltation and contaminant runoff by use of erosion control. Erosion-control materials will be of a tightly woven natural fiber netting or similar material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians (e.g., coconut coir matting). No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near vernal pools and seasonal wetlands. Erosion-control measures will be placed between the outer edge of the buffer and the activity area. All fiber rolls and hay bales used for erosion control will be certified as free of noxious weed seed. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. . For activities such as installation or repair of underground components (water, power, communication, or ground electrical line) or soil borings, a 250-foot (76-meter) buffer zone will be maintained. A smaller buffer could be approved after a site assessment by an agency-approved biologist, but must include silt fencing or other sediment control, to be established no less than 50 feet (15 meters) from the wetland boundary. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. BIO-2 During construction and O&M activities in the vicinity of seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, and marshes, and their associated habitats, Western will implement the following measures. During O&M Category A activities (see Appendix A): . The following activities will be prohibited at all times within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, and their associated habitats: – vehicle access, except on existing access and maintenance roads – dumping, stockpiling, or burying of any material – mixing of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals – open petroleum products During construction and O&M Category B and C activities (see Appendix A): . The following activities will be prohibited at all times within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, and their associated habitats: – vehicle access, except on existing access and maintenance roads – dumping, stockpiling, or burying of any material, except as required for specific O&M activities such as rip-rap – mixing of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals – open petroleum products . For vegetation management or maintenance within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of any seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, or any of their associated habitats, the following work-area limits will be provided (the herbicide restriction measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database supersede those below where they are different): – Only manual clearing of vegetation will be permitted – Foliar application of herbicides will be prohibited. Only cut-stump treatments of target vegetation will be allowed using herbicide approved for aquatic use by the EPA and in coordination with the appropriate land manager. . For ground-disturbing activities, a 100-foot (30.5-meter) buffer zone will be maintained from the edge of the seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, marsh, or their associated habitats for protection from siltation and runoff of contaminants by use of erosion-control measures. Erosion-control materials will be of a tightly woven natural fiber netting or similar material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians (e.g., coconut coir matting). No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or marshes. Erosion-control measures will be placed between the outer edge of the buffer and the activity area. All fiber rolls and hay bales used for erosion control will be certified as free of noxious weed seed. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. . Western will obtain applicable section 404 discharge and 401 water-quality permits prior to any maintenance activities that must take place within jurisdictional wetlands or other waters of the U.S. These will be coordinated with USACE and RWQCB as needed. . Dewatering work for maintenance operations adjacent to or encroaching on seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or marshes will be conducted to prevent muddy water and eroded materials from entering the water or marsh. . All stream crossings will be constructed such that they reduce the potential for stream flows to result in increased scour, washout, or disruption of water flow. Wherever possible, stream crossings will be located in stream segments without riparian vegetation, and structure footings will be installed outside of stream banks. Should Western need to modify existing access roads or install new access roads, they will be built at right angles to streams and washes to the extent practicable. Trees providing shade to water bodies will be trimmed only to the extent necessary and will not be removed unless they presented a specific safety concern. . Trees that must be removed will be felled to avoid damaging riparian habitat. They will be felled out of and away from the stream maintenance zone and riparian habitat, including springs, seeps, bogs, and any other wet or saturated areas. Trees will not be felled into streams in a way that will obstruct or impair the flow of water, unless instructed otherwise. Tree removal that could cause streambank erosion or result in increased water temperatures will not be conducted in and around streams. Tree removal in riparian or wetland areas will be done only by manual methods. 4.1.3 Compensatory Mitigation If avoidance cannot be achieved as described in BIO-1 and BIO-2, and in coordination with resource agencies it is determined that hydrological integrity would be compromised, compensatory mitigation for wetlands and open-water habitat may be required to comply with the CWA no-net-loss of wetlands policy. BIO-3 Compensation for loss of wetlands and waters will depend on habitat value and integrity, and may take the form of creation, restoration, enhancement, or preservation. Federal and state agencies have a no-net-loss of wetlands policy, which requires that any permanent loss of wetlands be mitigated. Mitigation can be accomplished through purchase of credits in an approved wetland mitigation bank or contribution of in-lieu fees to a conservation bank or other conservation organization that will create the wetlands as mitigation/ compensation for impacts from the project. If these options are not available then mitigation will be accomplished by the creation of new wetlands on site or in an appropriate off-site location. All newly created wetlands must be monitored and maintained for a minimum of 5 years. Annual reporting to the USACE and RWQCB are required as part of monitoring. As part of the permit process, a wetland mitigation and monitoring plan must be prepared in compliance with USACE and RWQCB guidelines. 4.1.4 Cumulative Efects Future agricultural and urban development projects may result in impacts to wetlands and waters that could contribute to cumulative impacts to these habitats. Impacts could be in the form of degradation of water quality and loss of wetland habitat. The creation of new wetlands to compensate for the loss of impacted wetlands may result in the loss of grassland habitat as this type would likely be used to create new wetlands for mitigation. 4.2 Special-status Vegetation Comunities Table 1 above presents the special-status plants and vegetation communities that occur or may occur within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometer) of the project area. Each special-status vegetation type that occurs within the project area is discussed in more detail below. Please refer to the table for the listing status and scientific name of each species and vegetation type. 4.2.1 Coastal and Valey Freshwater Marsh Coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitat typically occurs in quiet sites that lack significant current and are permanently flooded by freshwater (Holland, 1986). This habitat type is characterized by the dominance of perennial, emergent plant species that can grow to from 12 to 15 feet (4 to 5 meters) tall, often forming completely closed canopies with cattail and bulrush dominating. This type occurs within the project area at Corral Hollow and Mountain House creeks and some of the unnamed intermittent creeks. It also occurs in areas that are not within a river or intermittent creek drainage but that receive sufficient ponded water to support emergent plants. This habitat type has a state ranking of S2.1, is also a wetland type, and is regulated by federal and state agencies. 4.2.2 Great Valey Cotonwod Riparian Forest Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest occurs as a dense, broadleafed, winter deciduous riparian forest dominated by Fremont cottonwood (Populus fremontii) and willows (Salix spp.). It typically occurs in fine-grained alluvial soils near perennial or nearly perennial streams that provide subsurface irrigation even when the channel is dry (Holland, 1986). Within the project area this type was mapped at Corral Hollow, Mountain House, and Salado creeks. This habitat type has a state ranking of S2.1 and also falls under the permitting jurisdiction of the RWQCB and CDFW when it occurs as part of a stream or creek. 4.2.3 Northern Claypan Vernal Pol Northern claypan vernal pools occur as depressions in grassland with vernal pool plants such as Eryngium spp., Plagiobothrys spp., Lasthenia spp., Psilocarphus spp., and others, and are often more or less saline (Holland, 1986). This habitat type occurs in multiple locations within the project area. This habitat type has a state ranking of S1.1, is also a wetland type, and is regulated by federal and state agencies. 4.2.4 Sycamore Aluvial Wodland Sycamore alluvial woodland occurs as an open to moderately closed, winter deciduous broadleafed riparian woodland overwhelmingly dominated by well-spaced sycamores trees. Buckeye and elderberry are often widely spaced and mixed in with the sycamore trees. The herbaceous understory is usually non-native grasses or mulefat. This habitat type typically occurs in braded, depositional channels of intermittent streams, usually with a cobble or boulder substrate (Holland, 1986). This habitat type was observed to occur at Orestimba Creek. It has a state ranking of S1.1, is also a riparian tree community type, and is regulated by the RWQCB and CDFW. 4.2.5 Valey Nedlegras Grasland Valley needlegrass grassland is characterized as being dominated by perennial, tussock-forming purple needlegrass that has at least 5 percent absolute cover or 10 percent relative cover within the grassland stand. Native and introduced annuals occur between the perennials, often exceeding the bunchgrasses in cover. This vegetation type usually occurs on fine-textured (often clay) soils, moist or even waterlogged during winter, but very dry during summer (Holland, 1986). This type has a state ranking of S3.1 and is regulated by CDFW. This vegetation type was mapped at a few locations within the project area. 4.2.6 Valey Wildrye Grasland Valley wildrye grassland is characterized as having 50 percent or greater relative cover by creeping wildrye. This grassland type occurs in moist sites at low elevations, often adjacent to stands of riparian forest or freshwater marsh. Soils are frequently subalkaline and/or seasonally overflowed (Holland, 1986). This type was observed along the south bank of Corral Hollow Creek within the alternative project corridor within an area designated as seasonal wetland (Wse). It also occurs at the O’Neill Forebay in the West of Cemetery and West of O’Neill Forebay alternative corridors. This type has a state ranking of S2.1 and is regulated by CDFW. 4.2.7 Project Efects Implementation of the EPMs will provide general protection for sensitive resources within the project area. However, EPMs do not provide detailed guidelines for avoiding impacts to special-status vegetation communities and would not achieve full protection of resources. Special-status vegetation communities could be adversely affected by project activities. 4.2.8 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 and BIO-3 in Section 4.1.2 above will also avoid and minimize impacts to wetland and riparian habitats. In addition, Western will implement the measures below to ensure protection of and to reduce impacts to special-status vegetation communities and plants. BIO-4 Prior to construction, an agency-approved botanist will survey project areas during appropriate blooming periods for listed and special-status plant species and sensitive habitats. Special-status vegetation communities and species will be reported to the USFWS and/or CDFW. BIO-5 For special-status vegetation communities and special-status plants the following measures will be implemented during construction and O&M activities. . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until the site has been surveyed by an agency-approved botanist. Off-road travel will be avoided to the extent possible and off road travel outside of designated work areas will be prohibited. . If vegetation management activities are proposed between March 1 and August 31, an agency-approved biologist will mark plant populations, including a 50-foot (15-meter) buffer zone, prior to construction and O&M activities. Within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the marked area, the following work area limits will be provided: 1) only manual clearing of vegetation will be allowed within 50 feet of the edge of the flagged area, 2) mechanical treatment of all kinds (including mowers, tractors, chippers, dozers) will be prohibited, and (3) herbicide use will be prohibited at all times with the exception of direct application to target vegetation. . Ground-disturbing activities proposed will require a bloom season survey by an agencyapproved biologist to mark existing plant populations or clear the site. Ground disturbance will be prohibited within flagged boundaries. Flagging or other field markers such as temporary fence posts, or other markers that will last for the construction season, will be placed in the prohibited area to ensure that no disturbance occurs at that location. Locations of special-status plant communities will also be mapped and located in the field using a GPS so that they are clearly identified at all times of the year and construction workers can easily identify areas to be avoided. These areas will be avoided by workers doing construction activities at all times of the year. Areas that have been cleared will require no further field or map identification. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all ground-disturbing activities to prevent impacts to special-status vegetation communities. 4.2.9 Compensatory Mitigation If avoidance is not feasible, for special-status vegetation communities the following mitigation measures will be implemented: BIO-6 Western will purchase credits in an appropriate mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank for the vegetation community to be impacted. If a mitigation bank is not available Western will contribute in-lieu fees to a mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank that can provide appropriate mitigation for the vegetation type. Western will work with the appropriate resource agency (USFWS or CDFW) to ensure adequate compensation. If no mitigation bank, conservation bank, or in-lieu-fee compensation is available then Western will prepare a mitigation monitoring and reporting plan that describes the compensatory mitigation measures that will be implemented for these vegetation communities. The mitigation plan will be submitted to the CDFW for approval. 4.2.10 Cumulative Efects Future agricultural and urban development projects may result in reduced special-status plant communities and could contribute to cumulative impacts to these vegetation communities in the region. 4.3 Special-status Plants Table 1 above presents the special-status plants and vegetation communities that occur or may occur within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometer) of the project area. Each species in Table 1 that has the potential to occur within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometer) of the project area or is a federal or state listed species is discussed in more detail below. Please refer to the table for the listing status and scientific name of each species and vegetation type. Eight plant species were considered to not occur in the project area due to lack of potential habitat such as chaparral, cismontane woodland, or coastal scrub or microhabitat requirements such as moist subalkaline sands, blue oak woodlands, or serpentine soils. These species are Hospital Canyon larkspur, Mt. Hamilton coreopsis, Hall’s bush-mallow, Merced monardella, Mt. Diablo phacelia, Keck’s checkerbloom, chaparral ragwort, and Arburua Ranch jewel-flower. Keck’s checkerbloom is a federally listed species that occurs in grassy slopes in blue oak woodland and is known only from the Sierra Nevada foothills and is therefore considered to not have the potential to occur in the project area. A detailed discussion of the following plants is provided below: . five federally listed species—large-flowered fiddleneck, Contra Costa goldfields, Hoover’s spurge, Hartweg’s golden sunburst, and Greene’s tuctoria—and two state-listed species—Delta button-celery and Mason’s lilaeopsis—have the potential to occur based on the presence of potential habitat. Largeflowered fiddleneck, Hartweg’s golden sunburst, and Greene’s tuctoria are both federally and statelisted species. . eighteen special-status plants with a CRPR Rank 1B are either recorded to occur within the project area or have the potential to occur based on the presence of potential habitat. These are alkali milkvetch, heartscale, San Joaquin spearscale, big tarplant, beaked clarkia, round-leaved filaree, Lemmon’s jewel-flower, recurved larkspur, spiny-sepaled button celery, diamond-petaled California poppy, wooly rose mallow, Munz’s tidy-tips, Panoche pepper-grass, showy golden madia, shining navarretia, pincushion navarretia, Suisun marsh aster, and caper-fruited tropidocarpum . two special-status plants with a CRPR Rank 2B—Delta mudwort and Wright’s trichocoronis—have the potential to occur within the project area . one CRPR Rank 3 species—Merced phacelia—has the potential to occur within the project area, and two CRPR Rank 4 species—hogwallow starfish and small-flowered morning glory—were observed within the project area. 4.3.1 Large-flowered Fidleneck Large-flowered fiddleneck is an annual herbaceous plant in the Borage family. This species flowers from April to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 902 to 1804 feet (275 to 550 meters) in woodland and valley and foothill grassland habitats. It has orange-red flowers that are larger than other species in this genus, thus the name large-flowered fiddleneck. This species is has been documented from fewer than five natural occurrences and is known to occur at the north side of Corral Canyon at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and from two locations on the Connolly Ranch in San Joaquin County. These locations range 15 to 20 miles (24 to 32 kilometers) from the proposed transmission line corridor. Suitable habitat for large-flowered fiddleneck is present in the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area but was not found during the 2014 reconnaissance surveys. Even though potential habitat is present throughout the project area in the form of grassland habitat, this species appears to have limited distribution as it is known from only five occurrences and has not been found in the area in spite of surveys done for other projects in the same habitat and general location. Critical habitat for this species is mapped southwest of Tracy (Figure 5) and is within 5 miles (8 kilometers) of the proposed transmission line corridor. The common fiddleneck, Amsinckia menziesii, was observed in many areas within the grassland communities. 4.3.2 Contra Costa Goldfields Contra Costa goldfields is an annual herbaceous plant in the Aster family or Asteraceae. This species flowers from March to June and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 1542 feet (0 to 470 meters) in oak woodland, alkaline playas, valley and foothill grassland, and vernal pools in moist sites. The microhabitat for this species is vernal pools, swales, and low depressions in open grassy areas. There are no CNDDB recorded occurrences for this species within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area and for the USGS quads that intersect with the project area. However this species is known to occur in Alameda and Contra Costa Counties and shows up in the USFWS quad search for the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. Critical habitat for this species is mapped north of Tracy (Figure 5) and is within approximately 3 to 5 miles (5 to 8 kilometers) of the proposed transmission line corridor. Suitable habitat is present in the project area in areas mapped as vernal pools. This species is considered to have a low potential to occur in the project area. Potential suitable habitat is present; however, there are no known recorded occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area and this species prefers alkaline soils, which are limited within the project area. 4.3.3 Hover’s Spurge Hoover’s spurge is an annual herbaceous plant in the spurge family. This species flowers from July to October and occurs at elevations ranging from 82 to 820 feet (25 to 250 meters) in vernal pools on volcanic mudflow or clay substrate. This is a low-growing plant with white flowers. Within the project area this species is known from Merced and Stanislaus Counties. There are no recorded occurrences for this species within the nine-quad search for the project area. This species is considered to have a low potential to occur in the project area due to limited suitable habitat. Although vernal pools were observed in the project area, there are no volcanic mudflow vernal pools. 4.3.4 Hartweg’s Golden Sunburst Hartweg’s golden sunburst is an annual herbaceous plant in the sunflower family. This species flowers from March to April and occurs at elevations ranging from 49 to 492 feet (15 to 150 meters) in oak woodland and valley and foothill grassland on clay soils which are often acidic. This is a small 2 to 8 inch (5 to 20 centimeter) tall plant with yellow flowers. Within the project area this species is known from Merced and Stanislaus Counties. There are no recorded occurrences for this species within the CNDDB search for the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. This species is considered to have a low potential to occur in the project area due to limited suitable habitat. There is no oak woodland habitat; however, there is grassland habitat although acidic clay soils are either lacking or limited within the project area. 4.3.5 Grene’s Tuctoria Greene’s tuctoria is an annual herbaceous plant in the grass family. This species flowers from May to September and occurs at elevations ranging from 98 to 3510 feet (30 to 1070 meters) in vernal pools. This grass has an erect stem that becomes decumbent and often has purplish nodes. The inflorescence or flowering portion of the grass is spike-like and is partly enclosed by an upper sheath that becomes exerted with age. There are no recorded occurrences of this species within the nine-quad search of the project area but there are recorded occurrences in Merced County. It is considered to be extirpated from Fresno, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus Counties. Potential suitable habitat is present within the project area in areas mapped as vernal pools. This species has a very low potential to occur based on the lack of recorded occurrences and limited vernal pool habitat in the project area. 4.3.6 Delta buton-celery Delta button-celery is a biennial to perennial herbaceous plant in the Carrot family or Apiaceae. This species flowers from June to October and occurs at elevations ranging from 10 to 98 feet (3 to 30 meters) in riparian scrub in seasonally wet clay depressions. It has small greenish-white to faint-purple flowers. This species is known from one recorded location near Grayson, about 2 miles (3 kilometers) east of Westley. This occurrence is outside of the project area. Suitable habitat for Delta button-celery is present in the project area in areas mapped as great valley riparian scrub. This species has a moderate potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and one known CNDDB occurrence on the Westley USGS quad. 4.3.7 Mason’s Lilaeopsis Mason’s lilaeopsis is a perennial rhizomatous herbaceous plant in the Carrot family or Apiaceae. This species flowers from April to November and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 33 feet (0 to 10 meters) in brackish or freshwater marshes and swamps and in riparian scrub. The microhabitat for this species is described as tidal zones in muddy or silty soil formed through river deposition or river bank erosion. This species is not recorded to occur within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area but has multiple recorded occurrences on the Clifton Court Forebay USGS quad and is known from Clifton Court Forebay and other nearby areas. Suitable habitat for this species is potentially present in areas mapped as freshwater marsh and riparian scrub. However, this species typically occurs in tidal zones, which are not present in the project area, it is considered to have a low potential to occur in the project area. 4.3.8 Alkali Milk-Vetch Alkali milk-vetch is an annual herbaceous plant in the Pea or Legume family. This species flowers from March to June and occurs at elevations ranging from 3 to 197 feet (1 to 60 meters) in playas, valley and foothill grassland, and vernal pools in alkaline areas. It is a low growing plant with pink-purple flowers with stems from less than 1 inch to 5 inches (2 to 12 centimeters). There is potential vernal pool and grassland habitat for this species within the project area. This species is known to occur in Alameda, San Joaquin, and other counties and there are CNDDB recorded occurrences from near Byron/Livermore and Clifton Court Forebay. 4.3.9 Heartscale Heartscale is an annual herbaceous plant in the Chenopod family. This species flowers from April to October and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 1837 feet (0 to 560 meters) in chenopod scrub, meadows and seeps, valley and foothill grasslands (sandy) in saline or alkaline areas. It has greenish flowers and stems are one to many from the base with ascending to erect branches that are gray-scaly. It grows from 4 to 20 inches (1 to 5 decimeters). There is potential grassland habitat for this species within the project area. This species is known to occur in Alameda, San Joaquin, and other counties and there are CNDDB recorded occurrences from Clifton Court Forebay. 4.3.10 San Joaquin Spearscale San Joaquin spearscale is an annual herbaceous plant in the Chenopod family. This species flowers from April to October and occurs at elevations ranging from 3 to 2740 feet (1 to 835 meters) in chenopod scrub, meadows and seeps, playas, valley and foothill grasslands in alkaline areas. It is an erect plant that grows from 4 to 39 inches (1 to 10 decimeters). The stems are generally striate with ascending branches, sparsely scaly and glabrous in age. The flowers are greenish in color. There is potential grassland habitat for this species within the project area. This species is known to occur in Alameda, San Joaquin, and other counties and there are CNDDB recorded occurrences from Byron, Byron Hot Springs, Mountain House Road, and Clifton Court Forebay. 4.3.1 Big Tarplant Big tarplant is an annual herbaceous plant in the Aster family. This species flowers from July to October and occurs at elevations ranging from 98 to 1656 feet (30 to 505 meters) in valley and foothill grassland habitats, usually on clay soils. It has white ray flowers that are red-veined and the inflorescence is glandular and strongly scented. This species is known from many occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area and has a high likelihood to occur within the project area based on a search of the CNDDB. The 2014 surveys were conducted outside of the flowering season for this species. However, potential habitat is present within the grassland areas located within the project area. 4.3.12 Beaked Clarkia Beaked clarkia is an annual herbaceous plant in the evening primrose family. This species flowers from April to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 197 to 1640 feet (60 to 500 meters) in oak woodland and valley and foothill grassland habitats, on north-facing slopes, sometimes on sandstone. This is a small, delicate plant with pink flowers. This species is known to occur in Merced, Mariposa, Stanislaus, and Tuolumne Counties. Although there is potential grassland habitat in the project area, this is considered to have a low potential to occur based on the lack of known occurrences within the nine-quad search for the project area. 4.3.13 Round-leaved Filare Round-leaved filaree is an annual herbaceous plant in the Geranium family. This species flowers from March to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 49 to 3936 feet (15 to 1200 meters) in oak woodland and valley and foothill grassland habitats on clay soils. It has white flowers that can be tinged red to purple. The stems are glandular-hairy and the leaves are round, which makes it different from other plants that are closely related to this species. This species was found in several locations within the project area and was mapped. This species was commonly found in areas mapped as wildflower fields. It was not found in every area mapped as wildflower fields; however, these areas would be considered potential habitat for this species. 4.3.14 Lemon’s Jewelflower Lemmon’s jewelflower is an annual herbaceous plant in the Mustard family. This species flowers from March to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 262 to 4002 feet (80 to 1220 meters) in pinyon and juniper woodland and valley and foothill grassland habitats. It has white flowers that have dark purple veins. This species is known from recorded CNDDB occurrences within the project area between Tesla and Corral Hollow, from Hospital Canyon, and from the Los Banos area. Suitable habitat for Lemmon’s jewelflower is present in the project area in the form of grassland habitat. This species has a high potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and known occurrences within the project area. 4.3.15 Recurved Larkspur Recurved larkspur is a perennial herbaceous plant in the Buttercup family. This species flowers from March to June and occurs at elevations ranging from 10 to 2,591 feet (3 to 790 meters) in chenopod scrub, oak woodland, and valley and foothill grassland habitats in alkaline soils. It has light blue flowers with the lower petals being white. This species is known from recorded CNDDB occurrences within the project area from Salt Creek and from the Los Banos Reservoir area. Suitable habitat for recurved larkspur is present in the project area in the form of grassland habitat in alkaline soils. It was not found during the 2014 surveys. This species has a moderate potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and known occurrences within the project area. However it prefers areas with alkaline soils, which are limited within the project area. 4.3.16 Spiny-Sepaled Buton-Celery Spiny-sepaled button-celery is an annual to perennial herbaceous plant in the Carrot family or Apiaceae. This species flowers from April to June and occurs at elevations ranging from 262 to 2034 feet (80 to 620 meters) in valley and foothill grasslands and vernal pools. It has ovoid to spheric flower heads with white petals. This species is known to occur in Merced, Stanislaus, and other counties, and is known from one recorded location near Byron Airport within the project area. Suitable habitat for Delta button-celery is present in the project area in areas mapped as grassland and vernal pools. This species has a moderate potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and one known CNDDB occurrence. 4.3.17 Diamond-petaled California Popy Diamond-petaled California poppy is an annual herbaceous plant in the Poppy family. This species flowers from March to April and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 2972 feet (0 to 975 meters) in valley and foothill grassland habitats on alkaline and clay soils. It has yellow flowers and the leaf segments are obtuse. This species is known from several recorded CNDDB occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. The recorded occurrences are from Corral Hollow near Castle Rock, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, hills north of Del Puerto Canyon and the hills south of Byron. Although not found during the 2014 surveys, this species has a high potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and known occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. 4.3.18 Woly Rose Malow Woolly rose mallow is a perennial rhizomatous herbaceous plant in the Mallow family. This species flowers from June to September and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 394 feet (0 to 120 meters) in freshwater marshes or swamps, often in riprap on sides of levees. It has bell-shaped flowers and the petals are white with a rose-red center. This species is from San Joaquin and other counties and there are recorded occurrences within the project area from Clifton Court Forebay. There is limited suitable habitat for this species within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. 4.3.19 Munz’s Tidy-tips Munz’s tidy-tips is an annual herbaceous plant in the Aster family. This species flowers from March to April and occurs at elevations ranging from 492 to 2296 feet (150 to 700 meters) in chenopod scrub and valley and foothill grassland habitats on hillsides in white-grey alkaline soils. This is a glandular sunflowerlooking plant with yellow ray flowers with white tips. Within the project area this species is known to occur in Fresno County. This species is considered to have a very low potential to occur in the project area based on microhabitat of white-grey alkaline soils, which are lacking in the project area. 4.3.20 Panoche Peper-gras Panoche pepper-grass is an annual herbaceous plant in the Legume family. This species flowers from February to June and occurs at elevations ranging from 607 to 902 feet (185 to 275 meters) in valley and foothill grassland on white or grey clay lenses on steep slopes. It can occur in alluvial fans and washes and prefers clay and gypsum soils. This species is known to occur in Fresno County. This species is considered to have a very low potential to occur in the project area based on the microhabitat preference of white or grey clay lenses on steep slopes, which are lacking in the project area. 4.3.21 Showy Golden Madia Showy golden madia is an annual herbaceous plant in the Aster family. This species flowers from March to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 82 to 3985 feet (25 to 1215 meters) in oak woodland and valley and foothill grassland habitats on adobe clay soils. It has yellow flowers with a yellow to orange center and glandular stems. This species is known from recorded CNDDB occurrences at Corral Hollow near Castle Rock, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and the hills south of Byron. Suitable habitat for showy golden madia is present in the project area in the form of grassland habitat but it was not found during the 2014 surveys. This species has a high potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and known occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. 4.3.2 Shining Navaretia Shining navarretia is an annual herbaceous plant in the phlox family. This species flowers from April to July and occurs at elevations ranging from 249 to 3280 feet (76 to 1000 meters) in oak woodlands, valley and foothill grasslands and vernal pools, sometimes in clay. It has yellow flowers and the inflorescence is densely white-hairy in the center. This species is known to occur in Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties, and there is a recorded occurrence from Billie Wright Road northeast of Los Banos Valley. 4.3.23 Pincushion Navaretia Pincushion navarretia is an annual herbaceous plant in the phlox family. This species flowers from April to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 66 to 1082 feet (20 to 330 meters) in vernal pools, often acidic. It has white flowers. This species is known to occur in Merced and other counties. There are no recorded occurrences for this species in the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area based on the CNDDB search. There is potential vernal pool habitat for this species within the project area although soils in the project area are not likely to be acidic. 4.3.23 Suisun Marsh Aster Suisun marsh aster is a perennial rhizomatous herbaceous plant in the aster family. This species flowers from May to November and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 10 feet (0 to 3 meters) in brackish and freshwater marshes and swamps. It has violet colored flowers. This species is known to occur in San Joaquin and other counties. There are no known recorded occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area based on the CNDDB search. 4.3.24 Caper-fruited Tropidocarpum Caper-fruited tropidocarpum is an annual herbaceous plant in the mustard family. This species flowers from March to April and occurs at elevations ranging from 3 to 1387 feet (1 to 455 meters) in valley and foothill grassland habitats, on alkaline hills, and on alkaline clay soils. It has yellow flowers with erect stems with few branches. This species is known from recorded CNDDB occurrences at Mountain House, Byron, Livermore, and Tracy. Suitable habitat for Caper-fruited tropidocarpum is present in the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area in the form of grassland habitat but it was not found during the 2014 reconnaissance surveys. This species has a high potential to occur in the project area based on presence of suitable habitat and known occurrences within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. 4.3.25 Delta Mudwort Delta mudwort is a perennial stoloniferous herbaceous plant in the Figwort family. This species flowers from May to August and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 6 feet (0 to 3 meters) in fresh or brackish water marshes and swamps, riparian scrub, usually on mud banks. This is a small, low-growing plant with white flowers. Within the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area this species is known to occur in Contra Costa and San Joaquin Counties. This species is considered to have a low potential to occur in the project area because there is limited habitat, especially within the microhabitat of mud banks. There is a CNDDB occurrence from Victoria Canal recorded within the nine-quad search area, which is approximately 15 miles (24 kilometers) from the proposed corridor. 4.3.26 Wright’s Trichocoronis Wright’s trichocoronis is an annual herbaceous plant in the Aster family. This species flowers from May to September and occurs at elevations ranging from 15 to 1305 feet (5 to 435 meters) in meadows and seeps, marshes and swamps, riparian forest, and vernal pool habitats. The microhabitat is mud flats of vernal lakes, drying river beds, alkali meadows. Within the project area this species is known to occur in Merced County and presumed extirpated from San Joaquin County. This species is considered to have a very low potential to occur in the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area because the microhabitat not present or is limited. 4.3.27 Other Special-status Plants The three CRPR Rank 3 and Rank 4 species found or potentially occurring in the project area are described below. Hogwallow Starfish. Hogwallow starfish is a low-growing annual herbaceous plant in the Aster family. This species flowers from March to June and occurs at elevations ranging from 0 to 1656 feet (0 to 505 meters) in valley and foothill grassland habitats in mesic sites and on clay soils and in shallow vernal pools. It has greenish flowers that occur in dense groups of 10 to 40 with 10 to 20 leaves beneath the flowers. There were no recorded occurrences for this species in the area but this species was observed in grassland habitats within the project area. It occurs in the same areas and habitats as for round-leave filaree, a CRPR Rank 1B species. Small-flowered Morning-glory. Small-flowered morning-glory is a low-growing annual herbaceous plant in the Morning Glory family. This species flowers from March to July and occurs at elevations ranging from 98 to 2296 feet (30 to 700 meters) in chaparral openings, coastal scrub, valley and foothill grassland habitats on clay soils or serpentine seeps. It has bell shaped pinkish or bluish flowers and the stems are diffusely branched. There were no recorded occurrences for this species in the area but this species was observed in grassland habitats within the project area. It occurs in the same areas and habitats as round-leave filaree, a CRPR List 1B species. Merced Phacelia. Merced phacelia is an annual herbaceous plant in the Borage family. This species flowers from February to May and occurs at elevations ranging from 197 to 328 feet (60 to 100 meters) in valley and foothill grassland on adobe or clay soils of valley floors, open hills or alkaline flats. It has bell shaped blue flowers with hairy to plus or minus glandular stems. This species is known from Merced County but there are no known records for this species within the nine-quad search of the project area and within 1 mile (1.6 kilometer) of the project area. This species is considered to have a very low potential to occur based on limited clay or alkaline soils and the lack of any recorded occurrences within the project area or within 1 mile (1.6 kilometer) of the project area. 4.3.28 Project Efects Implementation of the EPMs will provide general protection for sensitive resources within the project area. However, EPMs do not provide detailed guidelines for avoiding impacts to special-status plants and would not achieve full protection of resources. Special-status plants could be adversely affected by project activities. 4.3.29 Avoidance and Minimization Measures In addition to Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-6 above, the following measures will be implemented to ensure protection of special-status plant species. Western will consult with USFWS and CDFW; any avoidance, minimization, and compensation measures developed through consultation will supersede those provided in this document. BIO-7 For the federal and state listed plant species (large-flowered fiddleneck, Hoover’s spurge, Delta button-celery, Contra Costa goldfields, Mason’s lilaeopsis, Hartweg’s golden sunburst, and Greene’s tuctoria), and for all CRPR special-status plants the following measures will be implemented. During construction activities: . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until the site has been surveyed by an agency-approved biologist. Off-road travel will be avoided to the extent possible and off road travel outside of designated work areas will be prohibited. Ground-disturbing activities proposed between March 1 and August 31 will require a survey by an agency-approved biologist to flag any existing plant populations. Ground disturbance will be prohibited within the flagged boundary unless further consultation with USFWS or CDFW is completed. Flagging or other field markers such as temporary fence posts, or other markers that will last for the construction season, will be placed in the prohibited area to ensure that no disturbance occurs at that location. Populations of special-status plants will also be mapped and located in the field using a GPS so that they are clearly identified at all times of the year and construction workers can easily identify areas to be avoided. The area where special-status plants that are being preserved will be avoided by workers doing construction activities at all times of the year. After construction is completed the flagging and markers can be removed. . During project construction, a biological monitor will be present when work occurs within 100 feet of a flagged listed plant population. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all ground-disturbing activities to prevent impacts to special-status plants. Where impacts to special-status plants cannot be avoided, and mitigation cannot be achieved through the purchase of credits at a mitigation or conservation bank, the top 4 inches of topsoil will be removed and salvaged and applied to an appropriate on-site or off-site restoration area. When this topsoil is replaced, compaction will be minimized. Soil will not be stockpiled for more than one year to maintain seed viability. During O&M activities: . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until the site has been surveyed by an agency-approved biologist. All vehicles will have rubber tires. Off-road travel will be avoided to the extent possible. . If vegetation management activities are proposed between March 1 and August 31, an agency-approved biologist will mark plant populations, including a 50-foot (15-meter) buffer zone, prior to construction or O&M activities. Within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the flagged area, the following work-area limits will be provided: 1) only manual clearing of vegetation will be allowed within 50 feet of the edge of the flagged area, and 2) mechanical treatment of all kinds (including mowers, tractors, chippers, dozers) will be prohibited, and (3) herbicide use will be prohibited at all times with the exception of direct application to target vegetation. . Workers will refer to maps that show the location of mapped populations of specialstatus plants so that these areas can be avoided. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all ground-disturbing activities to prevent impacts to plants. . Where impacts to special-status plants cannot be avoided, the top 4 inches of topsoil will be excavated and stockpiled in an appropriate location. When this topsoil is replaced compaction will be minimized. Topsoil will not be stockpiled for more than one year. 4.3.30 Compensatory Mitigation If avoidance is not feasible, for special-status plants the following mitigation measures will be implemented: BIO-8 Western will purchase credits in an appropriate mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank for the plants species to be impacted. If a mitigation bank is not available Western will contribute in-lieu fees to a mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank that can provide appropriate mitigation for the special-status plant species affected. Western will work with the appropriate resource agency (USFWS and/or CDFW) to ensure adequate compensation. Mitigation ratios will be sufficient to achieve performance criteria of no net loss of the affected plant species If mitigation cannot be achieved by purchase of credits in a mitigation or conservation or by in-lieu fees, then Western will prepare a mitigation plan that describes the compensatory mitigation measures that will be implemented for special-status plants. The mitigation plan will be submitted to the USFWS for approval for federal listed plants and to CDFW for statelisted and CRPR plants. The mitigation plan will include the mitigation measures, which are adopted from the CNPS Policy on Mitigation Guidelines Regarding Impacts to Rare, Threatened and Endangered Plants (CNPS, 1998), or equally effective alternative measures. 4.3.31 Cumulative Efects Future agricultural and urban development projects may result in reduced grassland habitat and could contribute to cumulative impacts to plant species in the region. 4.4 Special-status Wildlife and Fishes Table 2 above presents all the special-status wildlife species that were considered potentially affected by the project. Note that six species presented in Table 2 have been eliminated from further consideration because the project area does not overlap with the geographic range of the species and/or does not provide suitable essential habitats. These include green sturgeon, Central Valley spring-run Chinook salmon, Sacramento River winter-run Chinook salmon, Fresno kangaroo rat, riparian brush rabbit, and riparian woodrat. The remaining species are discussed in more detail below, as are migratory birds in general. Please refer to the table for the listing status and scientific name of each species. . Conservancy fairy shrimp . Longhorn fairy shrimp . Valley elderberry longhorn beetle . Vernal pool fairy shrimp . Vernal pool tadpole shrimp . Delta smelt . Central Valley steelhead . Alameda whipsnake . Blunt-nosed leopard lizard . California legless lizard . Coast horned lizard . Giant garter snake . Pacific pond turtle . San Joaquin whipsnake . California red-legged frog . California tiger salamander . Foothill yellow-legged frog . Western spadefoot . Bald eagle . Burrowing owl . California condor . Golden eagle . Least Bell’s vireo . Loggerhead shrike . Long-eared owl . Modesto song sparrow . Mountain plover . Northern harrier . Short-eared owl . Swainson’s hawk . Tricolored blackbird . White-tailed kite . Yellow-headed blackbird . American badger . Giant kangaroo rat . Pallid bat . San Joaquin kit fox . Short-nosed kangaroo rat . Townsend’s big-eared bat . Western mastiff bat . Western red bat 4.4.1 Conservancy Fairy Shrimp, Longhorn Fairy Shrimp, Vernal Pol Fairy Shrimp, and Vernal Pol Tadpole Shrimp 4.4.1.1 Conservancy Fairy Shrimp The majority of sites inhabited by Conservancy fairy shrimp are large to very large, turbid, clay-bottomed vernal pools called playa pools (Eriksen and Belk, 1999; Helm and Vollmar, 2002). Playa pools typically remain inundated much longer than most vernal pools, often well into the summer, even though they often have maximum depths comparable to vernal pools (Vollmar, 2002: 35). Playa pools are much larger and more rare on the landscape than vernal pools. However, while typically found in larger pools, they have also been found in pools as small as 323 square feet (30 square meters–USFWS, 2005a). Ericksen and Belk (1999) report that Conservancy fairy shrimp are usually associated with cool-water pools that are low to moderate in dissolved solids. Conservancy fairy shrimp are believed to have historically occupied suitable vernal pools throughout a large portion of the Central Valley (USFWS, 2005a). This species is currently known from disjunct populations in Tehama, Glenn, Placer, Solano, Yolo, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties (USFWS, 2007). There is no critical habitat for this species near the project area. There are no CNDDB records for Conservancy fairy shrimp within the BSA, and no critical habitat overlaps with the project (Figure 5). The nearest CNDDB record is for a location roughly 12 miles (19 kilometers) east of the project area. Five vernal pools or vernal pool areas were mapped within the project area. One, shown on Figure 3, map 24, Patterson Pass A alternative corridor, is in a sandstone formation; other vernal pools not shown occur a short distance to the east of this pool between the Patterson Pass A alternative corridor and the proposed corridor. Two more mapped vernal pools are shown on Figure 3, map 30, in the proposed corridor just north of Garzas Creek, the fourth mapped vernal pool occurs just east of San Luis Substation in all corridors, proposed and alternative, that run into and out of this substation to the east. It is shown on Figure 3, map 39. The fifth mapped vernal pool is a vernal pool grassland (an area with multiple pools) west of Los Banos Substation, shown on Figure 3, maps 40 and 41. Playa pools and other very large, turbid pools are not present in the project area; however, a playa-sized pool occurs approximately 550 feet (168 meters) east of the proposed corridor and 0.9 miles (1.4 kilometers) southeast of the vernal pools shown on Figure 3, map 25. In addition to vernal pools found within proposed and alternate corridors, at least two vernal pools are known to occur within 200 feet (61 meters) outside of these corridors, and others could be present within and adjacent to the project area in areas not surveyed in 2014 and 2015. Unless protocol surveys in the year prior to construction or O&M indicate absence, Conservancy fairy shrimp will be assumed to be present in suitable habitat throughout the project area. 4.4.1.2 Longhorn Fairy Shrimp The longhorn fairy shrimp is not well understood. It is known from a few widely dispersed locations with very different microhabitat characteristics, including sandstone rock pools near Livermore (Contra Costa County), alkaline grassland pools within basin rim formations (Merced County), and alkali pools within alkali sink scrub habitat on the Carrizo Plain (San Luis Obispo County) (Vollmar et al., 2013). While it is currently known only from six disjunct populations in Tehama, Butte, Solano, Glenn, Merced, and northern San Luis Obispo Counties (CDFW, 2015a), it likely was once more widespread in the regions where it is currently known, including the San Joaquin Vernal Pool Region (USFWS, 2005a), which runs roughly the length of the project area just to the east. One known location is a roadside ditch 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) north of Los Banos. There are no CNDDB records for longhorn fairy shrimp within the BSA, and no critical habitat overlaps with the project (Figure 5). The nearest CNDDB record is for a location roughly 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) west of the project area. Locations of vernal pools are as described above in section 4.4.1.1. Because it is known from a number of widely spaced locations and from a variety of vernal pool types, some of which could or do occur in the project area (sandstone rock pools and alkaline grassland pools), presence of longhorn fairy shrimp is assumed in the few places where vernal pools occur throughout the project area, unless protocol surveys in the year prior to construction or O&M indicate absence. 4.4.1.3 Vernal Pol Fairy Shrimp The vernal pool fairy shrimp can occur in a range of pool sizes and depths, but typically occupies pools at least 4 inches (10 centimeters) in maximum potential ponding depth (Helm and Vollmar, 2002). It can tolerate a range of water-quality conditions though it seems to prefer pools with relatively clear water and a medium level of algal growth; it thrives under cold-water conditions, and it occurs in varied terrain, including basin rim, low terrace, and high terrace settings, and a range of soil types (Vollmar et al., 2013). It is the most widespread of the large California vernal pool branchiopods, occurring in scattered areas throughout much of the Central Valley, sporadically in the central and southern coast ranges and Los Angeles Basin, and up into southern Oregon. Vernal pool fairy shrimp critical habitat Unit 19B lies approximately 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) northwest of the Tracy Substation, with other patches lying farther west and still others farther east of different parts of the project area. There are no CNDDB records for vernal pool fairy shrimp within the BSA, and no critical habitat overlaps with the project (Figure 5). The nearest CNDDB record is for a location roughly 15 miles (24 kilometers) east of the project area. Locations of vernal pools are as described above in section 4.4.1.1. Presence of vernal pool fairy shrimp in the project area is assumed unless protocol surveys in the year prior to construction or O&M indicate absence. 4.4.1.4 Vernal Pol Tadpole Shrimp This species typically inhabits medium to large pools that are at least 6–7 inches (15–18 centimeters) in maximum potential ponding depth (Helm and Vollmar, 2002) and commonly occurs in areas with a medium to high density of large, hydrologically interconnected pools (Vollmar et al., 2013). It is found in many types of pools, from small to large, from clear to turbid (Vollmar et al., 2013). It can tolerate a range of water-quality conditions including high turbidity and is occasionally found in seasonal stock ponds. The vernal pool tadpole shrimp is nearly endemic to the Central Valley with the exception of a few occurrences documented in southwest Alameda County near the southern end of San Francisco Bay. Within the Central Valley, most occurrences are concentrated along the eastern side, though population centers extend into western Merced and Solano Counties; there are also some scattered occurrences along the west side of the Sacramento Valley. There are no CNDDB records for vernal pool tadpole shrimp within1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area, and no critical habitat overlaps with the project (Figure 5). The nearest CNDDB record is for a location roughly 10 miles east of the project area. Locations of vernal pools are as described in section 4.4.1.1 above. Presence of vernal pool tadpole shrimp is assumed in vernal pools and stock ponds within the project area, unless protocol surveys in the year prior to construction or O&M indicate absence. 4.4.1.5 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity In the absence of negative protocol surveys, all vernal pool branchiopods are assumed to be present in vernal pools and, for tadpole shrimp, in stock ponds within the project area. 4.4.1.6 Project Efects Four species of vernal pool branchiopod could be affected by project activities. Direct effects could include physical damage to occupied or potential habitats, construction-related erosion or runoff into aquatic habitats, and loss of individuals during project construction. Indirect effects could include degradation or loss of occupied or potential habitats through erosion or runoff from construction areas and new roads, and from operations and maintenance such as long-term use of new or existing access roads, tower/line repairs, introduction of human trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, and increased susceptibility to wild fire. Project effects to habitats for branchiopods cannot yet be quantified. Implementation of EPMs will ensure that direct effects from erosion or runoff and indirect effects associated with human trash and introduction of non-native plants will be minimized or avoided. In the absence of other avoidance and minimization measures, individuals and their habitats would still be vulnerable to direct and indirect physical damage during construction and O&M activities. 4.4.1.7 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Western will consult with USFWS for federally listed branchiopods and with SJCOG for impacts to special-status species falling under the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin County Multi-species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000) where the project lies within San Joaquin County, as appropriate. Any avoidance, minimization, or compensation measures developed during consultation with these agencies will supersede those listed in this report. Implementation of BIO-1 and BIO-2 would also avoid and minimize impacts to vernal pool branchiopods. 4.4.1.8 Compensatory Mitigation BIO-9 If effects to branchiopod habitats cannot be avoided, Western will compensate for effects through one of the following: (a) affected pools will be restored on site after construction is complete, (b) credits will be acquired from an agency-approved conservation bank, (c) funds will be deposited into an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) a conservation easement will be purchased. Western will work with the USFWS to ensure adequate compensation. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation monitoring and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. If it is necessary for cysts to be salvaged to restore affected pools and with concurrence from the USFWS, an agency-approved biologist will salvage soils from local sites that are known to support vernal pool branchiopods at least 2 weeks before the onset of construction, or during the preceding dry season if pools are anticipated to hold water when construction begins. The salvaged soil samples will be stored and used to inoculate restored pools. 4.4.1.9 Cumulative Effects The project would not contribute to cumulative effects to branchiopods with implementation of EPMs and avoidance, minimization, and compensation measures. 4.4.2 Valey Elderbery Longhorn Betle The valley elderberry longhorn beetle is endemic to the Central Valley and foothills of California, and is found only in association with its host plant, elderberry (Sambucus spp.), a common component of riparian forests and adjacent uplands (USFWS, 1999). Elderberry plants that support elderberry beetle populations are generally found along waterways and in floodplains and savannas that support remnant stands of riparian vegetation. The beetle inhabits plants of various sizes, ages, and growth forms. Larvae feed internally on the pith of the trunk and larger branches, while adults appear to feed externally only on foliage and flowers (USFWS, 2006). The life cycle takes one to two years to complete. From March through June, beetles mate and females lay eggs on living elderberry plants. The first instar larvae bore to the center of elderberry stems where they develop for one to two years (USFWS, 2006). Use of elderberry plants by this beetle is rarely apparent. Frequently, the only exterior evidence of use is an exit hole created by the larvae just prior to the pupal stage. Field work indicates that larval galleries can be found in elderberry stems with no evidence of exit holes—the larvae either succumb prior to constructing an exit hole or are not far enough along in the developmental process to construct an exit hole (USFWS, 1997). Larvae appear to be distributed primarily in stems that are 1 inch (2.54 centimeters) or greater in diameter at ground level (USFWS, 1999). This beetle is found in the Central Valley and foothills from Shasta County to Kern County. There are no CNDDB records for valley elderberry longhorn beetle within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area, nor is there critical habitat within that distance. Of interest within the nine-quad search area: three breeding adults were found in 2002 in an elderberry stand in a small canyon on Lawrence- Livermore property about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) southwest of the of the project area north of Corral Hollow. Another CNDDB record from 1987 along Los Banos Creek was later determined to be a different subspecies. All other CNDDB records are from well east of the project area. A number of large, well-developed elderberry plants were found within the narrow riparian zone along Salado Creek during spring 2014 surveys. Approximately 12 large shrubs were visible within the proposed corridor and 12–13 large shrubs were visible within the alternative corridor. Additional shrubs may be found within the relatively dense riparian in both locations. Salado Creek is best shown on Figure 3, map 23. A formal survey for exit holes in these shrubs was not conducted, but easily accessible plants were examined superficially and exit holes were not seen. Adults were not seen. Elderberry plants were also found within the floodplain of Los Banos Creek in the Billy Wright Road alternative (Figure 3, map 47). Elderberry plants were not detected at any other location but there is potential for their occurrence in parts of the project area not accessible during spring 2014 and 2015. 4.4.2.1 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity Valley elderberry longhorn beetle could be present in the elderberry shrubs found along Salado Creek and in areas not surveyed during spring 2014. 4.4.2.2 Project Efects Direct effects to valley elderberry longhorn beetle could include physical damage to occupied or potential habitats and loss of individual beetles during project construction. Indirect effects could include degradation or loss of occupied or potential habitats through operation and maintenance such as long-term use of new or existing access roads, tower/line repairs, introduction of human trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, and increased susceptibility to wild fire. Project effects to elderberry plants cannot yet be quantified. Implementation of project EPMs would ensure protection of riparian areas in general, but individual elderberry beetles or elderberry plants would still be vulnerable to physical damage and local degradation within riparian zones, and project EPMs provide no protection of elderberry plants outside of a riparian zone. This invertebrate could be adversely affected by the project. 4.4.2.3 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Pursuant to conservation guidelines provided in USFWS 1999 (or more current document), the measures below apply to construction and O&M activities. Western will consult with USFWS for impacts to valley elderberry longhorn beetle and with SJCOG for impacts falling under the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin County Multi-species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000) where the project lies within San Joaquin County, as appropriate. BIO-10 During project construction, Western will protect valley elderberry longhorn beetle by implementing the following: . If the project may affect valley elderberry longhorn beetle, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations for this beetle, which could include but may not be limited to the following. . A 100-foot (30.5-meter) no-disturbance buffer fence will be installed and maintained around the perimeter of elderberry shrubs. No grading or any other ground-disturbing activities will be conducted within the fenced area without prior verification that the requirements of the USFWS have been satisfied including the issuance of any necessary permits or authorizations. . Contractors will be briefed on the status of the beetle, the need to protect its elderberry host plant, the need to stay out of this 100-foot buffer, and the possible penalties for not complying with these requirements. . Signs will be erected every 50 feet (15 meters) along the edge of avoidance areas with the following statements: “This area is habitat of the valley elderberry longhorn beetle, a threatened species, and must not be disturbed. This species is protected by the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. Violators are subject to prosecution, fines, and imprisonment.” The signs will be clearly readable from a distance of 20 feet (6 meters), and will be maintained for the duration of construction. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of elderberry plants. BIO-11 During O&M activities, Western will implement the following measures. . Prior to initiating vegetation clearance with elderberry plants present, qualified personnel will clearly flag or fence each elderberry plant with a stem measuring 1 inch (2.54 centimeters) or greater in diameter at ground level. If an elderberry plant meeting this criterion is present: . A minimum buffer zone of 20 feet (6 meters) outside of the dripline of each elderberry plant will be provided during all routine O&M activities within which all O&M activities except manual clearing will be prohibited. . No insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers, or other chemicals will be used within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of an elderberry plant, except direct application to target vegetation. . Trimming, rather than removal of shrubs, will be used where feasible. Directional felling of trees and manual-cutting trees prior to removal will be used to minimize impacts to elderberries. . Replacement of existing conductor or installation of additional lines will be performed by pulling the line from tower to tower without touching the vegetation in areas where elderberry plants were present. 4.4.2.4 Compensatory Mitigation It is expected that complete avoidance of elderberry plants will be feasible. If avoidance is not feasible, compensatory mitigation will be required as follows: BIO-12 If complete avoidance (100 feet) of elderberry plants is not feasible, a mitigation plan will be developed in accordance with the most current USFWS mitigation guidelines (currently USFWS, 1999) that will include provision for compensatory mitigation. The mitigation plan will include, but may not be limited to, relocating elderberry shrubs, planting elderberry shrubs, establishing success criteria, monitoring relocated and planted elderberry shrubs to ensure success, and an adaptive management plan in the event that mitigation is not successful. 4.4.2.5 Cumulative Efects The project would not contribute to cumulative effects to valley elderberry longhorn beetle if elderberry plants are completely avoided, or if, in the event avoidance is not feasible, mitigation measures are implemented and successful in the long term. If either of these does not occur, the project would contribute to the cumulative loss of habitat for this invertebrate. 4.4.3 Fishes 4.4.3.1 Delta Smelt The Delta smelt is tolerant of a wide range of salinities but spawns in fresh water. For a large part of its annual life cycle it is associated with the freshwater edge of the mixing zone, called the saltwaterfreshwater interface (USFWS, 1994). Shortly before spawning, it disperses widely into upstream river channels and tidally influenced backwater sloughs (USFWS, 1994, Leidy, 2007). After several weeks of development, larvae migrate downstream until they reach nursery habitat in a low-salinity zone (USFWS, 2010). Juvenile smelt rear and grow in this zone, preferring relatively shallow, open water. Once adulthood is reached, Delta smelt begin a gradual migration back into freshwater areas to spawn (USFWS, 2010). Delta smelt is a true estuarine-dependent species and is therefore restricted to the tidal portions of the Delta, Suisun Bay, San Pablo Bay, and the lower Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers (Herbold et al., 1992, in Leidy, 2007). Critical habitat for the Delta smelt includes all water and all submerged lands below ordinary high water within specific geographic boundaries (USFWS, 1994). These boundaries include uplands surrounding waterways, but uplands are not themselves critical habitat. Figure 5 shows overlap of the project with critical habitat. The northernmost 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) of the project lies within critical habitat for Delta smelt. This area includes Mountain House Creek and other canals and ditches that could potentially harbor this fish; however, there is no evidence that any waterway within the project area communicates directly or indirectly with waterways occupied by Delta smelt (F. Mizuno pers. comm.), and the likelihood of Delta smelt occurrence is considered extremely low. The nearest CNDDB records are for a slough north of Clifton Court Forebay that is 4 miles (6.4 kilometers) north of the project area. Delta smelt has been discussed in this document because of project overlap with critical habitat. 4.4.3.2 Central Valey Stelhead Hatched in fresh water, the anadromous form of the rainbow trout, the steelhead, emigrates to the ocean where most of its growth occurs, and returns to fresh water to spawn (McEwan, 2001). Peak spawning occurs from December through April in small streams and tributaries with cool, welloxygenated water. Spawning takes place in shallow swift riffles with small gravel and cobble as the primary substrate (McEwan, 2001). The Central Valley steelhead's typical habitats are freshwater rivers and streams that are tributaries to the Sacramento and San Joaquin River systems. In the San Joaquin Valley, these streams originate in the Sierra; existing data do not show spawning streams originating in the coast ranges (McEwan 2001, NOAA Fisheries, 2014). The western boundary of the Central Valley distinct population segment (DPS) of the steelhead encompasses most of the project area (NOAA Fisheries, 2014); however, the streams tributary to the San Joaquin River within which steelhead are known or expected to spawn all originate east of the San Joaquin River in the Sierra Nevada. The boundaries of the DPS show no known or expected spawning in tributaries originating west of the San Joaquin River (NOAA Fisheries, 2014); a range map provided in McEwan 2001 limits the current range of the Central Valley steelhead to an area bounded on the west by the western edge of the San Joaquin River many miles from the project area. Central Valley steelhead are therefore not expected to occur in any of the streams found in the project area. North of the Tracy Substation, however, two CNDDB records for Central Valley steelhead (CDFW, 2015a) identify two fish-salvage facilities, Tracy Fish Facility and Skinner Delta Fish Protective Facility, where steelhead are frequently rescued from entrainment during Central Valley Project and State Water Project pumping activities. These CNDDB records identify areas 1.4 and 1.9 miles (2.25 and 3.1 kilometers) northeast and northwest of project boundaries. All other CNDDB records are for the San Joaquin River, well east of the project, or other waterways, well north of the project. 4.4.3.3 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity Within the northernmost 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) of the project area, Mountain House Creek and other ditches and canals fall within Delta smelt critical habitat and could potentially, but are considered unlikely to, support this fish. With the exception of Central Valley steelhead found entrained at fishsalvage facilities north of Tracy Substation, there is no evidence that Central Valley steelhead occur anywhere within the project area. 4.4.3.4 Project Efects Direct and indirect effects to Central Valley steelhead are not expected because this species is not expected to occur in the project area. Similarly, Delta smelt is not expected to occur in or near the project area; however, given project overlap with critical habitat, project effects to Delta smelt have been considered. Direct effects to Delta smelt could include physical damage to potential habitats. Indirect effects could include degradation or loss of potential habitats through erosion or runoff from construction areas and new roads, and from project operations and maintenance such as long-term use of new or existing access roads, tower/line repairs, introduction of human trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, and increased susceptibility to wild fire, which could reduce shade and affect both water quality and water temperature. Project EPMs would sufficiently minimize the potential for direct and indirect effects to Delta smelt. 4.4.3.5 Avoidance and Minimization Measures No specific avoidance and minimization measures are proposed for Delta smelt and Central Valley steelhead because project EPMs would adequately protect their habitats in the unlikely event of the occurrence of these species in the project area. 4.4.3.6 Cumulative Efects In the absence of project effects, the project would not contribute to cumulative effects. 4.4.4 Reptiles 4.4.4.1 Alameda Whipsnake Typical habitat for the Alameda whipsnake is chaparral/scrub plant communities and any of the naturally occurring plant communities found in association with this type, including grassland, oak savanna, oak-bay woodland, mixed evergreen forest, rock outcrop, and riparian zones (Swaim 1994, Alvarez et al., 2005). This snake is often found where grassland meets chaparral, and in riparian zones they prefer cobble creek beds for travel and foraging (K Swaim pers. comm.). Swaim 1994 reported that most telemetry locations of snakes occur within 170 feet (50 meters) of scrub habitats, with some as far as 500 feet (152 meters), but Alvarez et al. 2005 reported one snake found in annual grassland 4.5 miles from scrub. However, the type of vegetation may have less to do with preference by the whipsnake than the extent of the canopy, slope exposure, the availability of retreats such as rock outcrops and rodent burrows, and prey species composition and abundance (Swaim, 1994), and homogeneous grassland is of low suitability when not contiguous with a mosaic of riparian, rock outcrops, and/or scrub (J Alvarez pers. comm.). The current range of the Alameda whipsnake includes mosaics of chaparral, coastal scrub, and adjacent habitat types throughout Contra Costa County, most of Alameda County, and small portions of northern Santa Clara and western San Joaquin Counties (USFWS, 2011a). This range has been subdivided into five populations that correspond to relatively contiguous mosaics of chaparral and coastal scrub, grassland, oak woodland/savanna, and riparian vegetation types; these five populations are otherwise fragmented by urban development, transportation corridors, and a lack of coastal scrub and chaparral vegetation (USFWS, 2011a). As described in the USFWS 5-year review (USFWS, 2011a), the draft recovery plan established five draft recovery units corresponding to each of these five populations; two additional draft recovery units were established to correspond to corridors that best provide habitat linkage between the five populations. Draft recovery unit 5 is the unit nearest the project area; it lies at closest roughly 3.25 miles (5.2 kilometers) west of the alternative corridor in western San Joaquin County. There are a number of CNDDB records for Alameda whipsnake within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) represented by two large polygons, one comprising the entire Midway quad and the other comprising the entire Lone Tree Creek quad (CDFW, 2015a), both of which overlap with parts of the project area from just north of I-205 south to roughly the level of Hospital Creek. Records are from 1937, and the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, including a record that describes habitat as grassland/coastal sage scrub. Most of the project area within these polygons was either walked or driven and spot-checked in spring 2014, and coastal scrub habitats were not found. Habitats in the proposed and alternative corridors within Alameda whipsnake range are almost entirely non-native annual grassland with an occasional rock outcrop and ephemeral drainage, but the mosaic of habitats preferred by Alameda whipsnake was not seen. While there are exceptions, most Alameda whipsnakes are found within 500–1000 feet (152–305 meters) of scrub habitats or some kind of suitable habitat mosaic (Swaim, 1994; Alvarez et al., 2005; Alvarez, pers. comm.). The best habitats within the project area occur within or adjacent to Corral Hollow, Lone Tree, and Hospital creeks where there is slightly more diversity of cover types. Grazed non-native grassland without a diversity of cover types is considered marginal. It should be noted that USFWS considers habitats within the species’ range to be occupied. Unit 5A is the critical habitat unit nearest the project area but it is roughly 2.25 miles (3.6 kilometers) west of the alternative corridor north of Corral Hollow (USFWS, 2011a). The project does not overlap with critical habitat for this species (Figure 5). 4.4.4.2 Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Blunt-nosed leopard lizards inhabit flat to rolling slopes, alluvial fans, alkali flats, and washes vegetated with sparse shrubs and grasses with little or no understory. They generally avoid areas of dense vegetation, such as dense grasses, and long-term studies show that population densities decline after years of consecutive above-average rainfall (Germano et al., 2004; Germano et al., 2005; Germano and Williams, 2005). Radio-telemetry studies near the Elk Hills in Kern County have documented that bluntnosed leopard lizards are generally restricted to more open habitats (e.g., washes, roads, grazed pastures) when grass cover is thick, but they may utilize grassland areas if the herbaceous cover is sparse (Warrick et al., 1998). Leopard lizards use small mammal burrows created by California ground squirrels, pocket mice, kangaroo rats, and other rodents for permanent shelter and dormancy and into which they retreat to aestivate during the winter months. Surface activity occurs between May and September, but activity is highly regulated by air and soil temperatures. Optimal activity occurs when air temperatures are between 77F and 95F (25F and 35C) and ground temperatures are between 72F and 97F (22C and 36C). Leopard lizards are most likely to be observed in the morning and late afternoon during hotter days. Smaller lizards and young have a wider activity range than adults, both daily and seasonally. Sub-adult lizards emerge from hibernation earlier than adults and remain active later in the fall, so that by the end of June or July almost all sightings are of sub-adults and hatchlings. Juvenile lizards also are active earlier and later in the day than adults. Adults retreat to their burrows and enter a dormancy period beginning in August or September, but hatchlings are active on the surface until mid-October or November, depending on weather (www.esrp.csustan.edu). Blunt-nosed leopard lizards inhabit interior coast range saltbush scrub (Holland, 1986, Sawyer et al., 2009), which in the project area ranges from Pacheco Pass southward. Much of this habitat has been converted to non-native annual grassland by intensive livestock grazing and fire. Other foothill communities that occur within the range of the blunt-nosed leopard lizard are Upper Sonoran subshrub scrub and serpentine bunchgrass (Holland, 1986). In general, leopard lizards are absent from steep slopes (>20-30 degrees), dense vegetation, or areas subject to seasonal flooding. This relatively large, predatory lizard formerly ranged in arid habitats throughout the San Joaquin Valley and into the surrounding foothills and associated valleys from San Joaquin County southward through Kern County into northeastern Santa Barbara County and northwestern Ventura County. Conversion of saltbush scrub and valley grassland habitat to agricultural, oil, and urban expansion has eliminated this species from more than 90 percent of its historic range (Germano and Williams, 1992; USFWS, 2010b). Blunt-nosed leopard lizards now are restricted to highly fragmented patches of arid-land habitats on the floor of the San Joaquin Valley and surrounding foothills from about Merced County southward (USFWS, 2010b). More contiguous habitat occurs in the foothills that border the western edge of the Valley in this region, such as the Kettleman Hills, Temblor Range, Ciervo Hills, Panoche Hills, and Tumey Hills, as well as the isolated valleys between individual ranges, including the Kettleman Plain, Panoche Valley, Carrizo Plain, Elkhorn Plain, and upper Cuyama Valley of northeastern Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties (USFWS, 2010b). In the latter region, it hybridizes with the widespread species, G. wislizenii (Montanucci, 1970). There are six blunt-nosed leopard lizard records in the CNDDB from the project region with observations made between 1931 and 1993. The records are clustered in foothill regions ranging 2–3 miles south and southwest of the southern end of the project area northward to the southern edge of San Luis Reservoir. The most recent USFWS five-year status review (USFWS, 2010b), and the Service’s guidance for us during agency meetings for this project, places the northernmost range limit at Santa Nella, near the north end of San Luis Reservoir. Leopard lizards were not observed during spring 2014 reconnaissance surveys but suitable habitat was found discontinuously across the southern portion of the project area. Figure 6 below presents relative habitat suitability in proposed and alternative corridors; note that habitat suitability was assessed using aerial imagery where right of entry was not available. Appendix F presents the data behind Figure 6 in tabular form, as well as a memo prepared for agencies on habitat requirements of blunt-nosed leopard lizard. 4.4.4.3 California Legles Lizard Despite a large geographic range that extends from San Francisco Bay southward into Baja California, Mexico, the local occurrence of the California legless lizard is determined by edaphic (soil), climatic, and vegetative conditions. It inhabits a variety of habitats, including coastal dunes, scrub, savanna, woodland, and forest habitats that share the common feature of growing on sand or sandy loam soils (Hunt, 2008). Surface activity is correlated with the rainy season when air and soil temperatures are seasonally low and soil moisture is elevated. Home ranges are very small (Kuhnz et al., 2005) and activity is focused around individual or clumps of shrubs and trees (Hunt, 1998). The species is also associated with streamside growths of sycamores, cottonwoods, and oaks with plenty of ground litter (Stebbins 2003; City of Oakley, 2005). A diurnal species, the California legless lizard forages in leaf litter under the overhang of trees and bushes and under rocks, logs, and old boards (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). Recent genetic work (Papenfuss and Parham, 2013) suggests that the taxon called A. pulchra contains at least five species-level taxa, although the geographical limits and contact zones of these taxa remain poorly known. The nominate form pulchra occurs in the project area. There are no CNDDB records for legless lizards in the nine-quad search area, but they are known from sites surrounding the project area and are expected to occur in sandy scrub and woodland habitats and sandy washes such as Orestimba Creek, Quinto Creek, Garzas Creek, and similar creeks (Hunt pers. obs.).   Figure 6a of Appendix C, titled “Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Gonzaga Rd Luis Ave Jasper Sears Rd Bayview Rd Donohugh Rd W W Comet Rd Deleon Ave 5 152 33 69 68 67 66 65 64 63 62 61 60 72 66 65 64 63 62 61 60 59 58 57 52 Figure 6a. Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability 0 0.25 0.5Miles OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI, CPAD Substation Proposed Corridor Quarter-mile Marker Corridor Alternative Quarter-mile Marker Proposed Project Corridor Survey Area Corridor Alternatives Survey Area 1-mile buffer around Project Area The Nature Conservancy Land None to Low Moderate Moderate to High High Habitat Suitability None (no fill) Low Low to Moderate Figure 6b of Appendix C, titled “Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.74 73 72 71 70 76 75 74 73 72 71 70 69 68 67 0 0.25 0.5Miles OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI, CPAD Figure 6b. Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability Substation Proposed Corridor Quarter-mile Marker Corridor Alternative Quarter-mile Marker Proposed Project Corridor Survey Area Corridor Alternatives Survey Area 1-mile buffer around Project Area The Nature Conservancy Land None to Low Moderate Moderate to High High Habitat Suitability None (no fill) Low Low to Moderate Figure 6c of Appendix C, titled “Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Arburua Rd 77 76 75 81 82 80 79 78 77 71 0 0.25 0.5Miles OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI, CPAD Figure 6c. Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability Substation Proposed Corridor Quarter-mile Marker Corridor Alternative Quarter-mile Marker Proposed Project Corridor Survey Area Corridor Alternatives Survey Area 1-mile buffer around Project Area The Nature Conservancy Land None to Low Moderate Moderate to High High Habitat Suitability None (no fill) Low Low to Moderate Figure 6d of Appendix C, titled “Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Langdon Rd Ortigalita Rd Arburua Rd Pole Line Rd Mervel Ave Charleston Rd S Private Rd S Pipeline Rd Pole Line Rd S Creek Rd 82 81 80 79 78 77 83 84 82 0 0.25 0.5Miles OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI, CPAD Figure 6d. Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability Substation Proposed Corridor Quarter-mile Marker Corridor Alternative Quarter-mile Marker Proposed Project Corridor Survey Area Corridor Alternatives Survey Area 1-mile buffer around Project Area The Nature Conservancy Land None to Low Moderate Moderate to High High Habitat Suitability None (no fill) Low Low to Moderate Figure 6e of Appendix C, titled “Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Mervel Ave ate Rd S Pipeline Rd Pole Line Rd 83 Dos Amigos 82 81 80 79 84 0 0.25 0.5Miles OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI, CPAD Figure 6e. Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Habitat Suitability Substation Proposed Corridor Quarter-mile Marker Corridor Alternative Quarter-mile Marker Proposed Project Corridor Survey Area Corridor Alternatives Survey Area 1-mile buffer around Project Area The Nature Conservancy Land None to Low Moderate Moderate to High High Habitat Suitability None (no fill) Low Low to Moderate 4.4.4.4 Coast (Blainvile’s) Horned Lizard The coast horned lizard inhabits open country, especially sandy areas, washes, floodplains, and windblown deposits in a variety of habitats (Morey, 2000), including annual and perennial grassland, oak woodland, chaparral, conifer, riparian, and juniper habitats. Important habitat features include loose, fine soils with high sand fraction, abundance of native ant species, open areas with limited overstory for basking, and areas with low, dense shrubs for refuge (YHJPA, 2013). Limiting habitat requirements are believed to include an exposed gravelly sandy substrate such as clearings in riparian woodlands or annual grassland with scattered perennial species (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). It is found in suitable habitats through the Central Valley and central and southern coast ranges and coastal areas. Four CNDDB records within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area are dated 1990-1992 and are located between I-205 and just south of Corral Hollow Road. No coast horned lizards were detected during spring 2014 surveys; however, a number of the major and minor creeks, washes, and drainages, as well as adjacent grasslands, provide suitable habitat for this reptile. With two exceptions, all CNDDB records are west of the project area and north of Corral Hollow in the preserve lands associated with the Highway 580 Business Park (SJCOG, 2011). The two exceptions are locations roughly 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) south of Corral Hollow, one of which overlaps with the project area. Suitable habitat is present throughout the project area. 4.4.4.5 Giant Garter Snake Standard descriptions of giant garter snake habitat include marshes, ponds, sloughs, small lakes, lowgradient streams, and other waterways, as well as agricultural wetlands such as irrigation and drainage canals, rice fields, and their adjacent uplands (USFWS, 2006). A habitat suitability model described by the Butte County Association of Governments (BCAG, 2012) identifies the following land cover types below 200 feet mean sea level as giant garter snake habitat: rice, managed wetland, emergent wetland, willow scrub, irrigated cropland adjoining the above wetland types, and canals, sloughs, and permanent or intermittent low-gradient small streams that are within 8 km (5 mi) of the above wetland types. Further refinement is provided by Halstead et al. (2010), particularly for giant garter snake in the Sacramento Valley: giant garter snakes occur in areas with a dense network of canals, close to rice fields, with a low density of streams, close to open water and wetlands, and far from other agriculture, with a negative association with streams. On a microhabitat level, increased odds of use by giant garter snakes were associated with increased percent cover of emergent vegetation, terrestrial vegetation, litter (dead vegetation), and submerged vegetation (Halstead et al., 2011). Giant garter snakes usually occur within a few feet of water and are often found between the water level and the top of the bank (City of Sacramento, 2003). Giant garter snake expert Eric C Hansen (pers. comm.) describes giant garter snake habitat as flood basins with flood-bottom habitats with occupational covariates appearing to show that soils are important drivers, as are historical flood conditions. Giant garter snakes overwinter in burrows and crevices near foraging habitats; individuals have been seen using burrows as far as 164 feet (50 meters) from marsh edges during the active season, and retreating as far as 820 feet (250 meters) from wetland edges while overwintering, presumably to reach hibernacula above prevailing flood elevations (BCAG, 2012). Adequate burrows are typically located in sunny exposures (USFWS, 2006). The current known distribution of giant garter snake is patchy, and extends from near Chico in Butte County, south to Mendota Wildlife Area in Fresno County (Hansen, 2008). Extant populations within the San Joaquin Valley, with one exception, originate south and west of the San Joaquin River where large wetland complexes remain (Hansen, 2008). Most of the CNDDB records are associated primarily with the Grasslands Ecological Area, the Mendota Wildlife Area, and the Los Banos Wildlife Area Complex (Hansen, 2008). The USFWS 5-year review (USFWS, 2012a) identifies a similarly restricted range in the San Joaquin Valley; the currently occupied areas are all some distance from the project area. While known to occur in Los Banos Creek, which overlaps with the project area, there are no records of giant garter snake closer than 5 miles (8 kilometers) from the project area, and there are no records west of Interstate 5. This snake is not expected to occur upstream of Los Banos Reservoir where the Billy Wright Road alternative corridor crosses the creek, and the proposed corridor spans the concrete-lined spillway below the Los Banos Creek dam. 4.4.4.6 Pacific Pond Turtle The Pacific pond turtle occurs in perennial waters such as lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, irrigation ditches, and sloughs with aquatic vegetation, deep or muddy water for cover, and sunny openings (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). Pond turtles need basking sites for thermoregulation such as logs, vegetation mats, open banks, or rock outcrops adjacent to deep water for escape. While adults are found in a variety of habitats, hatchlings and juveniles require specific habitats for survival: shallow water with relatively dense submergent or short emergent vegetation in which to forage and hide from predators (Jennings and Hayes 1994, Stebbins 2003, CDFW, 2014a). Although primarily aquatic, pond turtles leave aquatic habitats in the fall to mate and some overwinter in uplands (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). They nest in grassy uplands from late April to early August. Suitable upland habitat for egg-laying includes unshaded sandy banks or grassy, open fields on unshaded, south-facing slopes with generally less than 25 percent slope. Eggs are deposited in excavated nests, typically within 650 feet (200 meters) from aquatic habitats, but nests may be as far as 1300 feet (400 meters) from aquatic habitats (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). This turtle occurs in suitable habitats throughout California from mountainous foothills on the east to the coast on the west (CDFW, 2014a). CNDDB records for Pacific pond turtle within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project are for Delta- Mendota Canal, Mountain House Creek, Corral Hollow Creek, Orestimba Creek, and Los Banos Creek. Pacific pond turtles were also detected during spring 2014 field surveys in Del Puerto Creek. They are likely to occur in suitable habitats throughout the project area and are expected to nest in uplands around some or most of the occupied aquatic sites. Project corridors provide nesting habitat around aquatic sites that may be some distance away. 4.4.4.7 San Joaquin Whipsnake Little is known about the natural history of the San Joaquin whipsnake. It occurs in open, dry, treeless areas, including grassland and saltbush scrub, where it takes refuge in rodent burrows, under shaded vegetation, among rocks or surface objects, or in the branches of a bush (Stebbins, 2003; California Herps, 2014). San Joaquin whipsnakes are extremely active snakes that generally do not emerge from burrow retreats until surface temperatures reach 28C or higher (Hammerson, 1989). Consequently, emergence from winter aestivation occurs in late spring and diurnal emergence occurs in late morning (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). This snake is active from late April through August. This subspecies is found in the inner south coast ranges and southern San Joaquin Valley from Contra Costa County south to San Luis Obispo and Kern Counties. CNDDB records for San Joaquin whipsnake in the project area are centered around Corral Hollow in the north and Los Banos Creek in the south. While extensive patches of suitable habitat are found in both proposed and alternative corridors, open grassland/rangeland without rodent burrows (formerly disked land or disused dry-farmed land) is not likely to be occupied. Washes associated with Corral Hollow, Lone Tree, Hospital, Orestimba, Romero, Quinto, Garzas, Ortigalita, Los Banos, Salt Creek, and similar creeks may also provide suitable habitat for this species. This species was not observed during spring 2014 surveys. 4.4.4.8 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity With the exception of the giant garter snake, all of the reptiles described above have the potential to occur in suitable habitats within the project area. Giant garter snake is known to occur in Los Banos Creek, but not known to occur west of Interstate-5. It is not expected to occur in the project area. 4.4.4.9 Project Efects Seven reptile species could be affected by project activities: Alameda whipsnake, blunt-nosed leopard lizard, California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, giant garter snake, western pond turtle, and San Joaquin whipsnake. Direct effects to all include temporary or permanent loss of or physical damage to occupied and otherwise suitable upland and aquatic habitats, mortality during construction or through vehicle ingress/egress, disturbance through human presence and construction noise and vibration, and collapse of burrows. Indirect effects could include degradation or loss of habitat through project operations and maintenance such as long-term use of new or existing access roads, tower/line repairs, introduction of human trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, and increased susceptibility to wild fire. In the relative scarcity of suitable habitat for Alameda whipsnake within the project area, direct effects are unlikely but not impossible. Tower pads would be constructed primarily in grazed non-native grasslands, which in the project area do not contain the diversity or types of cover preferred by this snake. Alameda whipsnake is most likely to occur in Corral Hollow and other northern creeks where there are more shrubs and a diversity of cover types. While creeks are likely to be entirely spanned by the proposed transmission line, thereby minimizing impacts to creek habitats, improvements to existing access roads and construction of new access roads could adversely affect occupied and potential habitats. Project EPMs do not provide sufficient protection for this snake and it could be adversely affected. Similarly, California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake prefer a diversity of cover types not found in most of the grazed non-native grasslands where tower pads would be placed; however, improvements to existing access roads and construction of new roads could adversely affect occupied and potential habitats. Areas with more shrub cover occur around O’Neill Forebay and San Luis Reservoirs (in roughly a 1-mile radius around each) and through many of the creek corridors in the project area. Project EPMs do not provide sufficient protection for these three species. Giant garter snake is not expected to occur west of Interstate 5 or upstream of the Los Banos Reservoir, and the project would not directly affect Los Banos Creek or any other creek flowing into occupied habitat. While project effects will occur in uplands associated with Los Banos Creek, the creek below the dam is a concrete spillway and not suitable for this snake. Project EPMs sufficiently protect this snake in the unlikely event of its presence. Western pond turtle could be affected by impacts to both aquatic and upland habitats. Project EPMs do not provide sufficient protection for this reptile. The blunt-nosed leopard lizard is both state and federally endangered, but it is its status as a California fully protected species that entirely prohibits project-related take of this species; CDFW cannot authorize take (CDFW in litt., 2014b). Project EPMs do not provide sufficient protection for this lizard. 4.4.4.10 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Measures to protect special-status reptiles are presented below. Western will consult with USFWS and CDFW. Western will consult with SJCOG for impacts to special-status species falling under the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin County Multi-species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000) where the project lies within San Joaquin County, as appropriate. Any avoidance, minimization, or compensation measures developed during consultation with these agencies will supersede those listed below. BIO-13 Western will minimize or avoid effects to Alameda whipsnake and its habitats by implementing the following measures. . If suitable Alameda whipsnake habitat will be impacted by the proposed project, Western will consult with the USFWS and CDFW. Take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS and CDFW, as necessary. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations, which could include but may not be limited to the following. . If habitat for Alameda whipsnake will be impacted by project activities, Western will develop and implement a protection and monitoring plan for Alameda whipsnake that will be approved by USFWS and CDFW during formal consultation. Measures in this plan will include, but may not be limited to a procedure for conducting preconstruction surveys and/or trapping surveys before the onset of initial ground-disturbing activities in areas with high-quality habitat that cannot be avoided, surveying before construction and/or restoration begins each day that these activities will occur, and direct monitoring by an agency-approved biologist of the clearing of occupied or potentially occupied grassland/scrub/mosaic habitats in the project area that will be directly affected by project construction. BIO-14 To protect blunt-nosed leopard lizard, Western will implement the following for both construction and O&M activities. . An agency-approved (USFWS and CDFW) biologist will conduct blunt-nosed leopard lizard surveys for each ground disturbance site in blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat per the 2004 Approved Survey Methodology for the Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard (CDFG, 2004) or currently approved methodology. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are not detected during surveys, a flashing barrier or other short-term or longer-term fencing plan approved by CDFW will be installed when possible and necessary around the work area to prevent blunt-nosed leopard lizards from entering the work area. Fencing options may be shorter term (temporary for just a few hours) or longer term (days or weeks) and may include but would not be limited to a 36-inch (0.9- meter) tall barrier, buried 6 inches (15 centimeters) deep, and reinforced with rebar or Tposts, and may include escape ramps of silt-fencing material, wood, or soil to allow any undetected blunt-nosed leopard lizard to exit the site. Fencing plans and types may be altered based on length of time the fence is to remain in place, terrain, and project needs. Fencing will be removed upon project completion. If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are subsequently found within the fenced work area, a section of fence may be removed so that the lizard may leave the exclusion zone. The agency-approved biologist will monitor the location of the blunt-nosed leopard lizard to ensure that it has moved outside of the work area. The fencing will be immediately replaced to exclude the lizard from the construction area. When all observed blunt-nosed leopard lizards have exited the site, additional surveys will be implemented during appropriate conditions for detection for at least five survey days before construction begins to ensure that no more blunt-nosed leopard lizards inhabit the work-area exclusion zone. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are detected during surveys, any active burrow within a 200-foot radius of activity sites will be flagged and marked with a burrow number prior to construction or O&M activities. Flagged, 50-foot (15-meter) exclusion zones will be established around any potentially active burrow. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this exclusion zone. A flashing barrier or appropriate fencing approved by CDFW will be established between burrow(s) and work sites. The barrier or fencing will be established at least 180 degrees around the burrow site and will flare out at the ends to direct lizards away from the activity sites. The barrier or fencing will not enclose an active burrow site. . An agency-approved biological monitor will monitor all vehicular traffic within 200 feet (61 meters) of potentially active burrows by escorting all vehicles through this zone on foot. The monitor will walk in front of the vehicle to ensure that no blunt-nosed leopard lizards are in the road or path of travel. All personnel vehicles or other vehicles not needed for construction activities will park at least 200 feet (61 meters) from the flagged burrow site and crews will walk into the work area. . An agency-approved biological monitor will be on site for any activities within suitable blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat. Prior to construction or O&M activities each day within suitable blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site during appropriate conditions for detection to verify that no bluntnosed leopard lizards are visible within the site. The agency-approved biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect project activities in coordination with the project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of bluntnosed leopard lizards. The agency-approved biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Vehicle speed limit of 15 mph (24 kph) will be enforced during construction and O&M activities on all nonpublic project access roads within blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat and outside of blunt-nosed leopard lizard flagged areas. Vehicle speeds within 200 feet (61 meters) of flagged blunt-nosed leopard lizard areas (known presence) will be contingent upon the walking speed of biological monitor. BIO-15 To protect California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake, Western will implement the following measures. . A pre-construction survey for California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist in all suitable habitats where tower construction or new access roads will affect suitable sandy grassland, scrub, sycamore, or sandy wash habitats. The survey will be conducted within 14 to 30 days of the onset of construction. If individuals of these species are not found, no further action will be required. . If California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and/or San Joaquin whipsnake are found, occupied habitat as well as other suitable habitats will be avoided to the maximum extent feasible. An agency-approved biologist will conduct daily surveys in suitable habitats during construction and O&M activities and will attempt to capture or otherwise move animals out of harm’s way when necessary. BIO-16 While considered a remote possibility, giant garter snake could occur in Los Banos Creek and adjacent uplands below the dam impounding Los Banos Creek Reservoir. Projection of giant garter snake will be partially accomplished through implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 and BIO-2, which protect aquatic habitats. Western will implement the following additional measures: During construction activities: . A preactivity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before construction activities begin, and an agency-approved biologist will be on site during all activities in potential giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitats. Preactivity surveys will be repeated whenever a lapse in construction activity of two weeks or longer occurs. The biologist will have the authority to stop construction if a giant garter snake is encountered; construction may resume when the snake has been seen to leave the area on its own or the agency-approved biologist confirms the snake will not be harmed. Only personnel with a USFWS 10(a)(1)(A) recovery permit will have the authority to capture and/or relocate giant garter snakes encountered in project area. All sightings and incidental take will be reported to the Western Natural Resources Department, who will report to the USFWS. During Category A O&M activities (Appendix A): . Follow EPMs and Mitigation Measures BIO-1 and BIO-2. During Category B O&M activities (Appendix A): . Follow EPMs and Mitigation Measures BIO-1 and BIO-2. . With the exception of direct application, use of herbicides within 200 feet (61 meters) of potential giant garter snake habitat will be prohibited at all times. . Giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitats will be flagged as environmentally sensitive areas by an agency-approved biologist within or adjacent to the disturbance footprint. Only manual vegetation removal will be allowed within the flagged area. . An agency-approved monitor will be present for O&M activities within the flagged area. Ground-disturbing activities will be avoided within 200 feet (61 meters) from the banks of giant garter snake aquatic habitat. If this were not feasible, O&M activities will be conducted between May 1 and September 30, the giant garter snake active period, and all potentially affected aquatic habitats will be dewatered prior to any ground disturbance. Dewatered areas will remain dry with no puddled water remaining for at least 15 consecutive days prior to excavation or filling of that habitat. If a site could not be completely dewatered, prey items will be netted or otherwise salvaged if present. . If it is not feasible to conduct O&M activities between May 1 and September 30, the Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office will be contacted, and the following actions will be performed: – A preactivity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before construction activities begin, and an agency-approved biologist will be on site during all activities in potential giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitat. Preactivity surveys will be repeated whenever a lapse in construction activity of two weeks or longer occurs. The biologist will have the authority to stop construction if a giant garter snake is encountered; construction may resume when the snake has been seen to leave the area on its own or the agency-approved biologist confirms the snake will not be harmed. Only personnel with a USFWS 10(a)(1)(A) recovery permit will have the authority to capture and/or relocate giant garter snakes encountered in project area. All sightings and incidental take will be reported to the Western Natural Resources Department, who will report to the USFWS – Any temporary fill and debris that might provide habitat for giant garter snakes will be immediately removed and disturbed areas will be restored to pre-project conditions after completion of O&M activities. Restoration work could include replanting species removed from banks or replanting emergent vegetation in the active channel. Filter fences and mesh will be of a material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians. Erosion-control blankets will be used as a last resort because of their tendency to biodegrade slowly and trap reptiles and amphibians. No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near aquatic features. During Category C O&M activities (Appendix A): . Follow all measures listed for Category A and B activities above. Prior to site mobilization, Western will provide notification to appropriate agencies. BIO-17 It is expected that aquatic sites that could support western pond turtle will be avoided, either because they occur in drainages that will be spanned or because of protection of buffer distances around aquatic sites for California red-legged frog and California tiger salamander. It is also likely that protection measures for these latter two species (outlined in section 4.4.5 below) will confer protection on western pond turtle. Western will implement the following additional measures to ensure protection of western pond turtles and their nests. During construction activities: . A preconstruction survey for western pond turtles will be conducted by an agencyapproved biologist in all construction areas identified as potential nesting or dispersal habitat located within 1000 feet (305 meters) of potential aquatic habitat. The survey will be conducted within 48 hours prior to initiation of construction activities. If a western pond turtle is found during pre-construction surveys in an area where it may be affected by construction, it will be relocated by an agency-approved biologist with permission from CDFW if necessary to a site that is a suitable distance from construction activities. If a nest is found within the construction area, construction will not take place within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the nest until the turtles have hatched and have left the nest or can be safely relocated, as determined through coordination with CDFW. . Because attempting to locate pond turtle nests will not necessarily result in detection, after completion of pre-construction surveys and relocation as necessary, exclusion fencing will be placed around all construction sites adjacent to suitable aquatic habitats during the nesting season to eliminate the possibility of nest establishment in uplands adjacent to aquatic areas, as necessary. . If construction activities occur near aquatic areas where turtles have been identified during pre-construction or other surveys, a biological monitor will be present during construction. If a turtle is found, it will be relocated, if necessary, to a site a suitable distance from construction activities. . If a pond turtle is encountered on the project site, any construction activity that could result in harm of the turtle will immediately cease and will not resume until an agencyapproved biologist has moved the turtle to a safe location. During O&M activities: . For Category A activities (Appendix A): follow EPMs and BIO-2. . For Category B and C activities (Appendix A): Follow EPMs and BIO-2. From April 15 to July 15, any ground-disturbing activity within 400 feet (122 meters) of a permanent pond, lake, creek, river, or slough that could affect the bed, bank, or water quality of any of these features will be prohibited OR an agency-approved biologist will inspect the project area. If adult or juvenile pond turtles are present, an agency-approved biologist will monitor project activities to ensure that no turtles are harmed. If the biologist determines that nests could be adversely affected, potential nesting areas will be avoided between June 1 and October 31. 4.4.4.1 Compensatory Mitigation Compensatory mitigation is not proposed for giant garter snake as the project area is not considered suitable habitat and is not expected to be occupied. Compensatory mitigation is not proposed for western pond turtle as it is expected that project effects to aquatic and upland habitats will be compensated through measures provided for California red-legged frog and California tiger salamander (section 4.4.5 below). Measures for compensatory mitigation for other reptiles are provided below. BIO-18 Western will compensate for permanent and temporary loss of upland scrub habitats that could support Alameda whipsnake by (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the project. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation monitoring and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. BIO-19 Western will provide compensation for permanent and temporary impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the project. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation monitoring and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. BIO-20 If California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and/or San Joaquin whipsnake are found during preconstruction surveys and avoidance of habitats is not feasible, Western will restore habitats temporarily affected. Surveys, fencing, and compensation for BNLL habitat and upland habitats for CRLF and CTS will benefit these species as well. 4.4.4.12 Cumulative Efects With implementation of avoidance and minimization measures, and successful compensatory mitigation for project effects that cannot be avoided, cumulative effects to special-status reptiles are not expected. If compensatory mitigation in the form of habitat restoration is not successful, the project would contribute to cumulative habitat loss and degradation for these animals. 4.4.5 Amphibians 4.4.5.1 California Red-leged Frog California red-legged frogs typically occupy and breed along the margins of permanent and nearpermanent ponds, lakes, and streams where water is still or slow, shoreline and emergent vegetative cover is dense and extensive, and water depth is at least 2.1 feet (0.7 meters) close to the shoreline (Jennings and Hayes, 1994; Barry, 1999). Suitable breeding sites often have floating rooted vegetation and “grunge” (i.e., algae, particulates, or some form of turbidity) in the water (Barry, 2005; Barry pers. comm.). Such habitats would be considered typical and optimal. Larvae, tadpoles, and metamorphs, which indicate breeding, have been collected from streams, deep pools, backwaters within streams and creeks, ponds, marshes, sag ponds, dune ponds, and lagoons (USFWS, 2002). They also frequently breed in artificial impoundments such as stock ponds, irrigation ponds, siltation ponds, sewage percolation ponds, and golf course ponds, including some without shoreline vegetative cover (USFWS 2002, 2005b; Rathbun et al., 1997). Following mating, embryos hatch within 6–14 days, and larvae require 4–5 months for metamorphosis. While California red-legged frogs are more likely to breed in permanent ponds than other local amphibians, they will also use temporary ponds that persist for 5–6 months (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). Larvae will perish in ponds that dry before metamorphosis. Subadults and adults often use additional areas including seeps, springs, riparian zones, and other areas that may not otherwise be used or suitable for breeding. An essential habitat element is an abundant forage base of invertebrates, macroinvertebrates, and mice (Barry, 2005). They are aggressive feeders and often look for mouse tunnels for foraging (Barry pers. comm.). California red-legged frogs may complete their entire life cycle in a particular habitat or they may seek multiple habitat types (USFWS, 2002). They often forage in uplands within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of aquatic sites (J Alvarez pers. comm.), especially at night, and may take shelter in small-mammal burrows and other refugia up to 300 feet (100 meters) from water at any time of the year (USFWS, 2005b). They have been observed to make long-distance movements that are straight-line point-to-point migrations of up to several miles without apparent regard to topography, vegetation type, or riparian corridors (Bulgur 1999, Alvarez pers. comm.); they do not require corridors of appropriate habitat for dispersal or movements. The California red-legged frog occurs in the coast range mountains from Napa and Sonoma Counties south to portions of the Los Angeles Basin, and in the foothills and some higher elevations in the Sierra. A number of CNDDB records are found within or near the project area. A single 1985 record is from Los Banos Creek upstream of the project area; the remaining records are from 1986 to 2008 within and adjacent to the project area at and north of Corral Hollow. Within the nine-quad search area, CNDDB records of California red-legged frogs are numerous, especially from Corral Hollow north to Tracy Substation, from west of San Luis Reservoir, and at Los Banos Creek. They were not detected during spring 2014 surveys when many potentially suitable habitats were dry because of drought conditions; however, many stock ponds with little to substantial emergent cover were present and potentially suitable both within and near the project area. Uplands at most stock ponds were marginal, providing little vegetative cover because of heavy grazing, and in many locations few if any small-mammal burrows. Critical habitat Unit 15 lies adjacent to or overlaps with the project area for the northernmost 16 miles (26 kilometers) of the project; the zone of overlap covers a 5-mile stretch (Figure 5) within which are several stock ponds that could support breeding California red-legged frogs. 4.4.5.2 California Tiger Salamander California tiger salamanders inhabit grassland and oak savanna habitats in the valleys and low hills of central and coastal California. Having an obligate biphasic life cycle, larvae develop in pools and ponds in which they were born but they are otherwise terrestrial salamanders (Shaffer et al., 2004). They spend most of the year in subterranean refuges dug by California ground squirrels (Otospermophilus beecheyi), Botta’s pocket gophers (Thomomys bottae), California vole (Microtus californicus), and other burrowing mammals (Jennings and Hayes, 1994; Trenham, 2001; Trenham and Shaffer, 2005; Bobzein and DiDonato, 2007), and may also be found under buildings (Barry, pers. comm.) and in soil crevices (Loredo et al., 1996). During winter rains between October and April, adults emerge from underground retreats and migrate nocturnally to ponds to breed (Loredo and Van Vuren, 1996). Large vernal pools, stock ponds, and other ephemeral, quiet waters provide typical breeding sites for courtship and egg deposition (Barry and Shaffer 1994; Alvarez, 2004); Bobzein and DiDonato (2007) report that California tiger salamanders breed almost exclusively in seasonal and perennial stock ponds in their study area. Larvae hatch in 2 to 3 weeks (Bobzein and DiDonato, 2007). Metamorphosis from May to July can occur as quickly as 60 days following deposition of eggs (Feaver, 1971, in Laabs et al., 2002) but may take as long as 6 months (Shaffer et al., 2008, in YHJPA, 2009) and larvae have even been observed overwintering (Alvarez 2004, Bobzein and DiDonato, 2007). Length and weight vary at metamorphosis because larvae can either accelerate development rapidly in response to drying ponds or delay development to take advantage of ponds that hold water longer (Barry and Shaffer, 1994; Shaffer et al., 2008, in YHJPA, 2009). Larvae will die if ponds in which they are developing dry before metamorphosis is complete (Barry and Shaffer, 1994; Searcy et al., 2013). The number of larvae that reach metamorphosis is highly variable (Loredo and Van Vuren, 1996; Trenham, 2000). In addition to a variety of ecological factors, the number of larvae that transform appears to be related to the timing and amount of rainfall during the previous winter (Loredo and Van Vuren, 1996), and Trenham et al. (2000) reported that, contrary to results of other studies (Loredo and Van Vuren, 1996, and others), total juvenile production was positively related to the total biomass of breeding females. It is generally believed that breeding ponds must hold water continuously for at least 10 weeks for successful metamorphosis (USFWS, 2003). Following transformation, metamorphs leave natal ponds. Loredo et al. (1996) reported that metamorphs may seek temporary shelter in soil crevices the first night before dispersing farther or while waiting for better conditions for migration; and Searcy et al. (2013) report that metamorph and adult densities are negatively correlated with distance from breeding ponds. By contrast, Trenham and Shaffer (2005) and Searcy et al. (2013) report that juvenile density is positively correlated with distance from breeding ponds: adult capture rates began to decrease at 33 feet (10 meters) from ponds, while capture rates of juveniles increased steadily between 33 and 1312 feet (10 and 400 meters). Juveniles are the only age class that is independent of the breeding pond, neither needing it for reproduction nor emerging from it at metamorphosis (Searcy et al., 2013). California tiger salamanders do not breed every year. Females have been reported to breed an average of just 1.4 times in their lifetimes, and others may breed only once every 2 to 8 years (Trenham et al., 2000). This can cause the species to be undetectable during aquatic surveys (Alvarez et al., 2013). The underground phase of the California tiger salamander life cycle is often referred to as aestivation; however, aestivation implies a state of dormancy (the summer equivalent of hibernation) and evidence suggests that animals move, feed, and remain active in their burrows (Trenham, 2001; Van Hattem, 2004, in USFWS 2012b; Ford et al., 2013). The central population of California tiger salamander occupies a relatively narrow geographical and ecological range centered in the Central Valley from Sacramento and Solano Counties in the north to Tulare and San Luis Obispo Counties in the south, and from sea level to approximately 3900 feet (1200 meters) elevation (Shaffer et al., 2004). Many CNDDB records are found in the nine-quad search of the project area, but only two polygons occur within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area. One of them is a 2012 record from a location where these animals have been seen since 1975, along West Grant Line Road north of I-205 and just west of the California Aqueduct. The other is a 1992 record from Corral Hollow just east of the project area. CNDDB records from the nine-quad search area show numerous occurrences west of the project area from Corral Hollow north to Tracy Substation, and west of the Billy Wright Road alternative corridor south of O’Neill Forebay. The entire project area lies within its range and the species is likely to occupy more aquatic and upland habitats in the area than are currently known. As noted above, aquatic surveys may fail to detect California tiger salamander even when it is present because it can persist in uplands for years and not breed (Alvarez et al., 2013). 4.4.5.3 Fothil Yelow-leged Frog Foothill yellow-legged frogs are found in or near rocky streams in a variety of woodland, scrub, and meadow habitats. They require shallow, flowing water in small to moderate streams with some cobblesized substrate. While they have also been found in streams lacking a cobble or larger-sized substrate (Fitch, 1938; Zweifel, 1955), it is not known if these habitats are regularly used (Hayes and Jennings, 1988). They require sunny and partly shaded banks for basking. Adults are usually found near water and prefer riffle or cascade/pool areas with rocky banks. Breeding sites are typically in main-stem creeks and rivers near tributary confluences because tributaries, while generally poor for breeding, are relatively advantageous for overwintering (Kupferberg, 1996). Adults are commonly found in tributaries in the early spring before they move into main-stem habitats to breed. Characteristics of successful breeding sites are channels with high widthto-depth ratios, with the presence of cobble, small boulders, and emergent rocks. Adults often bask on exposed rock surfaces along streams; when disturbed, they dive and take refuge among stones, silt, or vegetation (Stebbins, 2003). During periods of inactivity, especially during cold weather, individuals seek cover under rocks in streams or on shore within a few meters of water. They are infrequent or absent in habitats where introduced aquatic predators such as centrarchid fishes and bullfrogs are present (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). Of the CNDDB records in the nine-quad search area, most records are clustered in Corral Hollow Creek within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area, in the higher reaches of Del Puerto Creek well upstream of the project area, and in Los Banos Creek within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) west of the Billy Wright Road alternative corridor. Suitable habitat was not detected during the spring 2014 surveys. During the dry spring of 2014, a few creeks, such as Corral Hollow Creek and Del Puerto Creek, still contained drying pockets of water, but even in a wet year, project-area creeks are likely to be too lowgradient, too sluggish to provide suitable habitat for this frog. It is not expected to be present. 4.4.5.4 Western Spadefot Western spadefoot is an almost completely terrestrial toad that enters water only to breed. It occurs in grassland settings and occasionally in valley woodlands where it breeds in temporary rain pools and vernal pools that are free from bullfrogs, fishes, and crayfishes (Jennings and Hayes, 1994); it may also breed in stock ponds (CDFW, 2014a). It spends most of the year in underground burrows within a short distance of breeding pools. In the absence of a specific upland distance for western spadefoot, Semlitsch and Brodie (2003) recommend a generic distance of 1112 feet (339 meters) around aquatic sites for a variety of amphibians. Western spadefoot is found in the Central Valley and foothills; in the coast ranges it occurs from Santa Barbara County south to the Mexico border. Breeding pools must remain inundated continuously for at least three weeks for complete metamorphosis (Jennings and Hayes, 1994). Of the numerous CNDDB records in the nine-quad area, only records from Salado Creek overlap with the project area. Other records are associated with Corral Hollow Creek, Lone Tree Creek, and Del Puerto Creek, as well as numerous stock ponds. Most records are north of O’Neill Forebay and west of the project area. 4.4.5.5 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity California red-legged frog, California tiger salamander, and western spadefoot have the potential to occur in suitable habitats throughout the project area. Because these three amphibians breed in similar aquatic habitats and could co-occur in the project area, and because it is known that California redlegged frog and California tiger salamander are often sympatric in breeding pools (Alvarez et al., 2013), it is assumed that any inundated pool could support breeding for any of these three species. They are all known to breed in pools that dry before larvae have metamorphosed; therefore, successful reproduction for each species depends on duration of ponding. During the drought spring of 2014, many shallow aquatic sites were dry in April, as were many smaller stock ponds. Stock ponds can be locally abundant in the biological study area, if not always present in the project area. Upland suitability, most critical for California tiger salamander but essential for all three, was limited in many parts of the project area by either a lack of or limited number of small-mammal burrows. Long stretches of the project area were devoid of upland burrows. Patches of gopher, mouse, vole, and ground squirrel burrows occurred throughout, but these were often separated by significant distances with no activity. However, this observation was based on a reconnaissance survey and cannot be quantified. Notes were taken on field maps, but field notes were not accurate enough to be presented graphically. Moreover, except in areas that may be entirely unsuitable for small mammals, the distribution of small mammals and their burrows could shift substantially in the years between reconnaissance surveys and construction, possibly related to varying patterns and levels of rodent control, making mapping of existing conditions likely unprofitable. In the case of California tiger salamander, which may go years without breeding, presence will be assumed with or without protocol aquatic surveys. Foothill yellow-legged frog is not expected to occur in the project area. Although it has been reported upstream of project reaches in Corral Hollow Creek and Los Banos Creek, no creek within project reaches provides suitable habitat for foothill yellow-legged frog. 4.4.5.6 Project Efects Three amphibian species could be affected by project activities: California red-legged frog, California tiger salamander, and western spadefoot. Project effects to foothill yellow-legged frog are not expected. Direct effects include temporary or permanent loss of or physical damage to occupied and otherwise suitable breeding, migration, dispersal, and upland retreat habitats, construction-related erosion or runoff into aquatic habitats, mortality during construction or through vehicle ingress/egress, exposure of individuals during excavations, disturbance through human presence and construction noise and vibration, and collapse of occupied burrows. Indirect effects could include post-project erosion or runoff from construction areas and new roads, and degradation or loss of habitat through operation and maintenance such as long-term use of new or existing access roads, tower/line repairs, introduction of human trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, disruption, and increased susceptibility to wild fire. Project EPMs provide general protection for aquatic resources, which provide breeding habitat for these three amphibians, but do not provide sufficient protection, especially for upland habitats that may be used outside the breeding season. The project could adversely affect special-status amphibians. 4.4.5.7 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-3 will ensure protection of wetland and aquatic habitats potentially occupied by California red-legged frog, California tiger salamander, and western spadefoot. Western will consult with SJCOG for impacts to special-status species falling under the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin County Multi-species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000) where the project lies within San Joaquin County, as appropriate, and will consult with USFWS and CDFW for other species; any avoidance, minimization, or compensation measures developed during consultation will supersede those listed below. BIO-21 To protect California red-legged frog, Western will implement the following measures. During construction activities: . If the project may affect California red-legged frog, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations, which could include but may not be limited to the following. . California red-legged frog presence will be assumed in all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted in the year prior to construction. Uplands within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) will be assumed to be occupied around all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted. . Transmission towers and new access roads will be sited as far from aquatic habitats as possible. . Construction activities will take place as much as possible during the dry season (generally June 1 through September 30) within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. If construction extends into the wet season (generally October 1 through May 31), temporary exclusion fencing will be installed 100 feet (30.5 meters) out from work areas to prevent California red-legged frogs from entering construction areas. . Escape ramps will be constructed in all trenches or excavations to allow wildlife to escape. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. The biological monitor will identify, capture, and relocate sensitive amphibians present in work areas if necessary. . A 300-foot (91-meter) setback, incorporating both riparian vegetation and uplands, will be provided on all sides of aquatic habitats identified as occupied or assumed occupied by red-legged frogs as feasible. A setback may be reduced or expanded through consultation with the USFWS depending on whether it would result in adverse impacts to the species or the biological values of the habitat. Setbacks will maintain existing vegetation free of disturbance and new construction, equipment storage, vehicle parking, and other activities that might compact or disturb soils or vegetation or that could introduce contaminants into aquatic habitats. Setbacks will be clearly delineated during the construction. . Water quality will be maintained through implementation of appropriate erosion-control measures to reduce siltation and contaminated runoff from project sites by maintaining vegetation within buffers and/or through the use of hay bales, filter fences, vegetative buffer strips, or other accepted equivalents. . Construction and other ground disturbances will be prohibited within setbacks. The use of insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides, and pesticides will occur in accordance with USEPA guidelines addressing the use of these materials in occupied California red-legged frog habitat. . Where aquatic sites cannot be avoided by 300 feet (91 meters) on all sides, an agencyapproved biologist will survey the work site immediately prior to construction activities. If California red-legged frogs, tadpoles, or egg masses are found, the approved biologist will contact USFWS to determine whether moving any of these life-stages is appropriate. In making this determination USFWS will consider whether an appropriate relocation site exists. If USFWS approves moving animals, the approved biologist will be allowed sufficient time to move California red-legged frogs from the work site before work activities begin. Only Service-approved biologists will participate in activities associated with the capture, handling, and monitoring of California red-legged frogs. Bare hands will be used to capture California red-legged frogs. Service-approved biologists will not use soaps, oils, creams, lotions, repellents, or solvents of any sort on their hands within two hours before and during periods when they are capturing and relocating individuals. To avoid transferring disease or pathogens from handling the amphibians, agency-approved biologists will follow the Declining Amphibian Populations Task Force Fieldwork Code of Practice. During O&M activities: . A Service-approved biologist will identify potential CRLF breeding habitat within the vicinity of O&M activities, and will flag a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer. The following restrictions will apply within the buffer: (1) only manual vegetation removal will be allowed; (2) only direct (e.g., injection and cut-stump) herbicide application methods will be allowed, except when otherwise restricted; (3) no ground disturbance (e.g., digging or auguring) will be allowed; and (4) erosion-control devices will be of a material that will not entrap amphibians. . If it is not possible to follow the above-stated measures, a pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before project construction or O&M activities begin. If ground disturbance is required, a Service-approved biologist will identify potential CRLF upland refuge habitat within disturbance areas. Areas that may provide suitable upland refuge will be avoided to the extent possible. Ground disturbance will not occur in CRLF aquatic/breeding habitat. If an area that provides suitable upland refuge must be impacted, a Service-approved biologist will determine if CRLF are present using visual surveys, an endoscope, or other accepted detection method. If CRLF are detected, the area will be avoided using a buffer determined appropriate by the biologist, and a Serviceapproved monitor will remain on site to ensure that CRLF are not impacted during project activities in the vicinity. A Service-approved biologist will remain on site during all activities to ensure protection of CRLF or an exclusion barrier will be constructed around the work site using Service-approved methods and materials. Exclusion materials will be removed at the end of the work activity. Crews will inspect any trenches left open for more than 24 hours for trapped animals. Only a Service-approved biologist will remove trapped animals. . To comply with the California red-legged frog injunction for herbicide applications, Western will ensure that, in the counties named in the injunction, there will be no ground application of any of the chemicals named in the injunction (http://www.epa.gov/espp/ litstatus/redleg-frog/steps-info.htm). Currently, the no-use buffer is 60 feet (18 meters) from any aquatic feature, aquatic breeding habitat, non-breeding aquatic habitat, and upland habitat. BIO-22 To protect California tiger salamander and western spadefoot, Western will implement the following measures. During construction activities: . If the project may affect California tiger salamander, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations. . California tiger salamander presence will be assumed in all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted in the year prior to construction. Uplands within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) will be assumed to be occupied around all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted . Transmission towers and new access roads will be sited as far from aquatic habitats as possible. . Construction activities will take place as much as possible during the dry season (generally June 1 through September 30) within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. If construction extends into the wet season (generally October 1 through May 31), temporary exclusion fencing will be installed 100 feet (30.5 meters) out from work areas to prevent California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots from entering construction areas. . Escape ramps will be installed in all trenches or excavations to allow wildlife to escape. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. The biological monitor will identify, capture, and relocate sensitive amphibians present in work areas if necessary. . A 300-foot (91-meter) setback, incorporating both riparian vegetation and uplands, will be provided on all sides of aquatic habitats identified as occupied or assumed occupied by California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots. A setback may be reduced or expanded in consultation with the USFWS depending on whether it would (a) affect habitat or (b) result in adverse impacts to the species or the biological values of the habitat. Setbacks will maintain existing vegetation free of disturbance and new construction, equipment storage, vehicle parking, and other activities that might compact or disturb soils or vegetation or that could introduce contaminants into aquatic habitats. Setbacks will be clearly delineated during the construction. . Water quality will be maintained through implementation of appropriate erosion-control measures to reduce siltation and contaminated runoff from project sites by maintaining vegetation within buffers and/or through the use of hay bales, filter fences, vegetative buffer strips, or other accepted equivalents. . Construction and other ground disturbances will be prohibited within setbacks. The use of insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides and pesticides will occur in accordance with USEPA guidelines addressing the use of these materials in occupied California tiger salamander and western spadefoot habitat. . Where aquatic sites cannot be avoided by 300 feet (91 meters) on all sides, an agencyapproved biologist will survey the work site immediately prior to construction activities. If California tiger salamanders, tadpoles, or eggs are found, the approved biologist will contact USFWS to determine whether moving any of these life-stages is appropriate. In making this determination USFWS will consider whether an appropriate relocation site exists. If USFWS approves moving animals, the approved biologist will be allowed sufficient time to move California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots from the work site before work activities begin. Only Service-approved biologists will participate in activities associated with the capture, handling, and monitoring of California tiger salamanders. Bare hands will be used to capture salamanders and toads. Serviceapproved biologists will not use soaps, oils, creams, lotions, repellents, or solvents of any sort on their hands within two hours before and during periods when they are capturing and relocating individuals. To avoid transferring disease or pathogens from handling the amphibians, agency-approved biologists will follow the Declining Amphibian Populations Task Force Fieldwork Code of Practice. During O&M activities: . A Service-approved biologist will identify potential California tiger salamander breeding habitat in the vicinity of O&M activities, and will flag a 500-foot buffer. The following restrictions will apply within the buffer: (1) only manual vegetation removal will be allowed; (2) only direct (e.g., injection and cut-stump) herbicide application methods will be allowed, except when otherwise restricted; (3) no ground disturbance (e.g., digging or auguring) will be allowed; and (4) erosion-control devices will be of a material that will not entrap amphibians. . If it is not possible to follow the above-stated measures, a pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before O&M activities begin. If ground disturbance is required, a Service-approved biologist will identify potential CTS aestivation habitat (burrows, rock piles) within disturbance areas. CTS aestivation habitat will be avoided to the extent possible. Ground disturbance will not occur in CTS breeding/aquatic habitat. If a burrow or other potential aestivation habitat must be impacted, a Service-approved biologist will determine if CTS are present within the burrow using an endoscope or other accepted detection method. If CTS are detected, the burrow will be avoided using a buffer determined appropriate by the biologist and a Service-approved monitor will remain on site to ensure that CTS are not impacted during project activities in the vicinity. A Service-approved biologist will remain on site during all activities to ensure protection of CTS or an exclusion barrier will be constructed around the work site using Serviceapproved methods and materials. Exclusion materials will be removed at the end of the work activity. Crews will inspect any trenches left open for more than 24 hours for trapped animals. Only a Service-approved biologist will remove trapped animals. 4.4.5.8 Compensatory Mitigation BIO-23 Western will provide compensation for permanent and temporary impacts to California tiger salamander and California red-legged frog aquatic and upland habitat through one or more of the following: (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the project. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation monitoring and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. If Western intends to eliminate aquatic habitat including wetlands, ponds, springs, and other standing water sources, and to create new, onsite habitat, then the newly created habitat will be created and filled with water prior to dewatering and destroying the existing habitat. Dewatering and relocation of aquatic habitats should occur outside of the breeding season for red-legged frogs (approximately January through June). If Western intends to eliminate aquatic habitat including wetlands, ponds, springs, and other standing water sources, and will not create new, onsite habitat, then dewatering of existing habitat should occur prior to commencement of construction and other sitedisturbing activities. Dewatering and relocation of aquatic habitats should occur outside of the breeding season for red-legged frogs (approximately January through June). Preserve lands acquired to offset impacts to the red-legged frog must have occupied habitat of at least equal habitat value as determined by the USFWS. 4.4.5.9 Cumulative Efects With implementation of avoidance and minimization measures, and successful compensatory mitigation for project effects that cannot be avoided, cumulative effects to special-status amphibians are not expected. If compensatory mitigation in the form of habitat restoration is not successful, the project would contribute to habitat loss and degradation for these animals. 4.4.6 Birds 4.4.6.1 Bald Eagle The bald eagle is a year-round resident at some higher elevation areas of California, and a winter resident in numerous traditionally used sites throughout much of the state (YHJPA, 2013). Bald eagles that breed in California may make only local winter movements in search of prey (Polite and Pratt, 1999), spending the winter in the vicinity of their nesting areas. Bald eagles that nest in the northwestern United States migrate south to winter in California (Buehler, 2000, in YHJPA, 2013). Wintering areas are used traditionally as indicated by the data from the long-term Mid-Winter Bald Eagle Count (USACE, 2014). Bald eagles hunt on the wing or from perches in tall trees or artificial perches. They are generalized and opportunistic scavengers and predators, commonly taking fish, waterfowl, jackrabbits, and various types of carrion (USFWS, 1986). Most eagle nesting territories are now found in mountainous habitats in ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests. In California, most nest sites were within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of water (Lehman, 1979). In California, bald eagles typically winter adjacent to nesting grounds (USFWS, 1986) along rivers, lakes, or reservoirs that support abundant fish or waterbird prey and that have large trees or snags for perch and roost sites. This species roosts communally and roost sites typically possess different habitat components than daytime use areas (USFWS, 1986). Night roosts are often in sites that are sheltered from the weather by landforms and in areas of coniferous stands that provide insulation from the weather (USFWS, 1986). The species has been known to forage in rice fields and may occasionally use flooded pasturelands. About half of the California wintering population is in the Klamath Basin (Polite and Pratt, 1999). Other local wintering populations include Clear Lake, Lake Berryessa, and Folsom Lake. The midwinter bald eagle count documented 430 bald eagles in 2012 at traditionally used wintering sites in California (USACE, 2014). Bald eagles are not expected to nest anywhere within or near the project area, but have some, if low, potential to visit O’Neill Forebay or other sites in winter. However, bald eagles are not likely to be present because the project area is not a traditional wintering area, the only large bodies of water in the area support few large snags or perch sites for hunting, and the area provides little in the way of thermal cover for night roosting. The only CNDDB record in the nine-quad search area is 1988 observations for two wintering bald eagles in the sycamore alluvial woodland along Orestimba Creek approximately 2.5 miles (4 kilometers) west of the project area. 4.4.6.2 Burrowing Owl Burrowing owls inhabit dry, open rolling hills, grasslands, desert floors, and open bare ground with gullies and arroyos. They can also inhabit developed areas such as agricultural areas, golf courses, cemeteries, roadsides within cities, airports, vacant lots in residential areas, school campuses, and fairgrounds (Haug et al., 1993, in Klute et al., 2003; Gervais et al., 2008). This species typically uses burrows created by fossorial mammals such as the California ground squirrel but may also use man-made structures such as culverts; debris piles of cement, asphalt, or wood; pipes; natural rock cavities; or excavations beneath cement or asphalt pavement (CDFG,1 1995; CDFG, 2012). The overriding characteristics of suitable habitat appear to be burrows for roosting and nesting and relatively short vegetation with only sparse shrubs and taller vegetation (Haug et al., 1993; in Klute et al., 2003). Burrowing owls are found throughout lowland areas of the state, absent primarily from mountainous and forested regions. Breeding populations have been extirpated locally in certain parts of the Bay area and southern California. 1 Effective January 1, 2013, California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) changed its name to California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW). In this report, all literature dated prior to this changeover date is attributed in text and in references to CDFG, California Department of Fish and Game, which was its name at the time of publication. Current range maps (Gervais et al., 2008; CDFW, 2014a) suggest that the project area skirts the western boundary of the Central Valley breeding range. Several active dens were observed during spring 2014 surveys in and near project corridors just north of Patterson Pass Road, and a single owl was flushed along the California Aqueduct, although its burrow was not discovered. Scattered CNDDB records are found for the grasslands between Patterson Pass Road and Corral Hollow, along Lone Tree Creek, at Hospital Creek, near Del Puerto Creek, and between San Luis Forebay and Dos Amigos Substation. There is a scarcity of eBird (eBird, 2014) records between Patterson Pass Road in the north and the Dos Amigos Substation, but most of that area is private and not accessible to the general public. Burrowing owls are considered potentially present in suitable habitats throughout the project area. 4.4.6.3 California Condor California condors require suitable habitat for nesting, roosting, and foraging, and currently occur primarily in chaparral, coniferous forest, and oak savanna habitats in southern and central California. They formerly occurred more widely throughout the Southwest and also fed on beaches and large rivers along the Pacific coast (USFWS, 1996). Primarily a cavity nester, nest sites are located in various types of rock formations including crevices and overhung ledges in cliffs and large rock outcrops, as well as, more rarely, in cavities in giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron gigantea) (USFWS, 1996). Traditional roosting sites are cliffs or large trees, often near feeding sites. California condors are opportunistic scavengers, feeding only on the carcasses of dead animals. Most foraging occurs in open terrain of foothill grassland and oak savanna habitats. Paired birds tend to forage most frequently in areas relatively close to their nests, not normally venturing more than 31 to 44 miles (50 to 70 kilometers) from their nest sites, although one flight of a member of a pair was documented at 113 miles (180 kilometers) (USFWS, 2013). During the non-breeding season, condors tend to range more widely. The nearest California condors are known to occur in Pinnacles National Park 35 miles (56 kilometers) southwest of the Dos Amigos Substation. There are no CNDDB records for California condor closer than that, and the nearest eBird record is 20 miles west of Los Banos Reservoir, north of Pinnacles. While there is no evidence of California condors using any part of the project area, potential foraging habitat occurs throughout the project area and potential nesting habitat occurs in the cliffs in and near project corridors between Patterson Pass Road and Corral Hollow. California condor is considered unlikely anywhere in or near the project area currently, but a possible nester in suitable nearby habitat in the event of a range expansion. 4.4.6.4 Golden Eagle Golden eagles are found in a variety of habitats from rolling foothills, mountain areas, sage-juniper flats, and deserts (CDFW, 2014a). Golden eagles in the interior central coast ranges of California occur primarily in grazed, open grasslands and oak savanna, with lesser numbers in oak woodland and open shrublands. With increasing urbanization, much of the remaining golden eagle habitat in central California is located on private ranches used for livestock grazing (Hunt et al., 1998). Over much of their range they prefer cliffs for nesting, but where trees are more abundant, many will nest in trees and some pairs will even use transmission towers (Hunt et al., 1998; DeLong, 2004). Golden eagles were observed in several locations either within the project area or within a mile or two during spring 2014 surveys (Figure 3). Most of the project area does not provide suitable nesting trees or cliffs; however, a golden eagle was observed just east of the proposed corridor in an area with steep canyons and high rock faces (Figure 3, map 7). Moreover, as golden eagles are known to nest in transmission structures, potential nesting habitat occurs throughout the project area. One 1996 CNDDB record is for a golden eagle pair nesting on a transmission structure north of Corral Hollow, well to the west of the project area. Another 1987 CNDDB reports a nest approximately 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) northwest of Dos Amigos Substation, and another record is for 2001 nesting in the sycamore alluvial woodland along Orestimba Creek well west of the project area. Golden eagles are considered potentially present in suitable habitats throughout the project area. 4.4.6.5 Least Bel’s Vireo The least Bell’s vireo is endemic to California and northern Baja California and is an obligate riparian species during the breeding season (USFWS, 1998a). It inhabits structurally diverse woodlands along water courses including cottonwood-willow forests, oak woodlands, mulefat scrub, Baccharis, and wild blackberry (Rubus spp.) (Zeiner et al., 1990; USFWS, 1998a). Two habitat features appear to be essential: the presence of dense cover within 3–6 feet (1–2 meters) of the ground, and a dense stratified canopy for foraging (Thelander et al., 1994; USFWS, 1998a). Historically, this bird was widespread in riparian woodlands in the Central Valley and low-elevation riverine valleys of California (USFWS, 1998a). Extensive habitat loss and brood parasitism by the brownheaded cowbird (Molothrus ater) resulted in a contraction of its range to just eight counties in southern California, with most of the birds occurring in San Diego County (Thelander et al., 1994; USFWS, 1998a). In 2005, nesting was detected at San Joaquin River National Wildlife Refuge, approximately 7 miles (11 kilometers) east of the project area. Showing high reproductive success, a single pair fledged six young in 2005. The CNDDB occurrence for this location reports successful nesting in 2005 and 2006, an unsuccessful nesting attempt in 2007, and no nesting since. Dettling et al. 2012 confirm that nesting at this location has not resumed. The single CNDDB record for Del Puerto Creek within the project area is from 1932 and this creek currently does not support suitable nesting habitat within or near the project area. Riparian habitat at Salado Creek (Figure 3, map 23) is narrow with little dense understory, but marginally suitable. Riparian habitat east of O’Neill Forebay (Figure 3, maps 36 and 40) has higher suitability. Willow-cottonwood riparian associated with Los Banos Creek upstream of the reservoir also provides potentially suitable habitat. All other habitat classified as riparian in the project area lacks density in either canopy or understory. 4.4.6.6 Logerhead Shrike Loggerhead shrikes breed primarily in shrublands or open woodlands with a fair amount of grass cover and areas of bare ground (CDFW, 2014a). They require shrubs or trees as well as fence posts and power lines for hunting perches, territorial display, and pair maintenance; open area of short grasses, forbs, or bare ground for hunting; and large shrubs or trees for nest placement (Humple, 2008). They also need impaling sites for prey manipulation or storage. In Central California, they are often associated with riparian edges, desert scrub, and sparse riparian woodland (Humple, 2008). Grinnell and Miller (1944) mapped the breeding distribution as most of the state except for primarily forested coastal slope, northern coast ranges, Klamath and Siskiyou mountains of northwestern California, Sierra Nevada and southern Cascades, and high elevations of the Transverse Ranges. Loggerhead shrikes were observed in the project area and are likely to occur anywhere tall shrubs or trees provide nesting habitat. There are no CNDDB records within 1 mi, but a number of CNDDB records are found on the nine-quad CNDDB search (CDFW, 2015a): a single 2005 record along Mountain House Creek near Tracy, a single 2002 record near Patterson, a cluster of 2009 records near Livermore, and a cluster of 2002 records near Corral Hollow west of the project area. eBird (eBird, 2014) reports of loggerhead shrike are dense from Clifton Court Forebay south to Patterson Pass Road, along Corral Hollow Road, along Del Puerto Canyon Road, around O’Neill Forebay, and at Los Banos Reservoir. 4.4.6.7 Long-eared Owl The long-eared owl nests in conifer, oak, riparian, pinyon-juniper, and desert woodlands that are either open or are adjacent to grasslands, meadows, or shrublands (Hunting, 2008). Key habitat components are dense cover for nesting and roosting, suitable nest platforms, and open foraging areas. While they occasionally nest on cliffs, in tree cavities, in orchards or ornamental trees, in man-made structures, or on the ground, they mainly nest in old corvid or hawk nests (Hunting, 2008). They may also nest in old woodrat and squirrel nests, mistletoe brooms, and natural platforms of (or debris piles in) trees. These owls apparently select nesting and roosting sites with dense cover. Limited available evidence suggests that the long-eared owl is a scarce and irregular breeder in the Central Valley (Hunting, 2008) There are no CNDDB records for long-eared owl within the nine-quad search area for this project. Nests were nests were found in 2005 in the Panoche Hills both at and near Mercey Hot Springs roughly 16 miles southwest of Dos Amigos Substation (Hunting, 2008). An eBird record reports a single long-eared owl detected February 2012 near O’Neill Forebay. There are no other eBird records for this owl anywhere near the project area (eBird, 2014). Suitably dense cover for nesting and roosting occurs around O’Neill Forebay and along Salado Creek. While generally unlikely because of its scarcity, this owl could nest in these areas. 4.4.6.8 Modesto Song Sparow There are currently nine subspecies of song sparrow breeding in California, seven of which breed in northern California (Roberson, 2014). Most song sparrows are resident where they occur. The widespread Modesto song sparrow occurs from roughly Suisun Marsh on the west to the Sierra foothills on the east, and from Butte and Glenn Counties south to northwest Baja California (Roberson, 2014). It nests in riparian thickets of willows and other vines, shrubs, and tall herbs, as well as in fresh or saline emergent marshes (CDFW, 2014a). Song sparrows were not detected during spring 2014 surveys. There are no CNDDB records for song sparrow within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area and all CNDDB records within the nine-quad search area are from either 1896 or 1928; however, suitable habitats within the project could support them. They are considered potentially present in suitable habitats throughout the project area. 4.4.6.9 Mountain Plover Mountain plovers nest in the western Great Plains and are present in California in winter only. They are found on open, flat lands such as xeric shrublands, short-grass or coastal prairie, alkaline flats, barren agricultural fields, and other sparsely vegetated areas, almost never near water (Hunting and Edson 2008, USFWS 2011b, CDFW, 2014a). On grasslands, they often use areas with a history of disturbance by burrowing rodents (kangaroo rats, ground squirrels), native herbivores (tule elk, pronghorn), or domestic livestock (USFWS, 2011b). Hunting et al. (2001) found the majority of wintering mountain plovers in fallow, grazed, and burned (barren) fields, and rarely on active agriculture and non-native grasslands. Currently, the largest numbers occur in the Imperial Valley and the portion of the Central Valley from southern Colusa County south to Kern County. The region supporting the second highest number of wintering mountain plovers encompasses the western Central Valley and adjacent Panoche Valley and Carrizo Plain (Hunting and Edson, 2008). Panoche Valley lies roughly 20 miles (32 kilometers) south of the Dos Amigos Substation. There are no CNDDB records for mountain plover within 1 mile of the project and all CNDDB records within the nine-quad search area are well east of the project in the Central Valley east of the Dos Amigos Substation. All eBird records are from the basins of the Central and Panoche valleys. While mountain plovers could use any parts of the project area that are sufficiently dry and are sufficiently barren, they are not expected to be present. 4.4.6.10 Northern Harier The northern harriers nest and forage in a variety of open, treeless habitats that provide adequate vegetative cover, abundant prey, and scattered hunting, plucking, and lookout perches such as shrubs or fence posts (Davis and Niemela, 2008). They are ground-nesting birds that typically nest in undisturbed patches of emergent wetland/marshes, open grasslands, meadow, weedy borders of lakes, sagebrush flats, or savannah communities usually in areas with dense vegetation (MacWhirter and Bildstein 1996, Davis and Niemela, 2008). While the entire project area falls within the nesting range of this bird, areas of suitably dense and undisturbed marsh, weeds, or shrubs are found primarily around O’Neill Forebay, which is also where the CNDDB records within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) are concentrated. Nesting in most of the rest of the project area is unlikely. 4.4.6.11 Short-eared Owl Nesting short-eared owls require open country that support dense concentrations of rodent prey, and herbaceous cover sufficient to conceal their ground nests from predators. Suitable habitats may include salt and freshwater marshes, irrigated alfalfa or grain fields, and ungrazed grasslands and old pastures (Roberson, 2008). Tule marsh or tall grasslands with cover 12–15 inches (30–50 centimeters) is preferred. In restoration areas in the San Joaquin Valley, appropriate habitat may consist of short weedy vegetation interspersed with native Atriplex or Allenrolfea (Roberson, 2008). In the San Joaquin Valley and adjacent Coast Range valleys, nesting by short-eared owls is generally considered episodic and associated with wet winters (Roberson, 2008). Following a wet winter in 1998, several short-eared owl broods were detected in the Panoche Hills where they are not normally found (Roberson, 2008). There are no CNDDB records for this owl within the nine-quad search area. An eBird record reports a short-eared owl near O’Neill Forebay in March 2008; there are no other eBird records anywhere near the project (eBird, 2014). Most of the grassland habitats within the project area were either mowed or heavily grazed during April and May site visits, making these areas unsuitable for nesting short-eared owls; however, any grassland or alfalfa field that remains unmowed during the nesting season could support this owl. Most freshwater marshes found within the project area were too small to support nesting, but extensive marshes east of the project along Mountain House Creek provide potential nesting habitat, as do some of the grasslands, open fields, and marshes around O’Neill Forebay. While unlikely in the project area, short-eared owls could nest in suitable habitats. 4.4.6.12 Swainson’s Hawk Swainson’s hawks are breeding residents of California, especially the Central Valley, and most winter from Mexico to South America (CDFG, 1994); a small population has been documented to winter in the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta (Polite, 2006). Generally present in California from early March to late September, they nest in tall trees in riparian forest, oak woodland, roadside landscape corridors, urban parks, and isolated trees in agricultural areas (Woodbridge, 1991; CDFG, 1994). They forage in nearby grasslands, pastures, and suitable grain and alfalfa fields. Prey abundance and accessibility are the most important features determining the suitability of Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat. In addition, agricultural operations (e.g., mowing, flood irrigation) have a substantial influence on the accessibility of prey and thus create important foraging opportunities for Swainson’s hawk (City of Sacramento et al., 2006). Crops that are tall and dense enough to preclude the capture of prey do not provide suitable habitat except around field margins, but prey in these habitats may be accessible during and soon after harvest (City of Sacramento et al., 2006). Although the most important foraging habitat for Swainson’s hawks lies within a 1-mile (1.6-kilometer) radius of each nest (City of Sacramento, 2003), telemetry studies have shown that they may use in excess of 15,000 ac (6100 ha) of foraging habitat and range up to 18 miles (28 kilometers) from the nest in search of prey (Estep, 1989). Most foraging, however, takes place within 10 miles (16 kilometers) (CDFG, 1994). CNDDB records within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area include a 1936 record associated with Del Puerto Creek, several records within the sycamore woodland along Orestimba Creek, including two from 2012, a number of recent records east and south of O’Neill Reservoir, including three that overlapped with the proposed corridor in 2009 and 2010, and one record on Los Banos Creek dated 2006. Swainson’s hawks were seen in a number of locations during spring 2014 surveys. See Figure 2, maps 4, 17, 21, 27, and 40. The Swainson’s hawk pair seen along the Delta-Mendota Canal (map 4) is likely to be nesting in an adjacent patch of large willow trees. Swainson’s hawks were sighted several times along Diablo Grande Parkway (map 21) including once in a kettle of six adults. The Swainson’s hawk seen in Orestimba Creek (map 27) was expected to be nesting there, and the Swainson’s hawk calling defensively from a transmission tower on map 40 was also expected to be nesting. Nesting Swainson’s hawks could be present wherever large trees are associated with open, grazed grasslands in the project area. Large trees are primarily associated with larger creeks in the project area and around O’Neill Forebay. 4.4.6.13 Tricolored Blackbird Tricolored blackbirds nest in colonies that range from several pairs to several thousand pairs depending on prey availability, the presence of predators, and the level of human disturbance (Beedy and Hamilton, 1999). They typically nest near open water in dense cattail, bulrush, willow, blackberry, or other dense vegetation with open grassland or agricultural foraging habitat nearby. Nesting colonies are sensitive to human disturbance (Jones & Stokes, 2006). This bird has experienced dramatic declines in abundance throughout its range (Shuford and Gardali, 2008). Basic requirements for breeding sites are open accessible water, a secure substrate in which to place their nests, and suitable nearby foraging areas that provide adequate food sources. With the loss of most of the native wetland and upland habitats in the Central Valley, breeding tricolors now forage primarily in managed habitats including agricultural crops such as rice, alfalfa, irrigated pasture, and ripening or cut grain fields (oats wheat, silage, and rice), as well as annual grasslands, cattle feedlots, and dairies, especially with vegetation less than 6 inches (15 centimeters) tall. They also forage in remnant native habitats, including wet and dry vernal pools and other seasonal wetlands, riparian scrub habitats, and open marsh borders (TCBL Working Group, 2007). They often nest 5–6 km (3– 3.75 mi) from foraging sites, occasionally farther (TCBL Working Group, 2007). On December 3, 2014, the California Fish and Game Commission voted to take emergency action to protect the tricolored blackbird by adding it to the list of endangered species. The action took effect December 29, 2014, for an initial term of six months. In March 2015, CDFW published findings that a listing action may be warranted based on the degree and immediacy of a number of threats to the species’ survival (CDFW, 2015b). While the initial term expires roughly June 29, 2015, it is safest to assume for the present that the tricolored blackbird will remain formally listed as endangered under CESA. From Tracy Substation south to O’Neill Forebay, the nearest CNDDB records are relatively old (1971– 1998). The most recent CNDDB records are in the freshwater marsh east of O’Neill Forebay and primarily west of the proposed corridor but also overlapping with it. These records are from 2006 and 2007. The only tricolored blackbirds detected during spring 2014 surveys were heard on a pier structure in the large impoundment immediately west of the proposed corridor on Mountain House Creek (Figure 3, map 3). Nesting was not detected there, but dense freshwater marsh east of the project corridor could support nesting tricolored blackbirds. Potential nesting habitat was also found north of O’Neill Forebay; see Figure 3, map 37). A 2012 eBird (eBird, 2014) record identifies a very large nesting colony within the proposed corridor south of O’Neill Forebay in a patch of nettles along Basalt Road just south of Gonzaga Road. Using the grid markers on Figure 3, map 39, this colony is located at roughly D5/E5. It was not detected during spring 2014 surveys. Tricolored blackbirds are assumed potentially present in suitable habitats throughout the project area; however, freshwater marsh and other suitably dense patches of habitat are limited to areas with more water than is found in most of the project area. 4.4.6.14 White-tailed Kite The white-tailed kite is a yearlong resident of coastal and valley lowlands from the east edge of the Central Valley west to the coast, the length of the state. White-tailed kites typically nest in isolated trees with dense canopies, or in similar trees in tree stands and woodlands, that are associated with foraging areas of open grasslands, meadows, farmlands, savannahs, and emergent wetlands. Polite (2005) states that they are rarely found far from agricultural areas and that they have extended their range and increased in numbers in recent years. There are only three CNDDB records in the nine-quad search area, the nearest of which is from 1993. Similarly, there are few eBird (eBird, 2014) records for the vicinity of the project area, although the numbers increase around O’Neill Forebay. Suitable habitat occurs where medium to large trees with dense canopies occur near open grassland and agricultural areas, including the area from Tracy Substation to Patterson Pass Road and around O’Neill Forebay. 4.4.6.15 Yelow-headed Blackbird Yellow-headed blackbirds nest almost exclusively in marshes with tall emergent vegetation such as bulrush and cattail, generally in open areas and edges over relatively deep water (Jaramillo, 2008). Males choose territories with ample open water and, within these, females tend to choose edges with moderately dense vegetation and extensive channels (Orians and Wittenberger, 1991). Because of the need for deeper water, breeding marshes are often on the edges of lakes, reservoirs, or larger ponds (Jaramillo, 2008). The Central Valley and northeastern California, as well as other parts of the state, are identified as current breeding range (Jaramillo, 2008). In the San Joaquin Valley, the species is fairly numerous locally, with the best pockets of suitable habitat along rivers, throughout the wetland complex of the Grasslands Ecological Area near Los Banos, along sloughs of the Kings River, and in the wetlands of the Tulare Lake Basin (Jaramillo, 2008). However, while numerous locally, they are scarce breeders in the western San Joaquin Valley (CDFW, 2015a) and the only CNDDB record in the nine-quad search area is from 1919. This species is potentially present wherever freshwater marsh lies adjacent to deeper water, which in the project area would occur only around O’Neill Forebay; however, while their presence cannot be ruled out, it appears unlikely given that the only known observation is one eBird report (eBird, 2014) of two that were seen in August 2005 at San Luis Reservoir. 4.4.6.16 Migratory Birds A migratory bird is any species or family of birds that live, reproduce, or migrate within or across international borders at some point during their annual life cycle. There are currently 1007 migratory bird species covered under the MBTA, more than 800 of which occur in the U.S. This act is interpreted to include disturbance through noise and human intrusion that could result in nest abandonment or premature fledging, so implementation typically takes the form of a preconstruction nesting-bird survey and protection of active nests with an appropriate no-disturbance buffer zone until chicks have fledged or the nest is no longer active, as determined by a qualified biologist. Migratory birds are also protected under section 3503 of California Fish and Game Code, which states that it is unlawful to take, possess, or destroy the nests or eggs of any bird. This code is also interpreted to include disturbance through noise and human intrusion that could result in nest abandonment or forced fledging. Among the non-special migratory birds observed nesting in the project area were California horned lark (Eremophila alpestris actia), common raven (Corvus corax), western meadowlark (Sturnella neglecta), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), red-winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus), and cliff swallow (Petrochelidon pyrrhonota). 4.4.6.17 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity Bald eagle, least Bell’s vireo, mountain plover, and yellow-headed blackbird are unlikely to occur in the project area. Bald eagles do not nest within the project area and are not known to winter there, nor does the area contain features preferred for wintering eagles, which include dense thermal cover for night roosting. While mountain plover is known to occur in the project region in winter, i.e., Central Valley lowlands, it is not known to use the project area; however, its presence in winter cannot be ruled out. The yellow-headed blackbird could potentially use dense freshwater marshes adjacent to relatively deep open water, but such habitats are likely to occur only near O’Neill Forebay and may not, because the only CNDDB records in the nine-quad search area are from 1919, and the only sightings from eBird.com (eBird, 2014) include just two seen at San Luis Reservoir in August 2005. Despite the low likelihood of least Bell’s vireo occurrence, a protocol survey is recommended because this bird’s range is expanding and it could use suitable habitats in the project area. California condor is not likely to occur in or near the project area as more than an occasional foraging individual, but its nesting range could expand north and east from Pinnacles National Park in the future. Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, and tricolored blackbird have nesting requirements that restrict their potential occurrence to dense freshwater wetlands or densely vegetated grasslands, shrublands, or other dense patches within the project area. Swainson’s hawk, golden eagle, and white-tailed kite all nest in trees, transmission towers, or cliffs. While transmission towers are abundant as nesting substrate in the project area and are known to be used by golden eagles, they are not likely nest sites for any of these special-status birds. Trees of suitable size and canopy density are restricted, as are suitable cliffs. The most common nester among these birds is the Swainson’s hawk, but golden eagle and white-tailed kite may also nest within the project area. Burrowing owl is unlikely to nest in or near the steepest terrain in the project area and was only infrequently observed during spring 2014 surveys; however, it could present in parts of the project area. Loggerhead shrike is likewise expected to be present wherever tall shrubs and trees for nesting are present. Birds protected by the MBTA were observed nesting throughout the project area. 4.4.6.18 Project Efects With the likely absence of bald eagle and mountain plover, project effects to these species are not expected. These winter visitors could easily move away from disturbing project activities. California condor is also unlikely to occur in or near the project area, but an expansion of its nesting range could make it vulnerable in the long term to project-related disturbance during the nesting season. The least Bell’s vireo is equally unlikely to occur in the project area; however, because it is expanding its range and has been known to breed within the last 10 years near the project, it could occur in the project area. Burrowing owl, golden eagle, loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, Swainson’s hawk, tricolored blackbird, white-tailed kite, and yellow-headed blackbird could be directly and indirectly affected by project activities if nesting birds are disturbed, nests are destroyed, nestlings are forced to fledge early because of disturbance, or habitats are permanently destroyed or degraded. Potentially significant indirect effects include avian collision with transmission lines and avian electrocution. Bald eagle, golden eagle, and white-tailed kite are California fully protected species and as such cannot be taken, nor can take be authorized. Migratory birds not named above nest throughout the project area. Project EPMs do not provide protection for these special-status birds and adverse effects are likely without other protections. 4.4.6.19 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Avoidance and minimization measures were not developed for bald eagle and mountain plover. They are unlikely to occur in the project area and, being winter residents only, will not likely be present during construction, nor will their nests or young be adversely affected by project activities; moreover, for any overlap of construction activities with their presence, they could easily move away from unwanted disturbances. For California condor, least Bell’s vireo, and other bird species, Western will consult with USFWS and CDFW. Western will consult with SJCOG for impacts to special-status species falling under the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin County Multi-species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000) where the project lies within San Joaquin County, as appropriate. Any avoidance, minimization, or compensation measures developed during consultation with these agencies will supersede those listed below. BIO-24 The updated CDFW Staff Report on Burrowing Owl Mitigation (CDFG, 2012) identifies a number of steps to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to burrowing owls. Western will protect burrowing owls by implementing the following methods derived from the 2012 staff report. To protect burrowing owl, Western will implement the following measures: During construction activities: . In coordination with CDFW, a burrowing owl protection and monitoring plan will be developed following guidelines in the updated CDFW staff report (CDFG, 2012). It will include but may not be limited to (a) conducting a protocol survey of the project area the year before construction begins to identify sites of wintering and breeding activity, (b) identifying measures to avoid and minimize impacts, (c) identifying restrictions on construction activities and buffer distances related to time of year, (d) determining whether burrow exclusion or closure will be necessary, and developing a plan for implementation, (e) developing mitigation measures and a compensation plan for unavoidable impacts, (f) conducting a preconstruction survey, and (g) developing a mitigation and monitoring plan to ensure success of mitigation. Compensatory mitigation could include habitat restoration or contribution to a conservation bank. During O&M activities: . From February 1 to August 31, project construction, herbicide application (with the exception of direct application), and other O&M activities will be prohibited within 250 feet (76 meters) of potential burrowing owl nesting dens (ground squirrel burrows, culverts, concrete slabs, debris piles that could support nesting burrowing owls). From September 1 through January 31, disturbance will be prohibited within 160 feet (49 meters) of potential burrowing owl dens. . OR a Department-approved biologist will conduct nesting and wintering surveys using methods described in California Burrowing Owl Consortium 1993, CDFG 2012, or currently accepted method. If nesting or wintering activity is detected, a Department-approved biologist will mark and monitor an appropriate non-disturbance buffer in the vicinity of burrows that have been active within the last three years. . Within the buffer zone, all project construction and O&M activities and herbicide applications will be prohibited from February 1 to August 31. BIO-25 To protect the California fully protected golden eagle and white-tailed kite, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting period for these species is March 1 through August 15. . For ground-breaking activities that begin outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a Department-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey in suitable habitats for each species no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) in all directions from construction areas. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . During construction, if a golden eagle or white-tailed kite nest is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a 0.5-mile (0.8-kilometer) no-disturbance buffer around the nest or center of activity. The buffer will be maintained until a Department-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged or the nest is no longer active. If this buffer cannot feasibly be implemented, CDFW will be consulted well in advance of grounddisturbing activities (CDFW in litt. 2014c). . During O&M, if a golden eagle or white-tailed kite nest is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within 0.25 mile (0.4 kilometer), Western will establish a 0.25-mile (0.4-kilometer) no-disturbance buffer around the nest or center of activity; a smaller buffer may be established if a Department-approved biologist determines that the O&M activity will not adversely affect adults or young. . When construction or O&M activities begin in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. BIO-26 The project area does not provide ideal nesting habitat for least Bell’s vireo and this bird is uncommon in this part of its former range. Potential, if marginal, habitat is found at Salado Creek and at a riparian area east of O’Neill Forebay. To protect least Bell’s vireo, Western will implement the following measures. . Where any construction-related activity will take place within 1000 feet (305 meters) of potential least Bell’s vireo habitat during the nesting season (mid-March through September), a protocol survey will be conducted by an agency-approved, agencyapproved biologist, in coordination with the USFWS. If nesting least Bell’s vireos are not detected, no further action is required for this species. If nesting is detected, Western will establish a clearly marked no-disturbance buffer of 1000 feet (305 meters) around the nest, or center of activity if the nest cannot be detected. The buffer will be maintained until the agency-approved biologist has determined that the nest is no longer active or that the young have fledged. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1000 feet (305 meters) of occupied habitat. The biological monitor will ensure that construction activities do not disturb nesting vireos. BIO-27 To protect loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, shorteared owl, and yellow-headed blackbird, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting season for these species is March 1 through August 15. . For ground-breaking activities that begin outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a Department-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey in suitable habitats for each of these species no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 250 feet (76 meters) in all directions from construction areas for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and 500 feet (152 meters) for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and shorteared owl. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . During construction, if nests of loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, and/or yellow-headed blackbird are detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a clearly marked 250-foot (76-meter) no-disturbance buffer around each nest or center of activity for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellowheaded blackbird, and a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer around each nest or center of activity for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl. Buffers will be maintained until a Department-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged or the nest is no longer active. . During O&M, if nests of loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, and/or yellow-headed blackbird are detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a clearly marked 250-foot (76-meter) no-disturbance buffer around each nest or center of activity for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellowheaded blackbird, and a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer around each nest or center of activity for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl; a smaller buffer may be established if a Department-approved biologist determines that the O&M activity will not adversely affect adults or young. . When construction begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. BIO-28 To protect nesting Swainson’s hawks, Western will implement the following measures pursuant to guidelines from CDFW (CDFG, 1994) and the Swainson’s Hawk Technical Advisory Committee (SWTAC, 2000), and pursuant to informal consultation for the project initiated January 2014 (CDFW in litt., 2014c). The nesting season for Swainson’s hawks, which encompasses the courtship and nest initiation phase, is considered by CDFW to be February 1 through September 15. During construction activities: . An agency-approved biologist will conduct preconstruction surveys according to guidelines presented in SWTAC 2000, which establishes five survey periods. During the first period (January 1 to March 20) potential nest locations are identified. During the second period (March 20 to April 5) Swainson’s hawks are returning to traditional nesting territories during a time when most nest trees are leafless and birds and their activities are easier to detect. During the third period (April 5 to April 20) pair bonding, courtship, and nest construction are taking place and while nests may be more difficult to see, they can be inferred from increased activity. During the fourth period (April 20 to June 10) nests are difficult to detect and activity is low because adults are incubating. Surveys should not be initiated during the fourth period. During the fifth period (June 10 to July 30), young birds may be active and visible, and both adults are making many visits to the nest with prey. Three surveys will be completed in at least at least two of the survey periods immediately prior to project imitation. Surveys will encompass the area within 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) of construction activities. . In addition, if ground-disturbing activities are to take place during the breeding season (February 1 through September 15), the CDFW recommends that additional preconstruction surveys for active nests be conducted by a Department-approved biologist no more than 10 days prior to the start of construction. . If an active Swainson's hawk nest is found, a clearly marked 0.5-mile (0.8-kilometer) nodisturbance buffer will be established around the nest. If such a buffer cannot feasibly be implemented, consultation with CDFW will occur well in advance of ground-disturbing activities and the acquisition of a state incidental take permit pursuant to Fish and Game Code section 2081(b) may be warranted. During O&M activities: . From February 1 to September 15, a 0.25-mile buffer zone will be established and maintained around potential Swainson’s hawk nest trees, within which there will be no intensive disturbance (e.g., use of heavy equipment, power saws, chippers, cranes, or draglines). This buffer may be adjusted, as assessed by an agency-approved biologist, based on changes in sensitivity exhibited by birds over the course of the nesting season and the type of O&M activity performed (e.g., high noise or human activity such as mechanical vegetation maintenance versus low noise or human activity such as semiannual patrols), or a Department-approved biologist will conduct nest surveys using methods described in SHTAC 2000 (or more current protocol) to determine absence. . Within 0.25 miles of an active nest, routine O&M activities will be deferred until after the young have fledged or until it is determined by a Department-approved biologist that the activities will not adversely affect adults or young. BIO-29 Tricolored blackbird nests colonially in a variety of densely vegetated habitats. The nesting season for tricolored blackbird is March 1 through August 15. . For ground-breaking activities that begin or take place outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a biologist experienced with tricolored blackbirds and their range of habitats will conduct a preconstruction survey no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 500 feet (152 meters) in all directions from construction areas. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . If nesting is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within 500 feet (152 meters) of a construction or laydown area, Western will establish a clearly marked 500-foot (152-meter) no-disturbance buffer around the outer edges of the habitat. The buffer will be maintained until a Department-approved biologist has determined that the colony is no longer active. . If tricolored blackbirds begin nesting near construction or laydown areas after construction has started, a clearly marked no-disturbance buffer will be established around the colony that is the maximum size possible for the circumstances. The buffer will be maintained until the colony is no longer active. . Biological monitoring will be provided by a Department-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 500 feet (152 meters) of occupied habitat. The biological monitor will ensure that construction activities do not disturb the colony. . When construction begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. BIO-30 For non-listed birds protected by the MBTA and Fish and Game Code, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting season for these birds is March 1 through August 31. . For ground-breaking activities that begin or take place outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities starting within the nesting season, a preconstruction survey for migratory birds not previously mentioned will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist no more than 10 days prior to project initiation in a sufficient area around the work site to identify nests that are present and determine their status. A sufficient area means any nest within an area that could potentially be affected by the project. In addition to direct impacts, such as nest destruction, nests might be affected by noise, vibration, odors, and movement of workers or equipment. . Identified nests will be surveyed within 24 hours prior to construction or O&M activities to establish a behavioral baseline. Once work commences, all nests will be monitored during work activities to detect any behavioral changes as a result of the project. If behavioral changes are observed, the work causing that change will cease and CDFW and USFWS will be consulted for additional avoidance and minimization measures. OR, if monitoring of identified nests by an agency-approved wildlife biologist is not feasible, CDFW and USFWS recommend a minimum no-disturbance buffer of 250 feet (76 meters) around active nests of non-listed passerine-type bird species and a 500-foot (152-meter) no-disturbance buffer around the nests of non-listed raptors until the breeding season has ended, or until an agency-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged and are no longer reliant upon the nest or parental care for survival. Variance from these no-disturbance buffers may be implemented when there is compelling biological or ecological reason to do so, such as when project activities would be concealed from a nest site by topography. Any variance from these buffers will be supported by an agency-approved biologist and it is recommended that CDFW and USFWS be notified in advance of implementation of a no-disturbance buffer variance. . When construction or O&M begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. 4.4.6.20 Compensatory Mitigation BIO-31 For unavoidable impacts to burrowing owl habitat known to be occupied within the last 5 years, compensatory mitigation will be required. Compensation may take the form of (a) acquiring and dedicating lands into conservation easements; (b) purchasing mitigation credits at compensation ratios that have been approved by the CDFW; or (c) preserving area contiguous or near the acreage lost. BIO-32 Compensatory mitigation will be required for loss of Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat using compensation ratios provided in CDFG 1994 (or more current document) or a ratio determined through consultation with CDFW. As provided in CDFW 2014c, compensatory mitigation for Swainson’s hawk may also be required for loss of nest trees. 4.4.6.21 Cumulative Efects With implementation of avoidance and minimization measures, and successful compensatory mitigation for project effects that cannot be avoided, cumulative effects to special-status birds are not expected. If compensatory mitigation in the form of habitat restoration is not successful, the project would contribute to cumulative habitat loss and degradation for these animals. 4.4.7 Mamals 4.4.7.1 American Badger American badgers are found in dry, open grassland, scrub, and forest habitats, usually in areas with sandy loamy soils and where small mammal prey are abundant (Ahlborn, 1988). They occur throughout California. They typically have large home ranges during the breeding season; home range size may be as little as 5 ac (2 ha) in winter and as high as 1790 ac (725 ha) in summer (Sargeant and Warner 1972, Lindzey, 1978). Most CNDDB records for American badger in the nine-quad search area are from 1927 to 1998, and the records nearest the project area are all from the late 1980s and 1990s. Two records from 2006 are near O’Neill Forebay. The entire project area is considered potentially occupied by American badger. 4.4.7.2 Bats Pallid bat. Pallid bat inhabits rocky, arid deserts and canyonlands, shrub-steppe grasslands, and higherelevation coniferous forests usually below 6500 feet (2000 meters) (Pierson and Rainey, 2002). It is most abundant in xeric habitats, including Great Basin, Mojave, and Sonoran deserts (WBWG, 2014). Day and night roosts crevices in rocky outcrops, and cliffs, caves, mines, trees, and various human structures such as bridges, barns, porches, bat boxes, including human-occupied and vacant buildings (WBWG, 2014). Tree habitats include basal hollows of coast redwoods and giant sequoias, bole cavities of oaks, exfoliating ponderosa pine and valley oak bark, deciduous riparian trees, and orchard fruit trees. They roost alone or in small or large groups; roosts generally have unobstructed entrances/exits and are high above the ground, warm, and inaccessible to terrestrial predators (WBWG, 2014). At lower elevations, this bat is strongly associated with oak savanna where it feeds primarily on ground-dwelling arthropods such as grasshoppers, scorpions, and Jerusalem crickets, and large, flying insects such as long-horned beetles and katydids (Pierson and Rainey, 2002). Potential cliff roosting habitat is found in or adjacent to the project area between Patterson Pass Road and Corral Hollow, and potential riparian roosting habitat is found at Corral Hollow, Salado, Orestimba, and Los Banos creeks, and around O’Neill Forebay. There are few if any human structures within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) of the project area suitable for bat roosting. Two CNDDB records are for pallid bats found in 1941, 1942, and 1956. More recently, a small nursery colony was found in 1991 in a crack in a stable manganese prospect; this site is located 3.5 miles (5.6 kilometers southwest of the project, about 2.5 miles (4 kilometers) south of Corral Hollow Road. A 1999 record is from a riparian area 10 miles east of the project. Roosting pallid bats are assumed potentially present within or near the project area. Townsend’s big-eared bat. In California, Townsend’s big.eared bat occurs from inland deserts to coastal forests, in oak woodlands of the inner coast ranges and Sierra Nevada foothills, and low to mid elevation mixed forests (CDFW, 2013). Distribution is patchy and strongly correlated with the availability of caves and cave.like roosting habitat, with population centers occurring in areas dominated by exposed, cavityforming rock and/or historic mining districts. It prefers open surfaces of caves or cave.like structures, such as mine adits and shafts, but has also has been reported in buildings, bridges, and water diversion tunnels that offer a cavernous environment. It has also been found in rock crevices and, like a number of bat species, in large hollow trees. Foraging associations include edge habitats along streams and areas adjacent to and within a variety of wooded habitats (CDFW, 2013). This bat became a state candidate for listing as threatened or endangered under the California Endangered Species Act in June 2013. There is little roosting and hibernating habitat in the Central Valley for Townsend’s big-eared bat and there are no records of maternity colonies there including the central coast ranges (Center for Biological Diversity, 2012); however, there is potential roosting habitat in old-growth sycamores in Orestimba Creek. SJCOG (2000) reports two confirmed records for the Midway quad, one of the quads through which the project passes, but is not more specific about location. There are no CNDDB records for this bat within 1 mile of the project area. A single 1991 CNDDB record reports multiple scattered males associated with an untimbered manganese prospect 3.5 miles (5.6 kilometers) west of the project, about 2.5 miles (4 kilometers) south of Corral Hollow Road (where pallid bats were also found—see above). Given the relative lack of roosting and hibernating habitat and the absence of known maternity colonies in the Central Valley and central coast ranges, this species is likely to occur in the project area only as foraging individuals. Western mastiff bat. This species is associated with cliff habitat where maternity colonies of 30 to several hundred (typically fewer than 100) roost generally under exfoliating rock slabs such as granite, sandstone, or columnar basalt (Pierson and Rainey, 2002). It has also been found in similar crevices in large boulders and buildings (WBWG, 2014). Roosts are generally high above the ground, usually allowing a clear vertical drop of at least 10 feet (3 meters) below the entrance for flight. It is adapted for fast, long-distance flight and forages in the open air over meadows, grasslands, forests, and open water for large moths and crickets (Pierson and Rainey 2002; WBWG, 2014). Since this species does not hibernate, it needs winter habitat with predominantly nonfreezing temperatures (Pierson and Rainey, 2002). The distribution of this bat is likely geomorphically determined, with the species being present only where there are significant rock features offering suitable roosting habitat (WBWG, 2014). It is found in a variety of habitats, from desert scrub to chaparral to oak woodland and into the ponderosa pine belt and high elevation meadows of mixed conifer forests, and occurs through much of California. All the CNDDB records for this bat near the project area are associated with just two locations and two years. In 1991, a roost was discovered along Corral Hollow several miles west of the project area, and in 1994, a roost was discovered along Los Banos Creek several miles west of the project area. Potential roosting habitat occurs within the project area (Figure 3, maps 4–8) and south of Crow Creek, best visualized as the northern half of Figure 3, map 25. Western red bat. The western red bat is strongly associated with riparian habitats, especially mature stands of cottonwood and sycamore in riparian corridors that are at least 165 feet (50 meters) wide (Pierson et al., 2006), primarily at lower elevations (Pierson and Rainey, 2002). It also occurs in narrower riparian stands of suitable age and in orchards (Pierson et al., 2006). Typically solitary, this bat roosts primarily in the foliage of trees or shrubs. Roost sites are generally hidden from view from all directions except below, lack obstruction beneath, allowing the bat to drop downward for flight, lack lower perches that allow visibility by predators, have dark ground cover to minimize solar reflection, have nearby vegetation to reduce wind and dust and are generally located on the south or southwest side of a tree (Bolster, 2005). This bat may also occasionally use caves, as both dead and live red bats, including a pregnant female, have been collected from Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico. It is locally common in some areas of California, occurring from Shasta County south to the Mexico border west of the Sierra/Cascade crest and deserts (Harris, 1990). A distribution study by Pierson et al. (2006) showed strong associations with the Central Valley, especially the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers. In this study, red bats were encountered infrequently or not at all in the coast ranges, along the coast, or in the Sierra Nevada, but were predictably present during the summer at most sites sampled in the Central Valley. The only CNDDB record in the nine-quad search area is from 1999 along the San Joaquin River. This bat could use riparian habitats along Salado Creek (Figure 3, map 23) and in the riparian forest east of O’Neill Forebay (Figure 3, maps 36 and 40). The sycamore alluvial woodland along Orestimba Creek (Figure 3, map 27) supports large sycamore trees but lacks the canopy density described by Pierson et al. (2006). Presence cannot be ruled out, but is not highly likely. 4.4.7.3 Giant Kangaro Rat Giant kangaroo rats inhabit flat or gently sloping terrain dominated by annual grassland in areas with hot, dry summers and average annual precipitation of approximately 12 inches (30 centimeters) or less (Williams et al. 1995, Bean et al. in press,). Found from elevations of 300 to 2900 feet (90 to 885 meters), most extant habitat lies at elevations above 650 feet (200 meters). They mainly inhabit sandyloam soils located on level and gently sloping ground vegetated with annual grasses and forbs and widely scattered desert shrubs (Williams et al., 1995; ESRP, 2014). Often found in areas that are heavily grazed by cattle and sheep, they prefer semi-arid slopes at the head of draws in barren, shrubless areas, with loose, friable, sandy-loam soils (Williams and Kilburn, 1991, cited in IUCN, 2014). Extant habitat has been fragmented, mostly by irrigated croplands, into six major geographic units, which in turn have been broken into dozens of smaller colonies by agricultural and petroleum developments (ESRP, 2014). The giant kangaroo rat is not known to occur anywhere within 15 or more miles (24 kilometers) of the project area. The nearest known extant populations occur in the Panoche Hills well south of the project area. However, the private lands north of extant populations in Panoche Hills have not been surveyed for giant kangaroo rat, and other areas may not have been surveyed because of potentially higher precipitation (B Cypher pers. comm., T Bean pers. comm.). Williams et al. 1995 considered the northern part of the range of this kangaroo rat to be western Fresno and eastern San Benito Counties; their study of distribution in the northern segment of the giant kangaroo rat range makes no mention of Merced County. Recent research has been focused on areas farther south where most records exist and where habitat conditions are more suitable. Distribution models based on climate, slope, and soil particle size show the potential for giant kangaroo rat occurrence in small areas north of the Panoche Hills (Bean et al., 2014a; Bean et al., 2014b). Humboldt State Assistant Professor Tim Bean (pers. comm.), who is using satellite imagery and other habitat models to map giant kangaroo rat habitats and is also conducting trapping studies, stated that to his knowledge there have been no recent surveys north of Panoche Valley, and he suspects the area is too wet. He stated that it would be a surprise to find the species that far north. His 2011 trapping surveys in Panoche Valley resulted in no captures of giant kangaroo rat; he will be trapping there again this summer (July 2014). Bureau of Land Management biologist Mike Westphal (pers. comm.) believes there is no giant kangaroo rat habitat within a 5-mile (8-kilometer) radius of the Dos Amigos Substation. He has superficially surveyed the general area around Arburua Road and found one or two “suspicious” areas, but nothing looked to him like ideal giant kangaroo rat habitat. Brian Cypher with the CSU Stanislaus Endangered Species Recovery Program (pers. comm.) said that with all the private land north of the Panoche Hills, there has been no trapping. These regional giant kangaroo rat experts were equivocal about the potential for this species to occur in the southern portion of the project area. The only CNDDB record for giant kangaroo rat in the nine-quad search area is a 1932 record for an abundance of this species at a location approximately 2.5 miles (4 kilometers) south of the Dos Amigos Substation. Trapping in that area in 1989 resulted in no captures (CDFW, 2015a). Giant kangaroo rat is considered unlikely to occur in the project area, but its presence cannot be ruled out. There was no evidence of giant kangaroo rat occurrence during reconnaissance surveys in 2014 and 2015. Western has contracted with Humboldt State University and Dr. Tim Bean to apply both satellite imagery and habitat models to the project area south of SR 152 to better assess habitat potential for the giant kangaroo rat. Results, which were unavailable for this report, will be presented in the EIS/EIR and biological assessment for this project. 4.4.7.4 San Joaquin Kit Fox The San Joaquin kit fox, endemic to the San Joaquin Valley of California, typically occurs in desert-like habitats characterized by sparse or absent shrub cover, sparse ground cover, and short vegetative structure such as saltbush scrub, grasslands, and alkali sink in flat or gently rolling terrain (Cypher et al., 2007). In areas where average slopes exceed 15 percent, kit fox abundance usually is considerably lower due to increased predation risk (Cypher et al., 2012); Koopman et al. (2001) noted that kit foxes prefer habitats with slopes less than 6 percent. Within its range, it is associated with areas having open, level, sandy ground (Grinnell et al., 1937, in USFWS, 2010c) that is relatively stone-free to depths of about 3–4.5 feet (0.9–1.4 meters). San Joaquin kit foxes use subterranean dens for temperature regulation, shelter from adverse environmental conditions, reproduction, and escape from predators. Though they are reputed to be poor diggers, the complexity and depth of their dens does not support this assessment (USFWS, 1998b). Kit foxes also modify and use dens constructed by other animals, such as ground squirrels, badgers, and coyotes, and human-made structures such as culverts, abandoned pipelines, banks in sumps or road beds, and rubble piles, as well as dens under sidewalks or buildings, among tree roots in urban areas, and in golf courses (USFWS 1998b; Cypher et al., 2012). Dens may extend to 6 feet (1.8 meter) or more below ground surface (Laughrin, 1970, in USFWS, 2010c). Cypher et al. 2012 report that San Joaquin kit foxes prefer well-drained sandy to loamy soils as such soils support higher abundance of preferred prey (kangaroo rats) and facilitate the excavation of new dens. Although the kit fox was historically thought to subsist primarily on kangaroo rats and kit fox populations appear to be most robust where kangaroo rats persist (Koopman et al., 2001), the kit fox diet currently varies geographically, seasonally, and annually and includes nocturnal rodents such as kangaroo rats and mice, California ground squirrels, rabbits and hares, San Joaquin antelope squirrels, ground-nesting birds, and insects (USFWS, 2010c). Kit foxes currently persist in a metapopulation consisting of three larger core and a number of smaller satellite populations (USFWS 1998b; Cypher et al., 2005) with areas of suitable habitat linking them. The SLTP project area crosses two satellite (S) areas and links between them: S1, spanning portions of Alameda, Contra Costa, and San Joaquin Counties, and S2, spanning portions of western Merced and Stanislaus Counties. USFWS (2010c:16) characterizes the current trend in S1 as “have declined, no known breeding” and in S2 as “have declined, presence in S. portion.” Constable et al. (2009) reports results of a multi-year study showing that a persistent but low-density kit fox population is present on lands from a region starting just south of Santa Nella (which lies directly east of northern O’Neill Forebay) and extending south to Little Panoche Road, roughly 10 miles (16 kilometers) south of the Dos Amigos Substation. According to Constable et al. (2009), north of Santa Nella (O’Neill Forebay) evidence indicates that kit foxes may only be intermittently present and may largely be dispersing individuals from farther south. They describe the northern part of the kit fox range this way (Constable et al., 2009:38): In this northern area, the habitat is primarily of medium or low quality and is highly fragmented. This landscape pattern appears to extend northward into and throughout the northern range of the kit fox. Throughout this northern region, steep terrain is common and in some locations this unsuitable terrain extends eastward and abuts Interstate 5 or agricultural lands (CSUS Endangered Species Recovery Program, unpublished data). This not only inhibits occupation by kit foxes, but also severely impedes movement through these areas. Furthermore, the herbaceous ground cover is dominated by relatively tall, dense stands of wild oats (Avena spp.). Steep terrain and dense cover increase predation risk for kit foxes (Warrick and Cypher, 1999), and also constitute poor habitat conditions for kangaroo rats, the preferred prey of kit foxes. The heavy clay soils common to this region also are an impediment to kangaroo rats. These factors collectively result in suboptimal conditions for kit foxes and probably are responsible for the intermittent presence of kit foxes in this northern region and the apparent lack of evidence for resident kit fox populations. Recent evidence indicates that kit foxes are unable to occupy farmland on a long-term basis (Warrick et al., 2007, in USFWS, 2010c). Agricultural lands do not provide suitable habitat for the kit fox for a variety of reasons. Although kit foxes may enter the margins of row crops and further into orchards at night from natural lands, Warrick et al. (2007 in USFWS, 2010c) found no evidence that kit fox were able to use farmland, even when it was the predominant available habitat. Currently, the entire range of the kit fox appears to be similar to what it was at the time of the 1998 recovery plan (USFWS, 1998b); however, population structure has become more fragmented, at least some of the resident satellite subpopulations have apparently been locally extirpated, and portions of the range now appear to be frequented by dispersers rather than resident animals (USFWS, 2010c). By 2006, kit foxes were determined to be largely eliminated from the central portion of the San Joaquin Valley. Kit fox presence on the west side of the Central Valley is primarily confined to a relatively narrow band of suitable habitat between coast range foothills and Interstate 5 (Constable et al., 2009; USFWS, 2010c). Within this narrow band, constriction of available habitat and occurrence of barriers such as the San Luis Reservoir, the California Aqueduct, the Delta-Mendota Canal, and several high-traffic roads, potentially limit movements of the kit fox (USFWS, 2010c). However, in late 2008 another kit fox was sighted in the northernmost portion of the range (Mueller in litt., 2008, in USFWS, 2010c). Most CNDDB records from the nine-quad search area are from 1998 or earlier. A 2000 record reports an assumed small population occupying an area directly north of the Tracy Substation within the project area. A number of records from 2003 and 2005 report kit foxes in the southern half of the project area south of O’Neill Forebay and south of Los Banos Reservoir, and continued presence there is supported by Constable et al. (2009). 4.4.7.5 Short-nosed Kangaro Rat Short-nosed kangaroo rats were historically found mostly on flat and gently sloping terrain and on hilltops in desert-shrub associations. They generally occupy grasslands with scattered shrubs and desertshrub associations on friable soils, inhabiting highly saline soils in some areas (ESRP, 2014). Over most of their current range they are generally more numerous in lighter, friable soils such as the sandy bottoms and banks of arroyos and other sandy areas. This species occupies many of the same general areas occupied by giant kangaroo rats, although with a different pattern of use. Occupied habitats have not been completely mapped, and there are relatively large areas that offer potential habitat for this species that have not been surveyed. However, the extant occupied area is unlikely to be more than about 1.5 percent of the estimated historical habitat. There are no CNDDB records for short-nosed kangaroo rat within the nine-quad search area, and there are no current or historic records within or near the project area (ESRP, 2014). They are known to occur on the valley floor south of Los Banos (ESRP, 2014), and could use the grassland habitats south of O’Neill Forebay. 4.4.7.6 Potential to Ocur in Project Vicinity American badger is assumed present in suitable habitats throughout the project area. Townsend’s bigeared bat is expected to be present in the project area only as foraging individuals; suitable roosting habitat is not likely to occur within the biological study area. Western mastiff bat could roost in cliffs found within or near the project area in the following locations: Figure 3, maps 4–8, and south of Crow Creek, i.e., the northern half of Figure 3, map 25. While western red bat is unlikely to roost in the project area, its presence cannot be ruled out. It could use riparian habitats along Salado Creek (Figure 3, map 23), the riparian forest east of O’Neill Forebay (Figure 3, maps 36 and 40), and, less likely, sycamore alluvial woodland along Orestimba Creek (Figure 3, map 27). Giant kangaroo rat is not currently known to occur north of portions of Panoche Valley, which is approximately 15 miles (24 kilometers) south of Dos Amigos Substation, but its presence cannot be ruled out without further study. Short-nosed kangaroo rat is not known to occur in or near the project area, but its presence in the grasslands south of O’Neill Forebay cannot be ruled out. San Joaquin kit fox is assumed to be present in suitable grassland and scrub habitats throughout the project area. For reasons described above, kit fox use of most of the project area north of Santa Nella is likely to be limited. Potential kit fox dens, identified on maps in Figure 3 as “PKFs,” were noted during spring 2014 surveys; these surveys were conducted at a reconnaissance level, so many areas were not walked or even seen, and not every den was examined for kit fox potential. Large stretches of grassland north of Santa Nella were devoid even of ground squirrel activity. A kit fox carcass was discovered south of Los Banos Reservoir and its location shown on Figure 3, map 49. Constable et al. (2009) have established a lowdensity kit fox presence in the project area from Santa Nella south. Project alternatives run through areas scoped by Constable et al. (2009) as least-cost corridors for kit fox movement in this area. 4.4.7.7 Project Efects American badger, giant kangaroo rat, and San Joaquin kit fox could be directly affected in grassland, scrubland, and open woodland habitats by temporary or permanent loss of or physical damage to habitats, mortality during construction or through vehicle ingress/egress, disturbance through human presence and construction noise and vibration, and collapse of burrows. Indirect effects could include post-project erosion at or near construction areas and new roads, and degradation or loss of habitat through operation and maintenance such as long-term use of new or existing access roads, tower/line repairs, introduction of human trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, and increased susceptibility to wild fire. Townsend’s big-eared bat is not known or expected to roost within the and the distribution of both western mastiff and western red bats is likely to be limited in the project area. The primary project effects to bats could be direct effects associated with disturbance at roost sites through human presence and construction noise and vibration. Roosting habitats (cliffs, mines, buildings, rock outcrops, and riparian areas) are not expected to be temporarily or permanently affected and the small amounts of grassland lost to tower footings and access roads are not expected to affect availability or use of foraging habitat. Project EPMs do not provide sufficient protection of habitats and individuals of these species and adverse project effects are likely without additional protections. 4.4.7.8 Avoidance and Minimization Measures Western will consult with USFWS and CDFW SJCOG for impacts to special-status species falling under the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin County Multi-species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJCOG, 2000) where the project lies within San Joaquin County, as appropriate. Any avoidance, minimization, or compensation measures developed during consultation will supersede those listed below. BIO-33 To protect American badger, Western will minimize impacts by implementing the following measures. . Concurrent with other required surveys (e.g., kit fox and burrowing owl), a Departmentapproved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey to identify the presence of American badgers. If this species is not found, no further action will be required. If badgers are identified, they will be passively relocated using burrow exclusion (e.g., installing one-way doors on burrows) or similar CDFW-approved exclusion methods. In unique situations it might be necessary to actively relocate badgers (e.g., using live traps) to protect individuals from potentially harmful situations. Such relocation will be performed with advance CDFW coordination and concurrence. When unoccupied dens are encountered outside of work areas but within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of proposed activities, vacated dens will be inspected to ensure they are empty and temporarily covered using plywood sheets or similar materials. . If badger occupancy is determined at a given site within a construction area, construction will be halted. Depending on the den type, reasonable and prudent measures to avoid harming badgers will be implemented and may include seasonal limitations on project construction near the site (i.e., restricting the construction period to avoid spring-summer pupping season), establishing a construction exclusion zone around the identified site, or resurveying the den a week later to determine species presence or absence. BIO-34 To protect Townsend’s big-eared bat and other special-status bats, Western will minimize impacts by performing preconstruction surveys and creating no-disturbance buffers around active bat-roosting sites, especially maternity roosts and especially during the bat pupping season (April 1 through August 15) for project construction and O&M activities using the following measures. . Before construction activities within 250 feet (76 meters) of trees, cliffs, or caves, a Department-approved bat biologist will survey for special-status bats. If no evidence of bats (i.e., direct observation, guano, staining, or strong odors) is observed, no further mitigation will be required. If evidence of bats is observed, Western will implement the following measures to avoid potential impacts on breeding populations: . A no-disturbance buffer of 250 feet (76 meters) will be created around active bat roosts or occupied roosting habitat during the pupping season (April 1 through August 15). Bat roosts initiated during construction will be presumed to be unaffected by the indirect effects of noise and construction disturbances. However, the direct take of individuals will be prohibited without further consultation with CDFW. . Removal of trees showing evidence of active bat use will occur during the period least likely to affect bats in winter hibernacula or maternity roosts, as determined by a Department-approved bat biologist (generally between August 15 and October 15, and between February 15 and April 1). If the exclusion of bats from potential roost sites is necessary to prevent indirect impacts due to construction noise and adjacent human activity, bat exclusion activities (e.g., installation of netting to block roost entrances) will be conducted by a Department-approved biologist. BIO-35 Western will either assume presence of giant and short-nosed kangaroo rats and implement measures to avoid or minimize impacts, or conduct research to assess habitat potential. Research could take the form of (a) evaluating the project area using a model based on satellite imagery currently being applied to giant kangaroo rat habitats throughout their range (T. Bean, pers. comm.) or other habitat models or (b) conducting protocol trapping in potentially suitable areas immediately prior to construction. If research indicates that kangaroo rats are not likely to be present, no further action will be required. If Western either assumes presence or research indicates that either kangaroo rat species could be present, Western will implement the following measures. . Prior to construction or O&M activities, any active burrows in the vicinity of work sites will be flagged and marked with a burrow number. Exclusion zones with a 30-foot (9-meter) radius will be established around any active burrow. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this exclusion zone. . A biological monitor will be on site for all activities within suitable kangaroo rat habitat. Prior to construction or O&M activities each day within suitable habitat, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site to verify that no kangaroo rats are present within the site. The biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect project activities in coordination with the project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of giant kangaroo rats. The biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Installation of barrier fencing around the work site may be used to further limit the risk of direct impacts to kangaroo rats where necessary. Barrier fencing will at no time inhibit the kangaroo rat’s ability to move between its den and other habitats that allow breeding, feeding, and sheltering. All barriers will be removed at the end of project activities. . If giant kangaroo rats are detected within a disturbance site and if necessary, they may be relocated to a suitable site away from project activities but as close to the disturbance site as feasible. Relocation methods will follow the recommendations in Tennant et al. 2013 or other Service-approved methods. BIO-36 To protect San Joaquin kit fox, Western will implement the following measures. . To the extent practical, Western will avoid project construction and O&M activities that require ground disturbance or off-road travel between December 1 and May 31, the kit fox breeding/pupping season. . Prior to project construction or O&M activities that involve ground disturbance, off-road travel, or vegetation management in suitable kit fox habitat, an agency-approved biologist will conduct habitat/den surveys in accordance with the “Small Projects” recommendations in the 2011 USFWS Standardized Recommendations for Protection of the Endangered San Joaquin Kit Fox Prior to or During Ground Disturbance (USFWS, 2011c). Any suitable den (i.e., burrow with an entrance greater than 4 inches in diameter) will be monitored for evidence of kit fox use by placing either a tracking medium or wildlife monitoring cameras at the entrance for at least three consecutive nights. Active dens will be marked with a 100- foot (30.5-meter) buffer and natal or pupping dens (December 1 through May 31) will be marked with a 1,000-foot (305-meter) buffer. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this buffer area. . If activities must occur within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of an active den, San Joaquin kit foxes will be excluded from the den. Methods will follow those outlined in USFWS 2011c. The den will be monitored for at least five consecutive nights from initial observation to allow the animal to move to another den during its normal activity. Use of this den may be discouraged by partially plugging the den in such a manner that any resident animal can easily escape but may be discouraged from re-entering. Once the kit fox has abandoned the den or is still present after five or more consecutive days of partial plugging and monitoring, the den will be plugged or excavated (by hand as possible) when the qualified biologist determines that the animal is absent due to normal activities. Natal dens will not be destroyed or disturbed during breeding/pupping season (December 1 through May 31). . A biological monitor will be on site for any work activities within suitable kit fox habitat. Prior to construction activities each day, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site to verify that no kit foxes are present. The biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect project activities in coordination with the project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of kit foxes. The biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Installation of barrier fencing around the work site may be used to further limit the risk of direct impacts on kit fox. If necessary, barrier fencing will be used to prevent kit foxes from entering the work site and getting injured or killed by equipment but will at no time inhibit the kit fox’s ability to move between its den and other habitats that allow breeding, feeding, and sheltering. All barriers will be removed at the end of construction or O&M work. . Any excavated, steep-walled holes or trenches more than 2 feet (0.6 meter) deep will be covered at the close of each working day with plywood or similar materials or escape ramps will be installed in the hole or trench. Before any hole or trench is filled, it will be inspected for trapped animals. . All construction pipes, culverts, or similar structures with a diameter of 4 inches (10 centimeters) or more that are stored at a construction site overnight will be thoroughly inspected for kit foxes before the pipe is buried, capped, or moved. If a kit fox is discovered inside a pipe, that section of pipe will not be moved until the kit fox has left the pipe. . Use of rodenticides and herbicides in the project area will be limited to the extent possible. Use of any such compounds will observe label and other restrictions mandated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, California Department of Food and Agriculture, and other state and federal legislation. If rodent control must be conducted, zinc phosphide will be used as possible because it presents a lower risk to kit foxes. 4.4.7.9 Compensatory Mitigation BIO-37 Compensatory mitigation will be required for temporary and permanent impacts to San Joaquin kit fox habitat. Compensation may take the form of (a) acquiring and dedicating lands into conservation easements or (b) purchasing mitigation credits at compensation ratios that have been approved by state and federal agencies. 4.4.7.10 Cumulative Efects With implementation of avoidance and minimization measures, and successful compensatory mitigation for project effects that cannot be avoided, cumulative effects to special-status mammals are not expected. If compensatory mitigation in the form of habitat restoration is not successful, the project would contribute to cumulative habitat loss and degradation for these animals. 5. Alternatives Analysis For purposes of comparing biological resources in the proposed and alternative corridors, the project was divided into four distinct segments (see Figure 2 above): . North Segment: between the Tracy Substation and Patterson Pass Road . Central Segment: between Patterson Pass Road and Butts Road . San Luis Segment: between Butts Road and the Los Banos Substation, including the 70-kV routes to San Luis Substation . South Segment: between Los Banos and Dos Amigos Substations, including the 230-kV routes from San Luis Substation There is no alternative corridor for the North Segment region, and therefore this segment is not analyzed in this section. Proposed and alternative corridors are compared to each other for the other three segments. For a detailed project description, refer to Appendix A. Table 4 compares habitat types and acreages among proposed and alternative corridors. A list of habitat codes and brief definitions is provided in Appendix C. Importantly, because large parts of the project area were not visited because of access constraints, the comparisons below are based on a combination of what was encountered and mapped in the field, and what was interpreted to be on the ground based on aerial imagery or long-distance views through binoculars. It would be particularly difficult to accurately identify and map such features as freshwater marsh, seasonal wetland, vernal pool, riparian forest or scrub, elderberries, and coyote brush scrub from aerial images, especially since these habitats occur in such small patches throughout the project area. Their relative scarcity also makes them easier to avoid during construction. The acreage figures in Table 4 and the descriptions of the corridors below are approximations and have not been field verified. This analysis assumes that all of the creeks and drainages within the segments, including those identified as rivers, would be spanned. For creeks that support Great Valley riparian forest, it is also assumed that spanning the creek would not adversely affect the associated riparian forest or woodland, which would also include a buffer zone as designated by the federal and state agencies. 5.1 Central Segment In the Central Segment, the 500-kV line would follow either the proposed corridor or the Patterson Pass Road alternative. 500-kV lines require construction of 4 to 5 tower structures per mile. The two routes run essentially parallel to each other on either side of existing PG&E transmission lines, with the proposed corridor on the east. This region is shown on Figure 2-6b, and on Figure 3, maps 4 through 33. Acreages are shown in Table 4 and corridor lengths are provided in Table 5.  Table 4. Comparison of Habitat Types Among Proposed and Alternative Corridors (acres) Habitat Type Central Segment: Proposed Central Segment: Patterson Pass Road Alternative San Luis Segment: Proposed San Luis Segment (500-kV): Butts Road Alternative San Luis Segment (500-kV): West of Cemetery Alternative South Segment: Proposed South Segment: Los Banos to Dos Amigos Alternative South Segment: Billy Wright Road Corridor Alternative San Luis Segment (70-kV): Proposed San Luis Segment (70-kV): West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Ag 43.53 34.23 0.00 0.00 0.00 43.91 38.48 0.00 0.00 0.00 Aggr 71.26 76.65 0.00 0.00 0.00 13.44 7.27 0.00 0.00 0.00 Agor 69.31 28.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Agps 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Agvn 16.92 12.79 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Bar 18.17 29.80 34.11 47.33 43.13 21.61 21.65 20.49 32.46 14.27 Cbsc 0.00 0.00 14.38 26.21 26.21 13.43 13.43 13.43 17.39 6.36 Com 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Gnn 2574.13 2525.33 1385.58 902.73 994.65 599.31 611.43 685.08 404.34 472.32 Gnp 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.36 0.36 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.14 Oth 0.88 0.36 29.75 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.04 0.14 Rgf 8.78 10.91 9.53 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.149 9.53 0.00 Rgs 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Wace 42.78 38.68 1.13 2.44 0.69 1.28 1.26 3.20 0.32 0.21 Waci 12.59 15.98 1.33 0.55 0.27 1.15 1.15 0.45 0.00 0.37 Wadr 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.34 11.34 11.16 11.16 11.16 11.16 0.37 Waic 0.00 0.00 8.95 3.53 3.53 3.41 3.41 3.41 8.52 3.76 Waim 0.00 0.50 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.09 Walk 0.00 0.00 6.28 35.89 35.89 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.28 7.10 Waot 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.61 0.61 0.61 0.00 0.00 Wapd 0.00 0.12 0.14 0.07 0.07 0.01 0.01 0.10 0.00 0.07 Warv 11.00 11.22 5.25 0.00 1.21 0.26 0.26 2.87 0.00 3.66 Wfm 1.09 0.60 6.31 3.41 1.66 0.07 0.07 0.07 6.39 1.94 Wldf 25.23 62.86 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 17.54 0.00 0.00 Wot 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 Wse 0.36 2.61 0.00 3.07 3.07 0.13 1.40 0.00 0.00 1.74 Wvp 0.37 0.02 3.39 3.61 3.61 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.45 Total 2896.41 2850.77 1506.12 1040.625 1125.679 710.08 711.90 759.79 498.64 512.49  5.1.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants The proposed corridor has more non-native grassland, freshwater marsh, and vernal pool habitat than the alternative corridor, but the number of towers would be essentially the same. The vegetation types are potential habitat for a number of special-status plants. In addition, the freshwater marsh qualifies as coastal and valley freshwater marsh and the vernal pool habitat qualifies as northern claypan vernal pool, both of which are special-status vegetation types. Non-native grassland is the most common vegetation type throughout the project area. If populations of special-status plants are found in the nonnative grassland type it is likely that the project could avoid those populations. It is also likely that the project could avoid impacting any freshwater marsh and vernal pool areas. Federal and state agencies that regulate wetlands such as the freshwater marsh and vernal pools would also require that these areas be avoided if possible. The Patterson Pass Road alternative has more wildflower fields, Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest, and seasonal wetlands than the proposed corridor. Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest is a specialstatus vegetation type in addition to being potential habitat for special-status plants. Seasonal wetlands are a sensitive habitat type regulated by federal and state agencies and can support special-status plants. At Orestimba Creek, the Great Valley riparian forest qualifies as sycamore alluvial woodland, another special-status vegetation community. Sycamore alluvial woodland has an equal amount of area in both corridors. It could also most likely be avoided. The wildflower fields within the alternative corridor have more observed populations of the three special-status plants found during surveys. In addition, all areas mapped as wildflower fields, even if no plants were observed in 2014, are considered to be potential habitat for these species. It is likely that the Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and seasonal wetland habitats could be avoided, thus avoiding impacts. However, it is less likely that the project would be able to avoid all of the wildflower fields and populations of special-status plants, which makes the alternative corridor more likely to have an adverse impact to sensitive botanical resources than the proposed corridor. 5.1.2 Special-status Wildlife The proposed and Patterson Pass Road alternative corridors separate just south of Patterson Pass Road, but they traverse similar topographic features, cross all the same creeks, and contain roughly equivalent amounts of each type of habitat. Quantitatively, the proposed corridor is essentially the same length but roughly 0.5 mile (0.8 kilometer) longer, roughly 46 acres (19 hectares) larger in total area, and encompasses about 12 acres (5 hectares) more upland.1 It contains 2 acres (0.8 hectare) less combined impoundment/pond, freshwater marsh, seasonal wetland, and vernal pool habitat. Given how little impoundment/pond habitat is present in either corridor, however, it is likely that towers can be placed to avoid these sensitive and/or regulated habitats, making impacts to aquatic habitats unlikely. The acreage of riverine habitat is the same in both corridors. 1 For the alternatives analysis for wildlife, the term upland combines native and non-native grassland, wildflower fields, coyote brush scrub, and intermittent and ephemeral creeks. Intermittent and ephemeral creeks are included because, although they may convey water during rainy periods and may be regulated as waters of the U.S., they almost exclusively supported upland vegetation. While agricultural lands may be used for foraging by some wildlife species, and rice fields have become essential habitats for giant garter snake, they are not equivalent to the native or naturalized habitats that provide the functions and values special-status upland species require. One feature in the Patterson Pass Road alternative corridor not present in the proposed corridor is a eucalyptus grove (Figure 3, map 12) within the floodplain of Lone Tree Creek, in which at least 10 species of nesting bird were detected during spring 2014 surveys. Despite the larger absolute size of the proposed corridor, its length and configuration are similar to the Patterson Pass Road alternative. At 0.5 mile (0.8 kilometers) longer, the proposed corridor might require more towers or longer access roads than the alternative corridor, which would minimally increase temporary and permanent project effects to uplands, and would increase the cost of compensatory mitigation for San Joaquin kit fox, burrowing owl, Alameda whipsnake, California tiger salamander, and California red-legged frog. This could also result in a slightly higher cumulative loss of habitats for special-status reptiles, upland-nesting birds, American badger, and the prey animals of golden eagle, Swainson’s hawk, and other raptors. Depending on tower placement, construction of the Patterson Pass Road alternative could require avoiding the nesting season for birds nesting at the Lone Tree Creek eucalyptus grove; if the creek were spanned, this impact could be avoided. 5.2 San Luis Segment (50-kV) In the San Luis Segment (500-kV), the project would follow the proposed corridor, the Butts Road alternative, or the West of Cemetery alternative. This would again be a 500-kV line requiring construction of 4 to 5 tower structures per mile. Relative habitat diversity increases in these corridors because there are more habitat types within shorter distances. These corridors are shown on Figure 2-6c, and on Figure 3, maps 34 through 41. Acreages are shown in Table 4 and corridor lengths are provided in Table 4. Table 5. Estimated Lengths of Proposed and Alternative Corridors Common Points Estimated Length Number of Alternatives Alternative Name Estimated Length 500/230-kV Corridors North Segment 7.7 0 None 7.7 Central Segment 48.0 1 Patterson Pass Road 48.0 San Luis Segment (500-kV) 9.1 2 Butts Road 9.6 West of Cemetery 10.3 South Segment 18.0 2 Los Banos to Dos Amigos 18.0 Billy Wright Road 19.5 70-kV Corridor San Luis Segment (70-kV) 7.0 1 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV 7.0 5.2.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants The proposed corridor has more non-native grassland, Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest, and coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitats than the Butts Road and West of Cemetery alternatives. Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and coastal and valley freshwater marsh are special-status vegetation communities. The proposed corridor has 3.39 acres (1.4 hectares) of vernal pool habitat, which is only 0.22 acres less than the Butts Road and West of Cemetery alternatives, so essentially these three alternatives have the same amount of vernal pool habitat. The vernal pool habitat corresponds to the northern claypan vernal pool vegetation type, which is also a special-status vegetation type. The proposed corridor has no mapped native perennial grasslands, whereas the Butts Road and the West of Cemetery alternatives have 0.36 acres (0.16 hectares) of this type, so the benefit of the proposed alternative is that it would not impact any native perennial grassland areas. However, given the relatively small amount of acreage of this type in the two alternatives, it is possible that these areas could be avoided. Non-native grassland is the most common vegetation type throughout the project area and cannot be avoided. However, if populations of special-status plants are found, it is likely that the project could avoid those populations. It is also likely that the project could avoid impacting any Great Valley riparian forest, coastal and valley freshwater marsh, and northern claypan vernal pool areas. Federal and state agencies that regulate these creek and wetland types would also require that these areas be avoided as possible. There are no seasonal wetlands within the proposed corridor which means no potential for impact. Given that the proposed corridor is longer, and has more grassland and other sensitive habitats, there is a higher probability for this corridor to have more impacts than for the two alternative corridors. The Butts Road alternative has the least amount of non-native grassland habitat and has the same amount of seasonal wetlands and northern claypan vernal pool (a special-status vegetation type) as the West of Cemetery alternative. It also has more freshwater marsh habitat than the West of Cemetery alternative. The federal and state agencies that regulate the wetlands would also require that these areas be avoided. This alternative is the shortest of the three corridors, which means fewer towers and the least probability of impacting sensitive plants and habitats. The West of Cemetery alternative is shorter in length than the proposed corridor, longer than the Butts Road alternative, and has more non-native grassland than the Butts Road alternative. This alternative would have fewer impacts than the proposed corridor but more than the Butts Road alternative. 5.2.2 Special-status Wildlife In the San Luis Segment, the proposed corridor is 465 acres (188 hectares) larger than the Butts Road alternative and 380 acres (154 hectares) larger than the West of Cemetery alternative. This is related to the proposed corridor being wider in several places than either alternative, which in turn is likely related more to providing siting options than to a need for the proposed corridor to take more ground. Assuming that each corridor would temporarily and permanently affect the same amount of habitat per tower, the proposed corridor, at 9.1 miles (14.6 kilometers) in length, would require construction of the fewest towers (~46), and the West of Cemetery alternative, at 10.3 miles (16.6 kilometers) in length, would require construction of the most towers (~42). The Butts Road alternative is intermediate in length at9.6 miles (15.4 kilometers) and would require construction of ~48 towers. Of significance in this segment is the historical and potential current occurrence of blunt-nosed leopard lizard. With the blunt-nosed leopard lizard being a California fully protected species, prohibitions against take pose a particular challenge. For this reason, the corridor that minimizes impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat is of greatest benefit for minimizing project and cumulative habitat loss, obtaining an incidental take permit from USFWS, complying with CDFW prohibitions on take, and minimizing the cost of compensatory mitigation—and it would minimize impacts to San Joaquin kit fox, California tiger salamander, burrowing owl, and other species. Figure 6 presents a schematic of general habitat values for blunt-nosed leopard in the proposed corridor and the Butts Road alternative corridor. Habitat potential was not assessed for the West of Cemetery alternative for reasons described in section 4; however, based on aerial imagery seen in figures 6d and 6e, the West of Cemetery alternative appears to be equivalent to the Butts Road alternative, and both appear to have more habitat of moderate to high quality than the proposed corridor. Both the Butts Road and the West of Cemetery alternative corridors contain more upland habitat potentially suitable for blunt-nosed leopard lizard than the proposed corridor. The proposed corridor crosses nearly 16 acres (6.5 hectares) of riparian forest and freshwater marsh in a relatively small area east of O’Neill Forebay. Portions of riparian channels in this area meander through the proposed corridor where they connect with patches of freshwater marsh within the corridor. Riparian forest and freshwater marsh, especially where it is extensive, are important habitat elements in an otherwise dry region. CNDDB records show that this area is known to support northern harrier, Swainson’s hawk, and tricolored blackbird. It could also support valley elderberry longhorn beetle, least Bell’s vireo, loggerhead shrike (along the edges of riparian), Modesto song sparrow, and many migratory songbirds. If there is open water within these channels and wetlands, they could also support specialstatus amphibians during breeding and non-breeding seasons, as well as pond turtle. There is no riparian forest in either alternative corridor. The West of Cemetery alternative contains roughly half as much freshwater marsh as the proposed corridor, and the Butts Road alternative contains about a quarter as much freshwater marsh. While both alternative corridors contain some seasonal wetland, which the proposed corridor does not, it occurs in such small amounts that it could presumably be avoided. The combination of the importance of riparian and freshwater marsh habitats, their relative abundance and density in the proposed corridor, and the configuration of the proposed corridor (with several bends, it could require more towers), either the Butts Road alternative or the West of Cemetery alternative would be better for avoiding impacts to marsh and riparian. The proposed corridor crosses less coyote brush scrub than either the Butts Road alternative or the West of Cemetery alternative. This habitat type is important for wildlife because it provides cover diversity in a region of relatively monotypic non-native grassland. The proposed corridor would have less impact on this upland element; however, this is of less concern than potential impacts to uplands and riparian and wetland habitats. The proposed corridor also includes a large eucalyptus grove, nearly 30 acres (12 hectares) classified as Oth (other), where a Swainson’s hawk was seen calling in spring 2014 and was likely nesting, and where CNDDB records show Swainson’s hawks nesting in previous years. This grove is also likely to support a number of other nesting migratory bird species. The Butts Road and West of Cemetery alternatives avoid this area by slightly more distance. Construction near the eucalyptus grove would need to accommodate a no-disturbance buffer during the nesting season. Some degree of compensation for loss of Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat would be common to all three corridors. 5.3 South Segment From San Luis Substation, the project would follow the proposed corridor, the Los Banos to Dos Amigos alternative, or the Billy Wright Road alternative. The transmission line in this segment would be 230 kV, which would require construction of 7 to 10 tower structures per mile. These corridors are shown on Figure 2-6e and can be seen in more detail on Figure 3, maps 41 through 54. Acreages are shown in Table 4 and corridor lengths are provided in Table 5. 5.3.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants The proposed corridor has slightly more non-native grassland habitat than the San Luis to Dos Amigos alternative and much less than the Billy Wright Road alternative. The freshwater marsh and vernal pool habitat is the same for all three corridors, whereas the San Luis to Dos Amigos alternative has more seasonal wetlands. The proposed corridor and San Luis to Dos Amigos alternative are equal in length, whereas the Billy Wright Road alternative is longer. The San Luis to Dos Amigos alternative has the least amount of non-native grassland habitat, is equal in length to the proposed corridor, and shorter than the Billy Wright Road alternative. Since the proposed alternative has the least amount of non-native grassland area it has a lower probability of adversely affecting any potential special-status plants. Therefore this alternative has the least likelihood to have adverse impacts to sensitive plant and wetland resources. Northern claypan vernal pool habitat is the same for all three corridors. There were no mapped seasonal wetlands for the Billy Wright Road alternative and the Los Banos to Dos Amigos alternative has the most mapped seasonal wetland habitat. Given that the seasonal wetland areas are small in size and in total acreage, it is likely that the project would be able to avoid any impacts to this wetland type. The Billy Wright Road alternative has 85 acres (35 hectares) more grassland than the proposed corridor and 73.65 acres (29.8 hectares) more than the Los Banos to Dos Amigos alternative. It is also 1.5 miles (2.5 kilometers) longer than these two corridors. In addition, this is the only one of the three corridors to have mapped wildflower fields, which are known to support at least 3 special-status plant species. These three factors combine to make it the most likely corridor to support, and therefore impact, specialstatus plants. 5.3.2 Special-status Wildlife The Billy Wright Road alternative covers roughly 50 acres (20 hectares) more area than the either the Los Banos to Dos Amigos alternative or the proposed corridor, which are roughly the same size. It also contains the highest proportion of upland habitat because, unlike the other two corridors, it contains no agricultural land; both the proposed and Los Banos to Dos Amigos alternative corridors have more land in agriculture and less upland. Each contains roughly equivalent amounts of freshwater marsh, seasonal wetland, pond, and drainage/irrigation canal habitats. The Billy Wright Road alternative corridor contains ~1.15 acres (0.5 hectares) of riparian forest associated with Los Banos Creek. The uplands in this segment have varying degrees of suitability for blunt-nosed leopard lizard (Figure 6). As with the previous segment, the corridor that minimizes impacts to upland habitats is of benefit for minimizing temporary and permanent loss of habitat, obtaining an incidental take permit from USFWS, complying with CDFW prohibitions on take, minimizing the cost of compensatory mitigation, minimizing cumulative impacts, and minimizing impacts to San Joaquin kit fox and California tiger salamander, as well as to giant and short-nosed kangaroo rats if they are present. Both the proposed and Los Banos to Dos Amigos corridors, which are each18 miles (29 kilometers) long and roughly 86–88 percent upland, affect less upland than the Billy Wright Road alternative, which is 19.5 miles (31 kilometers) long and nearly 95 percent upland. Those additional1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) would result in construction of as many as 8 additional 230-kV towers in an area of relatively higher potential for blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Either the proposed corridor or the Los Banos to Dos Amigos alternative would be preferred to the Billy Wright Road alternative from that perspective. The Billy Wright Road alternative crosses approximately 1.15 acres of riparian forest, but this is associated with the upper reaches of Los Banos Reservoir, which would likely be spanned. 5.4 San Luis Segment (70-kV) A single-circuit 70-kV corridor would link San Luis Substation back to O’Neill Substation through either the proposed corridor, which would run east of O’Neill Forebay, or the West of O’Neill Forebay alternative corridor. A 70-kV line would require construction of 15 to 30 tower structures per mile. These corridors are shown on Figure 2-6d and can be seen in more detail on Figure 3, maps 34 through 41. Acreages are shown in Table 4 and corridor lengths are provided in Table 5. 5.4.1 Sensitive Habitats and Special-status Plants The proposed corridor has less non-native grassland, seasonal wetland, and northern claypan vernal pool habitat, but more Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitat than the West of O’Neill Forebay alternative.. The West of O’Neill Forebay alternative has more non-native grassland habitat and has mapped native perennial grassland habitat in addition to seasonal wetlands and more vernal pool habitat than the proposed corridor. The two corridors are the same length with the same number of towers. The proposed corridor overall is less likely to impact specialstatus plants and special-status vegetation communities, primarily due to having less non-native grassland habitat, which is the type that will be most impacted by development and also likely to support specialstatus plant species. The Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitats could presumably be spanned and avoided. 5.4.2 Special-status Wildlife The West of O’Neill Forebay alternative corridor in this segment covers nearly 14acres (5.6 hectares) more total area and contains 57.4 acres (23.2 hectares) more upland than the proposed corridor. Constructing 15 to 30 more towers per mile in this segment substantially increases the impact of this line in both corridors, but the impact to upland habitat is greater in the West of O’Neill Forebay alternative corridor. Given that uplands support blunt-nosed leopard lizard, as well as San Joaquin kit fox, burrowing owl, and California tiger salamander, among others, and impacts will require compensatory mitigation, the proposed corridor would cause less impact to sensitive species. The proposed corridor contains approximately 16 acres (6.4 hectares) of riparian forest and freshwater marsh combined, concentrated in a small area south of the O’Neill Substation, in which construction of 15 to 30 towers per mile could result in significant impacts to these regulated and sensitive habitats. The West of O’Neill Forebay alternative contains no riparian forest and less than 2 acres (0.8 hectare) of freshwater marsh. However, permitting and impact considerations for wetlands and riparian for the proposed corridor may be less problematic than those for the West of O’Neill Forebay alternative for this 70-kV line. The proposed corridor contains less than 1 acre (0.4 hectare) of impoundment, pond, seasonal wetland, and other waters. The West of O’Neill Forebay alternative corridor contains 3.16 acres (1.3 hectares) of these features. With construction of an equal number of towers for each corridor, the difference between 1 acre and 3.16 acres is not likely to be significant in terms of permitting and impacts, especially for features that occur in relatively small patches. 6. Discusion and Conclusions 6.1 Sensitive and Regulated Habitats and Special-status Plants In general, the project would likely be able to avoid effects to wetlands and waters of the U.S. This would be preferred, and is typically required, by federal and state agencies that regulate these habitats. The Central Segment and the Billy Wright Road Alternative in the South Segment have wildflower fields that support special-status plants, and these areas may not be avoidable. The largest area of wildflower fields is within the Patterson Pass Road alternative corridor. Overall the corridors that have the most non-native grassland and/or wildflower fields are the corridors that have the greatest potential to impact special-status plants and/or special-status grassland communities. All of the other special-status or sensitive habitats could most likely be avoided. 6.2 Special-status Wildlife The dominant habitat type in the project area is uplands in the form of native and non-native grassland, which includes intermittent and ephemeral creeks because they all support upland plant species. Uplands also include coyote brush scrub and wildflower fields wherever they occur. Most special-status species in the region depend to some degree on uplands like those found in the project area, including blunt-nosed leopard lizard, California red-legged frog, California tiger salamander, western pond turtle, burrowing owl, Swainson’s hawk, golden eagle, American badger, and San Joaquin kit fox. The project would affect habitat for all of these species, and could affect habitat for others such as Alameda whipsnake, San Joaquin whipsnake, coast horned lizard, loggerhead shrike, northern harrier, white-tailed kite, and giant kangaroo rat. Equally important to wildlife but far less common in the project area are impoundments and ponds, riparian forest and scrub, freshwater marsh, seasonal wetlands, and vernal pools. With the exception of the proposed corridor in the San Luis Segment, these habitats occur in such relative isolation from each other that they could presumably be avoided. The corridor that adversely affects the least upland habitat and avoids the most aquatic and wetland habitat is the corridor that would require the least compensatory mitigation and would be easiest to justify to permitting agencies such as USACE, RWQCB, USFWS, and CDFW. 7. Literature Cited, References, and Persons Contacted 7.1 Literature Cited and References Ahlborn, G. 1988. American badger (Taxidea taxus) in California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System, California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/whdab/cwhr/A043.html. Alvarez, JA, MA Shea, and AC Murphy. 2005. A compilation of observation of Alameda whipsnakes outside of typical habitat. Trans Western Sect Wildlife Soc 41: 21-25. Alvarez, JA, MA Shea, JT Wilcox, ML Allaback, SM Foster, GE Padgett-Flohr, and JL Haire. 2013. Sympatry in California tiger salamander and California red-legged frog breeding habitat within their overlapping range. California Fish and Game 99(1): 42-48. Alvarez, JA. 2004. Overwintering California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense) larvae. Herpetological Review 35:344. Baldwin, BG, DH Goldman, DJ Keil, R Patterson, TJ Rosatti, and DH Wilken, editors. 2012. The Jepson manual: vascular plants of California, second edition. University of California Press, Berkeley. Barry, S. 2005. Special-status amphibians and reptiles of northern California. UC Davis Extension, Davis, CA. _____. 1999. A study of the California red-legged frog (Rana aurora draytonii) of Butte County, California. Prepared by Par Environmental Services, Inc, Sacramento, CA. Barry, SJ and HB Shaffer. 1994. The status of the California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense) at Lagunita: a 50-year update. J. of Herpetology 28:159-164. Bean, WT, LR Prugh, R Stafford, HS Buttefield, M Westphal, and JS Brashares. 2014a. Species distribution models of an endangered rodent offer conflicting measures of habitat quality at multiple scales. J. Applied Ecology 51: 1116-1125. Bean, WT, R Stafford, HS Butterfield, and JS Brashares. 2014b. A multi-scale distribution model for nonequilibrium populations suggests resource limitation in an endangered rodent. PloS ONE 9(9): e106638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106638 Beedy, EC and WJ Hamilton, III. 1999. Tricolored blackbird (Agelaius tricolor), The Birds of North America Online (A. Poole, Ed.). Ithaca: Cornell Lab of Ornithology. Retrieved from the Birds of North America Online. Available at: http://bna.birds.cornell.edu/bna/species/423. Bobzein, S and JE DiDonato. 2007. The status of the California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense), California red-legged frog (Rana draytonii), foothill yellow-legged frog (Rana boylii), and other aquatic herpetofauna in the East Bay Regional Park District, California. East Bay Regional Park District, Oakland, CA. 87 pp. Bolster, BC. 2005. Lasiurus blossevillii, western red bat. Species account prepared for Western Bat Working Group. Available at: http://www.wbwg.org/speciesinfo/species_accounts/species_ accounts.html. Buehler, DA, JD Fraser, and JD Chase. 1987. Bald eagle movements, distribution, and abundance on the northern Chesapeake Bay. Final report. Virginia Polytechnic Inst. and 18 State Univ., Blacksburg. Not seen; cited in YHJPA, 2013. Buehler, DA. 2000. Bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus). The Birds of North America Online (A. Poole, ed). Ithaca: Cornell Lab of Ornithology; Retrieved from the Birds of North 15 America Online. Available at: http://bna.birds.cornell.edu/bna/species/506. doi:bna.506. Not seen; cited in YHJPA, 2013. Bulger, J. 1999. Terrestrial activity and conservation of California red-legged frogs (Rana aurora draytonii) in forested habitats of Santa Cruz County, California. Prepared for Land Trust of Santa Cruz County, Santa Cruz, CA. 37 pp. Butte County Association of Governments. 2012. Butte Regional Conservation Plan Preliminary Public Draft, Appendix A. Available at: http://www.buttehcp.com/index.html. Calflora. 2014. The Calflora Database: Information on California plants for education, research and conservation, based on data contributed by dozens of public and private institutions and individuals, including the Consortium of Calif. Herbaria. The Calflora Database, Berkeley, CA. Available at: http://www.calflora.org/. California Herps. 2014. A guide to the reptiles and amphibians of California. Available at: http://www. californiaherps.com/snakes/pages/c.f.ruddocki.html. Accessed June 13, 2014. California Invasive Plant Council. 2006. California Invasive Plant Inventory. Cal-IPC Publication 2006-02. Berkeley, CA. CDFG (California Department of Fish and Game). 2012. Staff report on burrowing owl mitigation. California Department of Fish and Game [now California Department of Fish and Wildlife], Sacramento, CA. _____. 2009. Protocols for surveying and evaluating impacts to special-status native plant populations and natural communities. California Natural Resources Agency, Department of Fish and Game. November 24. _____. 2004. Approved survey methodology for the blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Fresno, CA. May. 5 pp. _____. 2003. List of natural communities recognized by the California Natural Diversity Database. California Department of Fish and Game, Wildlife Habitat Analysis Branch, http://www.dfg.ca. gov/biogeodata/vegcamp/pdfs/natcomlist.pdf. _____. 1995. Staff report on burrowing owl mitigation. Prepared by California Department of Fish and Game. _____. 1994. Staff report regarding mitigation for impacts to Swainson’s hawks (Buteo swainsoni) in the Central Valley of California. Sacramento, CA. CDFW (California Department of Fish and Wildlife). 2015a. California Natural Diversity Database record search of 43 quads comprising a nine-quad search area of all affected quads for the San Luis Transmission Project. Accessed February 2015. _____. 2015b. Evaluation of the petition from the Center for Biological Diversity to list tricolored blackbird (Agelaius tricolor) as endangered under the California Endangered Species Act. Prepared for Fish and Game Commission by California Department of Fish and Wildlife, March. _____. 2014a. Online California Wildlife Habitat Relationships Program. Available at: http://www.dfg. ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/cawildlife.aspx. Accessed August–September 2013. _____. 2014b. Letter from CDFW Regional Manager Jeffrey Single Western Document Manager Don Lash responding to the notice of preparation for a joint environmental impact statement/environmental impact report, San Luis Transmission Project, January 24. _____. 2014c. State and federally listed endangered, threatened, and rare plants of California. California Department of Fish and Game, Resource Management and Planning Division. Biogeographic Data Branch, July 2011. Available at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cnddb/pdfs/TEPlants.pdf. _____. 2013. Evaluation of the petition from the Center for Biological Diversity to li st Townsend’s big-eared bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) as threatened or endangered under the California Endangered Species Act. Report to Fish and Game Commission from California Department of Fish and Wildlife Service. March. Center for Biological Diversity. 2012. A petition to list all populations of the Townsend’s big-eared bat, Corynorhinus townsendii townsendii and Corynorhinus townsendii pallescens, as threatened or endangered under the California Endangered Species Act. Petition to the California Fish and Game Commission, October 18. City of Oakley. 2005. East Cypress Corridor specific plan—Draft EIR, volume I. Prepared by McLarand, Vasquez, Emsiek and Partners and Phil Martin & Associates. 631 pp. City of Roseville. 2011. Open space preserve overarching management plan. Prepared by ECORP Consulting, Inc. Available at: http://www.roseville.ca.us/lp/supersize/OSPOMP_8.3.2011_Final. pdf. City of Sacramento and Sacramento Local Agency Formation Commission. 2006. Greenbriar development project, Sacramento California, draft environmental impact report, volume I. Prepared by EDAW [now AECOM], Sacramento. 558 pp. City of Sacramento. 2003. Final Natomas Basin Habitat Conservation Plan. Prepared by City of Sacramento, Sutter County, and Natomas Basin Conservancy for U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and Game. Available at: http://www.natomasbasin.org. CNPS (California Native Plant Society). 2014. Inventory of Rare and Endangered Plants (version 8-01a). California Native Plant Society. Sacramento, CA. Available at: http://www.rareplants.cnps.org/ simple.html. Constable, JL, BL Cypher, SE Phillips, and PA Kelly. 2009. Conservation of San Joaquin kit foxes in western Merced County, California. Prepared for Bureau of Reclamation, Fresno. Available at: http://esrp. csustan.edu/publications/. Cowardin, LM, V Carter, FC Golet, and ET LaRoe. 1979. Classification of wetlands and deepwater habitats of the United States. (FWS/OBS-79/31.) U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC. Cypher, B, CVH Job, and S Phillips. 2012. Conservation strategies for San Joaquin kit foxes in urban environments. Prepared for U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Fresno. Available at: http://esrp. csustan.edu/publications/. Cypher, BL, PA Kelly, DF Williams, HO Clark, Jr, AD Brown, and SE Phillips. 2005. Foxes in farmland: recovery of the endangered San Joaquin kit fox on private lands in California. Prepared for National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, project no 2000-0129-012, by CSU Stanislaus, Fresno. Available at: http://esrp.csustan.edu/publications/. Cypher, BL, SE Phillips, and PA Kelly. 2007. Habitat suitability and potential corridors for San Joaquin kit fox in the San Luis Unit, Fresno, Kings and Merced counties, California. Prepared for U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Fresno, and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento. Available at: http://esrp. csustan.edu/publications/. Davis, JN and CA Niemela. 2008. Northern harrier (Circus cyaneus) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisn and Game, Sacramento. DeLong, JP. 2004. Effects of management practices on grassland birds: golden eagle. Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center, Jamestown, ND. 22 pp. Dettling, M, C Howell, and N Seavy. 2012. Least Bell’s vireo monitoring and threat assessment at the San Joaquin River National Wildlife Refuge 2007-2009. Prepared for U.S. Bureau of Reclamation by PRBO Conservation Science, Petaluma, CA. Contribution #1854. Eriksen, CH and D Belk. 1999. Fairy shrimps of California’s puddles, pools and playas. Mad River Press, Eureka, California. ESRP (Endangered Species Recovery Program). 2014. Species profiles provided by California State University–Stanislaus. Available at: http://esrp.csustan.edu/speciesprofiles/. Accessed June 11 and September 11, 2014. Estep, JA. 1989. Biology, movements, and habitat relationships of the Swainson’s hawk in the Central Valley of California, 1986-87. California Fish and Game, Nongame Bird and Mammal Section Report. 52 pp. Fisher, RN and HB Shaffer. 1996. The decline of amphibians in California’s Great Central Valley. Conservation Biology 10: 1387-1397. Ford, LD, PA Van Hoorn, DR Rao, NJ Scott, PC Trenham, and JW Bartolome. 2013. Managing Rangelands to Benefit California Red-legged Frogs and California Tiger Salamanders. Livermore, California: Alameda County Resource Conservation District. Germano, D and D Williams. 2005. Populations ecology of blunt-nosed leopard lizards in high elevation foothill habitat. Journ. of Herpetology 39: 1-18. _____. 1992. Recovering blunt-nosed leopard lizards: past efforts, present knowledge, and future opportunities. Trans. Western Section of the Wildl. Society 28: 38-47. Germano, DJ, DF Williams, and P Kelly. 2004. Long-term fluctuation of a population of blunt-nosed leopard lizards in relation to precipitation and herbaceous plant biomass. Presented at the San Joaquin Natural Communities Conference, May 25, 2004, Bakersfield, California. Germano, DJ, GB Rathbun, and LR Saslaw. 2001. Managing exotic grasses and conserving declining species. Wildlife Society Bulletin 29:551-559. Germano, DJ, GB Rathbun, E Cypher, LR Saslaw, and S Fitton. 2005. Effects of livestock grazing on a community of species at risk of extinction in the San Joaquin Valley, California. 2005 Annual Report. The Lokern Grazing Study Project. Bureau of Land Management, Bakersfield, California. Available at: http://www.csub.edu/~dgermano/GrazingWebSite.htm and http://www.esrp. csustan.edu. Accessed March 19, 2014. Gervais, JA, DK Rosenberg, and LA Comrack. 2008. Burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisn and Game, Sacramento. Gorman J. 1957. Recent collections of the California limbless lizard, Anniella pulchra. Copeia 1957:148- 150. Not seen; cited in City of Oakley, 2005. Grinnell, J, J Dixon, and J Linsdale. 1937. Fur-bearing mammals of California. 2 Vols. University of California Press, Berkeley. 777 pp. Not seen; cited in Constable et al., 2009. Grinnell, J. and AH Miller. 1944. The distribution of birds of California. Artemisia Press, Lee Vining, CA. 617 pp. Halstead, BJ, GD Wylie, and ML Cassaza. 2010. Habitat suitability and conservation of the giant gartersnake (Thamnophis gigas) in the Sacramento Valley of California. Copeia 4: 591-599. Halstead, BJ, P Valcarcel, GD Wylie, PS Coates, and ML Cassaza. 2011. Microhabitat selection of the giant gartersnake. Abstract for: The Wildlife Society 18th Annual Conference Waikolao, HI. November 5–10. Hammerson, G. 1989. Effects of weather and feeding on body temperature and activity in the snake Masticophis flagellum. J. Thermal Biol., 14(4): 219-224. Hansen, E. 2008. Implementation of Priority 1, Priority 2, and Priority 3 recovery tasks for giant garter snake (Thamnophis gigas)—continuing surveys in Merced County, California, with an expansion into northern Fresno County. Prepared by Eric C Hansen Consulting Environmental Biologist for U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento. 108 pp. Hansen, RW, RR Montanucci, and KH Switak. 1994. Blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Life on the Edge. Volume 1: Wildlife 1:272-273. Haug, EA, BA Millsap, and MS Martell. 1993. Burrowing owl (Speotyto cunicularia). in A. Poole and F. Gill, eds. The birds of North America, No. 61. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA; The American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, DC. Not seen; cited in Klute et al., 2003. Helm, B and JE Vollmar. 2002. Chapter 4: Vernal Pool Large Branchiopods. Pages 151-190 in JE Vollmar (ed), Wildlife and rare plant ecology of eastern Merced County’s vernal pool grasslands. Vollmar Consulting, Berkeley, CA. Helm, B. 1998. Biogeography of eight large branchiopods endemic to California. Pages 124-139 in C Witham, ET Bauder, D Belk, WR Ferren, Jr., and R Ornduff, eds. Ecology, conservation, and management of vernal pool ecosystems-Proceedings from a 1996 Conference. California Native Plant Society, Sacramento, California. Not seen; cited in Helm and Vollmar, 2002, and USFWS, 2007. Herbold, B, AD Jassby, and PB Moyle. 1992. Status and trends report on aquatic resources in the San Francisco Estuary. San Francisco Estuary Project. Prepared under cooperative agreement #CE009519-01-1 with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, San Francisco, California. Not seen; cited in Leidy, 2007. Holland, RF. 1986. Preliminary descriptions of the terrestrial natural communities of California. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, California 156 pp. Humple, D. 2008. Loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus) (mainland populations) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisn and Game, Sacramento. Hunt, LE. 2008. Anniella pulchra Gray, California legless lizard, pp. 850.1-850.14, in A. Price (ed.). Catalogue of Amer. Amphibians and Reptiles. Soc. Study Amphib. and Reptiles, Lawrence, KS. _____. 1998. Geostatistical modeling of species distributions: Implications for ecological and biogeographical studies, pp. 427-438 in A. Soares et al. (eds.). Geostatistics for Environmental Applications. Kluwer Academic Publ., London. 504 pp. Hunt, WG, RE Jackman, TL Hunt, DE Driscoll, and L Culp. 1998. A population study of golden eagles in the Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area: population trend analysis 1997. Report to National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Predatory Bird Research Group, University of California, Santa Cruz. Hunting, K and L Edson. 2008. Mountain plover (Charadrius montanus) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisj and Game, Sacramento. Hunting, K, S Fitton, and L Edson. 2001. Distribution and habitat associations of the mountain plover (Charadrius montanus) in California. Trans. W. Section Wildl. Soc. 37:37–42. Hunting, K. 2008. Long-eared owl (Asio otus) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisj and Game, Sacramento. IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources). 2014. IUCN red list of threatened species, species profile. Available at: http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/full/6678/0. Accessed June 11, 2014. Jaramillo, A. 2008. Yellow-headed blackbird (Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisn and Game, Sacramento. Jennings, MR and MP Hayes. 1994. Amphibian and reptile species of special concern in California. California Department of Fish and Game, Inland Fisheries Division, Rancho Cordova, CA. 255 pp. Jones & Stokes. 2006. Pacific Gas & Electric Company Final San Joaquin Valley operation and maintenance habitat conservation plan. December. Sacramento, CA. Available at: http://www.fws.gov/ecos/ ajax/docs/plan_documents/thcp/thcp_838.pdf. Klute, DS, LW Ayers, MT Green, WH Howe, SL Jones, JA Shaffer, SR Sheffield, and TS Zimmerman. 2003. Status assessment and conservation plan for the western burrowing owl in the United States. U.S. Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Biological Technical Publication FWS/BTPR6001-2003, Washington, DC. Koopman, ME, BL Cypher, and DR McCullough. 2001. Factors influencing space and prey use by San Joaquin kit foxes. Trans. West. Soc. Wildlife Society 37: 77-83. Kuhnz, LA, RK Burton, PN Slattery, and JM Oakden. 2005. Microhabitats and population densities of California legless lizards, with comments on effectiveness of various techniques for estimating numbers of fossorial reptiles. Journal of Herpetology 39(3): 395–402. Laabs, D, SG Orloff, and ML Allaback. 2002. Pond and stream-breeding amphibians. Pages 191-229 in JE Vollmar, ed. Wildlife and rare plant ecology of eastern Merced County’s vernal pool grasslands. Vollmar Consulting, Berkeley, CA. Laughrin, L. 1970. San Joaquin kit fox: its distribution and abundance. California Department of Fish and Game, Wildlife Management Branch Administrative Report No. 70-2. Not seen; cited in Constable et al., 2009. Leidy, RA. 2007. Ecology, assemblage structure, distribution, and status of fishes in streams tributary to the San Francisco Estuary, California. Contribution number 530, San Francisco Estuary Institute, San Francisco. Lindzey, FG. 1978. Movement patterns of badgers in northwestern Utah. Journal of Wildlife Management 42(2): 418–422. Loredo, I, and D Van Vuren. 1996. Reproductive ecology of a population of the California tiger salamander. Copeia 1996:895-901. Loredo, I, D Van Vuren, and ML Morrison. 1996. Habitat use and migration of the California tiger salamander. Journal of Herpetology 30:282-285. MacWhirter, RB and KL Bildstein. 1996. Northern harrier (Circus cyaneus). The Birds of North America Online (A. Poole, ed.). Ithaca: Cornell Lab of Ornithology. Retrieved from the Birds of North America Online. Available at: http://bna.birds.cornell.edu/bna/species/210NOT. Not seen; cited in City of Roseville, 2011. Montanucci, RR. 1970. Analysis of hybridization between Crotaphytus wislizenii and Crotaphytus silus (Sauria: Iguanidae) in California. Copeia 1970 (1): 104-123. Morey, S. 2000. Coast horned lizard (Phrynosoma coronatum) in California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System, California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/whdab/cwhr/A043.html. NOAA Fisheries. 2014. Species boundaries, salmon and steelhead, Central Valley steelhead. Available at: http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/maps_data/species_population_boundaries.html. Accessed June 15, 2014. NWI (National Wetlands Inventory). 2014. National wetlands inventory. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D.C. Available at: http://www.fws.gov/nwi/. Papenfuss, T and J Parham. 2013. Four new species of California legless lizards (Anniella). Breviora 536: 1-17. Petranka, J.W. 1998. Salamanders of the United States and Canada. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington DC, pp 47-50. Not seen; cited in Laabs et al., 2002. Pierson, ED and WE Rainey. 2002. Bats. Pages 385-400 in JE Vollmar, ed. Wildlife and rare plant ecology of eastern Merced County’s vernal pool grasslands. Vollmar Consulting, Berkeley, CA. Pierson, ED, WE Rainey, and C Corben. 2006. Distribution and status of western red bats (Lasiurus blossevillii) in California. Calif. Dept. Fish and Game, Habitat Conservation Planning Branch, Species Conservation and Recovery Program Report 2006-04, Sacramento, CA. 45 pp. Polite, C and J Pratt. 1999. Bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) in California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System, California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/whdab/cwhr/A043.html. Polite, C. 2006. Swainson’s hawk (Buteo swainsoni). California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System, California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/whdab/cwhr/A043.html. Rathbun, GB, NJ Scott, and TG Murphey. 1997. Rana aurora draytonii behavior. Herpetological Review 28(2):85-86. Roberson, D. 2014. Checking out…song sparrows. A web page showing ranges of song sparrow subspecies in California. Available at: http://creagrus.home.montereybay.com/MTYbirdsSOSP.html. _____. 2008. Short-eared owl (Asio flammeus) in Shuford, WD and T Gardali (eds). California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisj and Game, Sacramento. Sargeant, AB and DW Warner. 1972. Movements and denning habits of a badger. Journal of Mammalogy 53 (1): 207–210. Sawyer, JO, T Keeler-Wolf, and JM Evens. 2009. A manual of California vegetation, 2nd ed., CA Native Plant Society and CA Dept. Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA. 1300 pp. Searcy, CA and HB Shaffer. 2008. Calculating biologically accurate mitigation credits: insights from the California tiger salamander. Conserv. Biol. 22(4): 997-1005. Searcy, CA, E Gabbai-Saldate, and HB Shaffer. 2013. Microhabitat use and migration distance of an endangered grassland amphibian. Biological Conservation 158: 80-87. Semlitsch, RD. and JR Brodie. 2003. Biological criteria for buffer zones around wetlands and riparian habitats for amphibians and reptiles. Conservation Biology 17(5):1219-1228. Shaffer, HB, GB Pauly, JC Oliver and PC Trenham. 2004. The molecular phylogenetics of endangerment: cryptic variation and historical phylogeography of the California tiger salamander, Ambystoma californiense. Molecular Ecology 13: 3033-3049. Shuford, WD and T Gardali. 2008. California bird species of special concern: A ranked assessment of species, subspecies, and distinct populations of birds of immediate conservation concern in California. Studies of Western Birds 1. Western Field Ornithologists, Camarillo, California, and California Department of Fisn and Game, Sacramento. SJCOG (San Joaquin Council of Governments). 2011. Preserve management plan for the Tracy 580 Business Park preserve. Prepared for San Joaquin Council of Governments by ICF International, Sacramento, CA. 60 pp. _____. 2000. San Joaquin County multi-species habitat conservation and open space plan. Available at: http://www.sjcog.org/DocumentCenter/View/5. Stebbins, RC. 2003. A Field Guide to Western Reptiles and Amphibians. Third Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, MA. 533 pp. Swaim, KE. 1994. Aspects of the Ecology of the Alameda Whipsnake Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus. Master's Thesis, California State University, Hayward, December. TBWG (Tricolored Blackbird Working Group). 2007. Conservation plan for the tricolored blackbird (Agelaius tricolor). Susan Kester (ed.). Sustainable Conservation. San Francisco, CA. Tennant, EN, DJ Germano, and BL Cypher. 2013. Translocating endangered kangaroo rats in the San Joaquin Valley of California: recommendations for future efforts. California Fish and Game 99(2): 90.103. Trenham, PC and HB Shaffer. 2005. Amphibian upland habitat use and its consequences for population viability. Ecological Applications 15:158-1168. Trenham, PC, HB Shaffer, WD Koenig, and MR Stromberg. 2000. Life history and demographic variation in the California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense). Copeia 2000:365-377. Trenham, PC, WD Koenig, and HB Shaffer. 2001. Spatially autocorrelated demography and interpond dispersal in the California tiger salamander, Ambystoma californiense. Ecology 82: 3519-3530. Trenham, PC. 2001. Terrestrial habitat use by adult California tiger salamanders. Journal of Herpetology 35:343-346. USACE (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers). 2014. Midwinter bald eagle count. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers with U.S. Geological Survey. Available at: http://ocid.nacse.org/nbii/eagles/. Accessed June 24, 2014. USFWS (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). 2014. Introduction of riparian brush rabbit to San Joaquin River National Wildlife Refuge, Stanislaus County. http://www.fws.gov/Refuge/San_Joaquin_River/ wildlife_and_habitat/index.html. _____. 2013. California condor (Gymnogyps californianus) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento. 62 pp. _____. 2012a. Giant garter snake (Thamnophis gigas) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento. 62 pp. _____. 2012b. Formal Consultation for the Tracy-Livermore Optical Ground Wire Project, Alameda County, California. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento. 40 pp. _____. 2012c. Programmatic biological opinion for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) permitted projects utilizing the East Alameda County Conservation Strategy that may affect federally listed species in East Alameda County, California (Corps File Number 2011-00230S). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento, CA. 109 pp. _____. 2011a. Alameda whipsnake (Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento, CA. _____. 2011b. Withdrawal of the proposed rule to list the mountain plover as threatened. Federal Register 76(92): 27756-27799. _____. 2011c. Standardized recommendations for protection of the endangered San Joaquin kit fox prior to or during ground disturbance. Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office. _____. 2010a. 12-month finding on a petition to reclassify the Delta smelt from threatened to endangered throughout its range. Federal Register 75(66): 17667-17680. _____. 2010b. Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (Gambelia sila) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento, CA. February. 79 pp. _____. 2010c. San Joaquin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento. _____. 2007. Conservancy fairy shrimp (Branchinecta conservatio) 5-year review: Summary and evaluation. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento, CA. 32 pp. _____. 2006. Giant garter snake (Thamnophis gigas) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento, CA. _____. 2005a. Recovery plan for vernal pool ecosystems of California and southern Oregon. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Portland, OR. xxvi + 606 pp. _____. 2005b. Revised guidance on site assessments and field surveys for the California red-legged frog. Sacramento, CA. Available at: http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es/Survey-Protocols- Guidelines/es_survey.htm. _____. 2003. Interim guidance on site assessment and field surveys for detrmining presence or a negative finding of the California tiger salamander. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento, CA. _____. 2002. Recovery plan for the California red-legged frog (Rana aurora draytonii). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Portland, OR. viii + 173 pp. _____. 1999. Conservation guidelines for the valley elderberry longhorn beetle. Sacramento, CA. Dated July 9. _____. 1998a. Draft recovery plan for the least Bell’s vireo. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Portland, OR. 139 pp. _____. 1998b. Recovery plan for upland species of the San Joaquin Valley, California. Region 1, Portland, OR. 319 pp. _____. 1996. California condor recovery plan. Third revision. Portland, OR. 62 pp. _____. 1994. Critical habitat determination for the Delta smelt. Federal Register 59(242): 65256-65279. _____. 1986. Recovery plan for the Pacific bald eagle. Portland, OR. Vollmar, JE, RF Holland, CW Witham, and JH Schweitzer. 2013. Predictive habitat analysis and mapping of four rare vernal pool species in Merced, Sacramento and Placer counties, Great Valley, California, USA. Vollmar Natural Lands Consulting, Berkeley, California. Report prepared for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and Bureau of Reclamation CVPIA Habitat Restoration Program under Grant Agreement No. 80270-A-G509 with USFWS. Vyverberg, KA. 2010. A review of stream processes and forms in dryland watersheds, California Department of Fish and Game. Sacramento, CA. 32 pp. Warrick, GD, HO Clark, Jr., PA Kelly, DF Williams, and BL Cypher. 2007. Use of agricultural lands by San Joaquin kit foxes. Western North American Naturalist 67:270-277. Not seen; cited in Constable et al., 2009. Warrick, GD, TK Kato, and BR Rose. 1998. Microhabitat use and home range characteristics of bluntnosed leopard lizards. Journal of Herpetology. 32(2): 183-191. WBWG (Western Bat Working Group). 2014. Species accounts of bats found in western North America and northern Mexico. Available at: http://www.wbwg.org/speciesinfo/species_accounts/ species_accounts.html. Williams, DF, MK Davis, and LP Hamilton. 1995. Distribution, population size, and habitat features of giant kangaroo rats in the northern segment of their geographic range. California Department of Fish and Game, Bird and Mammal Conservation Program rep. 95-01. 38 pp. Woodbridge, B. 1991. Habitat selection by nesting Swainson’s hawks: a hierarchical approach. MS Thesis, Oregon State University. 80 pp. YHJPA (Yolo Habitat/Natural Community Conservation Plan Joint Powers Agency). 2013. Yolo Natural Heritage Program. First administrative draft. Available at: http://www.yoloconservationplan.org/ maps-and-documents.html. Zeiner, DC, WF Laudenslayer, Jr., KE Mayer, and M White. 1990. California's wildlife: Volume II Birds. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA. 732 pp. Zuidema, PA, Sayer, JA, and Dijkman, W. 1997. Forest fragmentation and biodiversity: The case for intermediate-sized conservation areas. Environmental Conservation 23: 290-297. 7.2 Persons Contacted Alvarez, Jeff. 2014–2015. Herpetologist, The Wildlife Project, Sacramento. Email and in-person communications with Anne Wallace. June 2014, March 2015. Barry, Sean J. Herpetologist, UC Davis, CA. Telephone communication with Anne Wallace 2000, June 2004, and July 2005, and presentation at a 2003 California tiger salamander workshop. Bean, W Tim. 2014. Assistant professor, Humboldt State University. Personal and email communications with Anne Wallace. June 10-11. Cypher, Brian. 2014. Associate director and research ecologist, California State University–Stanislaus, Endangered Species Recovery Program. Telephone communication with Anne Wallace. June 10. Hansen, Eric C. 2013. Giant garter snake expert, Consulting Environmental Biologist, Sacramento, CA. Telephone communication with Anne Wallace September 12, and email communications. September 13 and 17. Mizuno, Frances. 2015. Assistant Executive Director, San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Agency. Personal communication (conference call) with Anne Wallace and others, February 23. Swaim, K. 1999. Herpetologist, Swain Biological Consulting, Livermore, CA. Personal communication with Anne Wallace. November 11.  GIS Habitat Maps Biological Survey Report Figure 3  Figure 3, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 35 34 36 38 37 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 O'Neill Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy San Luis Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 3 6 Miles OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: DSW Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Map Page 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Figure 3, page 1, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 2 RWBL nesting Amph larvae 5 6 6 Pseudacris sierra A CORA nest B C D E See Page 3 Figure 3. Hydrol OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under he Freedom of Information U.S .C.552 ic Feature Habitat Type Freshwater marsh l Di ch Grain Existing Substation og Cana Pi t A ct (5 ) Biological Resources Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. t Photo poi t es n peline ream Orchard Pas Western review required before public release. Speci 1.25-m Occurrence ile buffer around Project Area derberry StNW/RI Wetliver and Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 t h ure Barren Grassland non-nati This cartographic product and GIS da ional ice standards. ta were prepared in accordance wit El polygon profess source Data is only as accurate as its primary ve-grade. should be used i ada or n Corridors ve accuracy. Drainage Proposed Project Corridor and are intended for Irrigation canal 0 750 1,500 of this product is Corridor Alternatives Other waters Fee pract and is spatially relati survey dat Ref It t not replace and p ace of a. er to met a for source This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE lanni and l No reproducti or copying W AP A analysis on t paon /DOE. ng llowed wi Source: houtWA PA SNR, Aspen EG, y. t the sole consent of ES R I l 7 7 Govern queduct educt 1 or Edmund G Brown Californ i a A D e l ta -M e n d o ta C a n a l Governor Edmund G Brown California A q u Kelso Rd Bruns Rd Byron Hwy Mountain House Rd lyn Rd 4Wd Road California Aqueduct Bikeway Mountain House Rd 1 5 1 A B C D HerdE 2 2 3 3 Tracy 4 RWBL nesting 4Figure 3, page 2, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 1 Old River Delta-Mendota Canal Kelso Rd Byron Hwy Mountain House Rd Herdlyn Rd 4Wd Road Mountain House Rd Patterson Park Rd Adam St 1 1 A B C D E 2 2 3 3 Tracy RWBL nesting 4 RWBL nesting Amph larvae 5 5 6 Pseudacris sierra E Legacy Dr CORA nest A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 3 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Existing Substation Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeFreshwater marsh Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Photo point Canal Ditch Grain Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Pipeline Orchard Species Occurrence Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Stream/River Pasture This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with NWI Wetland Barren professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary Elderberry polygon source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridors Grassland non-native place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Drainage Proposed Project Corridor This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Irrigation canal 0 750 1,500 Corridor Alternatives allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is Other waters Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 2 7 4 6 7 Figure 3, page 3, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 2 3 M o u n ta i n H o u s e C r ee k Delta-Mendota Canal TCBL RWBL nest ROPI nest CORA nest RWBL nesting Pseudacris sierra Pseudacris sierra W Grant Line Rd Midway Rd Mountain House Rd California Aqueduct Bikeway E Legacy Dr Patterson Park Rd 4Wd RoadDriveway Grant Line Rd Altamont Pass Rd Muela Dr Joel St Mascot Blvd Brett Ave Altamont Speedway Adam St Mulberry Ln Paul St Drew St 4Wd Road 4Wd Road 4Wd Road Driveway 580 205 580 205 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grain Barren Commercial Grassland non-native Great Valley riparian scrub Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek Drainage Irrigation canal Other waters Pond Freshwater marsh A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 4 Figure 3, page 4, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.4 4Wd 4Wd See Page 3 BUOW 2 SWHA Pa tte r s o n R u n Pa tte r s o n R u n Delta-Mendota Canal Delta-Mendota Canal BUOW BUOW LOSH BUOW BUOW pair RWBL nest ROPI nest RWBL nesting Pseudacris sierra W Grant Line Rd Midway Rd 4Wd RoadDriveway Muela Dr Altamont Speedway Mulberry Ln Road 580 205 Midway Rd Patterson Pass Rd County Hwy 2063 S Schulte Rd W Via Nicolo Rd Mountain House Pkwy W Schulte Rd Schulte Ct Road 580 580 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grain Barren Commercial Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek Other waters River Freshwater marsh Seasonal wetland A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 5 Figure 3, page 5, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.5 LOSSee Page 4 H BUOW Patterson Run BUOW BUOW BUOW pair CORA nest 4Wd Road Midway Rd Patterson Pass Rd County Hwy 2063 S Schulte Rd W Via Nicolo Rd Mountain House Pkwy W Schulte Rd S Corporate Ct Schulte Ct Midway Rd 4Wd Road 580 580 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Impoundment River Wildflower field Seasonal wetland A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 6 Figure 3, page 6, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.6 CORA nest Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Impoundment Wildflower field Seasonal wetland A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 5See Page 7 Figure 3, page 7, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.7 Elymus triticoides Delta-Mendota Canal GOEA Stick nest Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Great Valley riparian forest Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek River Freshwater marsh A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 6See Page 8 Figure 3, page 8, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 7 Corral Hollow Creek County Hwy J2 Exit 7 S Corral Hollow Rd County Hwy J2 1 2 3 1 A B C D E 580 GOEA 2 2 4 Elymus triticoides Stick nest GHOW GHOW CORA nest 3 4 5 CORA nest 5 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Great Valley riparian forest NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives River This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Freshwater marsh 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Seasonal wetland Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 8 See Page 9 6 Figure 3, page 9, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Hetch Hetc Hollow Rd See Page 8 C o rr al Ho llow C r ee k Delta-Mendota Canal G o v e r n o r Ed m u n d G B r o w n C a l i fo r n i a A q u e d u c t h y A q u e d u c t Exit 72 S Corral 1 1 A B C D E 2 2 CORA nest 3 3 CORA nest 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. See Page 11 See Page 10 May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Biological ease. 1.25-m Pi derberry pol Stream/River Intermitten creek Corr NW and Resources Western review required before public rel ile buffer around Project Area peline Ephemeral creek Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 El t h ygon idors I Wetl Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alterna i This cartographic product and GIS da ional ice standards. Dat a were prepared y as accurate as ld not lin accordance w its pri ace or be used t it profess source and pract a is onl mary is spatially relati survey data. Ref ve-grade. to met It shou repadata for source and accuracy. in place of er t ves 0 750 1,500 Fee This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for lanning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product i t pas llowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 9 Figure 3, page 10, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.10 See Page 9 Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Photo point 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 8 See Page 11 Figure 3, page 11, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct Lone Tree Creek 2 2 A B C D E 580 3 3 4 4 PKF PKF CORA nest 5 Stick nests PKF 5 Stick nests CORA nest 6 10+ species of nesting birds 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Intermittent creek NWI Wetland River professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Corridor Alternatives This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 11 See Page 10See Page 12 1 1 132 Figure 3, page 12, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Stick ne Hospital Cr eek Lone Tree Creek L o n e T r ee C r ee k 6 A B C D E 1 1 2 2 PKFPKF CORA nest PKF sts 3 Stick nests CORA nest 10+ species of nesting birds 4 4 5 5 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Ephemeral creek NWI Wetland Impoundment professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor River place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 12 See Page 11 See Page 13 3 6 Figure 3, page 13, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.13 Hospital Cr eek L o n e T r ee C r ee k H o s p i ta l C r e e k 1 1 A B C D E See Page 12 2 2 3 3 4 4 Stick nest 5 Stick nest 5 Nasella pulchra Stick nest 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Ephemeral creek NWI Wetland Impoundment professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor River place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI See Page 14 Figure 3, page 14, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Martin Cr eek Arkansas Cr eek 1 6 1 A B C D E See Page 13 2 2 Stick nest 3 Stick nest 3 Nasella pulchra Stick nest Stick nest 4 4 PKF's PKF's Stick nest PKF's 5 PKF's PKF's 5 PKF's 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River NWI Wetland professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Corridor Alternatives This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 14 See Page 15 6 Figure 3, page 15, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.15 P Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct M a r ti n C r ee k Delta-Mendota Ca n a l M a r ti n C r ee k A B C D E 1 1 See Page 14 2 2 KF's PKF's Stick nest PKF's 3 PKF's PKF's PKF's 4 3 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Intermittent creek NWI Wetland professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Corridor Alternatives This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 4 Figure 3, page 16, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.16 Edmund G Brow n C a l i fornia Aqueduct I n g r a m C r ee k Ingram Cr eek 1 5 1 A B C D E See Page 15 2 2 3 3 4 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Elderberry polygon Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Corridors Pipeline Proposed Project Corridor Stream/River Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Intermittent creek Corridor Alternatives NWI Wetland professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 4 5 Figure 3, page 17, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.17 Ingram Creek Ingram Creek 3 A B C D E 2 2 4 4 SWHA 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Species Occurrence Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Elderberry polygon Pipeline Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Corridors Stream/River Intermittent creek NWI Wetland professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 1 1 3 Figure 3, page 18, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.18 Delta-Mendota Canal 1 1 A B C D E 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552)Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 2 SWHA 3 4 5 6 7 C D E Figure 3. Species Occurrence Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Canal Ditch Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Biological Resources Elderberry polygon Pipeline Corridors Stream/River Intermittent creek Proposed Project Corridor NWI Wetland Corridor Alternatives 0 750 1,500 Feet Figure 3, page 19, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.19 Delta-Mendota Canal D e l Pu e r to C r e e k 1 1 A B C D E 2 2 3 3 5 4 5 4 5 5 2 WPT Bullfrogs abundant 2 WPT 6 Bullfrogs abundant California 6 toad larvae A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Orchard Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Barren Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Grassland non-native NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives River This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Freshwater marsh 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Seasonal wetland Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 7 7 Figure 3, page 20, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.20 Del Puerto Cr eek D e l Pu e r to C r e e k Del Puerto Canyon Rd Raines Rd Zacharias Rd Diablo Grande Pkwy 1 2 5 1 2 A B C D E 5 5 3 2 WPT 3 Bullfrogs abundant 2 WPT Bullfrogs abundant Californiatoad larvae 4 2 GOEA 6 6 6 adult SWHA A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 22 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeSeasonal wetland Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grain Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Orchard Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Barren NWI Wetland Grassland non-native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Impoundment This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for River 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Freshwater marsh Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI See Page 18 7 4 5 7 Figure 3, page 21, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.21 2 WPT Del Puerto Canyon Rd Diablo Grande Pkwy 4 Bullfro s abundant See Page 20 gA 2 WPT B C D E Bullfrogs abundant California toad larvae 1 1 2 2 2 GOEA 3 3 2 GOEA 6 adult SWHA 5 5 6 6 CORA nest Scattered PKF's 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 22 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeSeasonal wetland Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grain Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Orchard Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Barren NWI Wetland Grassland non-native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Impoundment This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for River 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Freshwater marsh Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 4 Figure 3, page 22, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.anal Sa l a d o C r e e k Sa l a d o C r ee k Delta-Mendota C Diablo Grande Pkwy 1 1 See Page 21 A B C D E 2 GOEA 6 adult SWHA 2 2 3 CORA nest 3 Scattered PKF's 4 4 5 5 6 6 Elderberry bushes Toad larvae Elderberry bushes A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 24 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeSeasonal wetland Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grain Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Orchard Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Vineyard NWI Wetland Barren professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Grassland non-native place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Great Valley riparian forest This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Ephemeral creek 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. River Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 22 7 7 Figure 3, page 23, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Salado Creek L i ttl e S a l a d o C r e e k Salado Creek Salado Cr eek 4 See Page 21 A B C D E Scattered PKF's 1 1 2 2 3 3 Elderberry bushes Toad larvae Elderberry bushes 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 24 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeSeasonal wetland Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Grain Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Orchard Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Vineyard NWI Wetland Barren professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Grassland non-native place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Great Valley riparian forest This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Ephemeral creek 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. River Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 23 4 Figure 3, page 24, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Little 24 S a l a d o C r e e k Salado Cr eek See Page 23 A B C D E Elderberry bushes Toad larvae Elderberry bushes 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 Stick nest PKF Stick nest 5 CORA nest 5 PKF 6 6 Stick nest 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 25 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type River Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Ag Wildflower field Vernal pool Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grain Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Orchard NWI Wetland Vineyard professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Barren place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Grassland non-native This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Great Valley riparian forest 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Ephemeral creek Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 3, page 25, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.25 Crow Creek Crow Creek See Page 24 A B C D E Stick nest 1 Stick nest PKF CORA nest 1 2 PKF 2 Stick nest 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 26 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type Seasonal wetland Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Ag Vernal pool Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grain Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Barren NWI Wetland Grassland non-native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Intermittent creek This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for River 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Wildflower field Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 3, page 26, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. See Page 25 A B C D E 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 PKF's PKF's PKF's 5 California macrophylla 5 Hesperevax caulescens 6 6 7 Hesperevax caulescens 7 California macrophylla California macrophylla A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 27 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Ag Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Barren Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Grassland non-native NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives River This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Wildflower field 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Seasonal wetland Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 26 Figure 3, page 27, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.27 Brown California Orestimba Cr eek Governor Edm u n d G 4 5 See Page 26 A B C D E PKF's PKF's 1 1 PKF's California macrophylla Hesperevax caulescens 2 2 3 3 Hesperevax caulescens California macrophylla California macrophylla 4 SWHA Sycamore Alluvial Woodland Sycamore Alluvial Woodland 6 6 PKF GOEA pair 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 29 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Great Valley riparian forest NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Pond place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives River This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Wildflower field 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 5 Figure 3, page 28, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.28 Orestimba Cr eek Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct 2 1 2 Hesperevax caulescens A B California macCro phylla See Page 26 D E 1 California macrophylla SWHA Sycamore Alluvial Woodland Sycamore Alluvial Woodland 3 3 PKF GOEA pair 4 4 5 5 6 California macrophylla California macrophylla 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 29 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Great Valley riparian forest NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Pond place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives River This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Wildflower field 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 3, page 29, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.29 Sullivan Rd Pete Miller Rd 1 1 See Page 28 A B C D E 2 California macrophylla California macrophylla 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 Hesperevax caulescens Hesperevax caulescens California macrophylla 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 31 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Ephemeral creek NWI Wetland Intermittent creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Wildflower field place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Vernal pool This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 3, page 30, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.30 Garzas Creek Garzas Creek Sullivan Rd Pete Miller Rd See Page 28 A B C D E 1 1 2 2 3 Hesperevax caulescens Hesperevax caulescens California macrophylla 4 4 5 5 6 6 Stick nest 7 Stick nest 7 Stick nest A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 31 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Other NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Wildflower field This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Vernal pool 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 3 Figure 3, page 31, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.31 Mustang Cr eek G a r z a s C r ee k 1 1 See Page 30 A B C D E 2 Stick nest 2 3 Stick nest Stick nest 3 4 4 5 5 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 32 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Other NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Vernal pool This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 6 Figure 3, page 32, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.32 Mustang Creek t 3 4 See Page 31 A B C D E 1 1 2 2 Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduc 3 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 33 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Elderberry polygon Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Corridors Stream/River Other Proposed Project Corridor NWI Wetland Ephemeral creek professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Figure 3, page 33, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.uct Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqued Butts Rd 2 2 See Page 32 A B C D E 1 1 3 3 4 4 5 5 Q u i n t o C r e e k 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 35 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Canal Ditch Barren Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Elderberry polygon Pipeline Grassland non-native Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 Corridors Stream/River Intermittent creek Proposed Project Corridor NWI Wetland professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 33 See Page 34 Figure 3, page 34, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.34 a Q u i n t o C r e e k Delta-Mendota Can l Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct CORA nest CLSW nesting Butts Rd Mccabe Rd Butts Rd 5 5 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek Irrigation canal Pond River Vernal pool A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 37 See Page 35 Figure 3, page 35, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.35 t o Creek See Page 33 Quin Romero Creek Mccabe Rd Butts Rd Horseshoe Rd Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek River A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 38 See Page 34 Figure 3, page 36, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.36 See Page 37 nesting O' Nei ll Forebay San Luis Wasteway Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct D e l ta -M e n d o ta C a n a l Luis Ave W Comet Rd E Comet Rd Deleon Ave Bayview Rd Centinelia Ave S Sun St Anacapa Ave 3 6 See Page 34 A B C D E 1 1 CORA nest 2 2 4 4 5 O'Neill A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 40 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Existing Substation Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeFreshwater marsh Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Photo point Canal Ditch Barren Coyote brush scrub Biological Resources Western review required before public release. PipelineSpecies OccurrenceName/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Stream/River Grassland non-native This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with NWI Wetland Great Valley riparian forest professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary Elderberry polygon source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridors Intermittent creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Irrigation canal Proposed Project Corridor This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Pond 0 750 1,500 Corridor Alternatives allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is River Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 7 3 5 6 7 Figure 3, page 37, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.1 2 34 6 7 re 3. Hydrol See Page 38See Page 40 he Freedom of Information U.S.C.552ic Feature Habitat Type Seasonal wetland l Di ch Barren Existing Substation og Cana Pi t Act (5 ) Biological Resources Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. t Pho ito po t es n peline ream Coyote brush scrubGrassland iWestern review required before public release. Speci 1.25-m Occurrence ile buffer around Project Area derberry dors StNW/RI Wetliver and Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 t h non-na ve GrasslandIive l This cartographic product and GIS da t ional ice standards. a were prepared in accordance wina t t El polygon profess source Data is only as accurate as its primary ve-grade. should or be used iadarrigation cana mpoundmen Lake Corri accuracy. Proposed Project Corridor are intended for Corridor Al erna i pract and is spatially relati survey dat Ref It t not replace and n Ip ace of a. er to met a for source t 0 750 1,500 Feet This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and lanni and l No reproducti or WAPA t t analysis on copying of this product is ves paon /DOE. Freshwater marsh ng llowed wi Source: houtWAPA SNR, Aspen EG, y. t the sole consent of ESR I l 37 5 O' Nei ll Forebay O ' N e i ll F o r e b a y Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct 5 See Page 34 A B C D E 1 Pot. TCBL nesting habitat 2 3 O'Neill 4 6 Nasella pulchra Elymus triticoides 7 A BNase OFFICIAL USE ONLY lla pulchra C D E See Page 39 Figu May be exempt from public release underFigure 3, page 38, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.hra San Luis Reservoir 1 1 See Page 35 A B C D E Pot. TCBL nesting habitat 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 Nasella pulchra Elymus triticoides A B C D E Nasella pulc OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 39 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeFreshwater marsh Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Barren Seasonal wetland Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Coyote brush scrub Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Grassland non-native NWI Wetland Grassland native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridor Alternatives Intermittent creek This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Impoundment 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Lake Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 38 See Page 37 7 7 Figure 3, page 39, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Edmund G Br S a n L u i s R e s e r v o i r O ' N e i ll F o r e b a y o w n California Aqueduct 1 4 5 1 See Page 38 A B C D E 2 2 Nasella pulchra Elymus triticoides 3 Nasella pulchra San Luis 4 NOHA nest PKF 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY Figure 3. May be exempt from public release underthe Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Existing Substation Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeSeasonal wetland Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Photo point Canal Ditch Barren Vernal pool Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Pipeline Coyote brush scrub Species Occurrence Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Stream/River Grassland non-native This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with NWI Wetland Grassland native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary Elderberry polygon source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridors Drainage place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Irrigation canal Proposed Project Corridor This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for Lake 0 750 1,500 Corridor Alternatives allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is Freshwater marsh Feet Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 39 See Page 41 3 5 Figure 3, page 40, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.A O ' N e i l l F o r e b a y San Luis Wasteway Gonzaga Rd Hilldale Ave Luis Ave nohugh Rd W W Comet Rd E Comet Rd Deleon Ave Bayview Rd Centinelia Ave S Sun St Anacapa Ave 1 2 2 See Page 36 B C D E 1 5 5 3 3 4 4 5 33 5 Do 6 "Eucalyptus grove deSWHA with ornamental pines" fensi behav ive or 6 33 152 Los Banos A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 41 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Existing Substation Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypePondExemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Canal Ditch Barren Freshwater marsh Photo point Vernal pool Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Pipeline Coyote brush scrub Species Occurrence Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Stream/River Grassland non-native IS data were prepared in accordance with NWI Wetland Otherly as accuratElderberry polygon Great orestve-grade. shou or be used i Corridors ada See Page 37 This cartographic product and G professional ice standards. source Data is on e as its primary Valley riparian f l creek pract and is spatially relati survey dat Ref It t ld not repl and ace n Ephemera Irrigation canal Lake p ace of a. er to met a for source accuracy. Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Al erna i0 750 1,500 Feet This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended f planning and ysis ly. No reproduction or copying s produc a hout W AP A/DOE. or anal on of thi t is t t ves llowed wi Source: t the sole consent of ES R WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, I l 40 7 7 Figure 3, page 41, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 39See Page 42 O' Neill Forebay Gonzaga Rd nohugh Rd W Jasper Sears Rd 1 2 5 2 D See Page 40 A B C D E 1 33 o "Eucalyptus grove deSWHA with ornamental pines" fensive behav ior PKF 3 152 Los Banos 4 4 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 43 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Existing Substation Hydrologic Feature Habitat TypeVernal pool Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Photo point Canal Ditch Barren Coyote brush scrub Biological Resources Western review required before public release. Pipeline Species Occurrence Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/20151.25-mile buffer around Project Area Stream/River Grassland non-native This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with NWI Wetland Other professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary Elderberry polygon source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Corridors Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Lake Proposed Project Corridor This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Pond 0 750 1,500 Corridor Alternatives allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is Wildflower field Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 41 3 5 Figure 3, page 42, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. e See Page 40 fensi hav ive or A B C D E 1 33 1 2 2 3 3 4 Malva parviflora 4 5 San Joaquin 5kit fox dens (2) 6 6San Joaquin kit fox scat San Joaquin kit fox scat 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 44 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Ag Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grain Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Barren This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors NWI Wetland Grassland non-native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Proposed Project Corridor Pond This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Corridor Alternatives Wildflower field 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 42 SWHA de bSee Page 41See Page 45 Figure 3, page 43, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 41 Malva parviflora A B 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D C D San Joaquin kit fox scat San Joaquin kit fox scat San Joaquin kit fox dens (2) E E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grassland non-native Pond Wildflower field See Page 46 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet 43 See Page 44 Figure 3, page 44, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 43See Page 45 Malva parvif San Jo San Joaqu WwESCErn AREA POWER ADMINISTRATION See Page 42 lora A B C D E 1 1 San Joaquinkit fox dens (2) 2 2 in kit fox scat aquin kit fox scat 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY See Page 46 Figure 3. May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Photo point Hydrologic Feature Habitat Type Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Species Occurrence Canal Ditch Ag Biological Resources Western review required before public release. 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Pipeline Grain Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 Elderberry polygon Stream/River Barren This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with Corridors NWI Wetland Grassland non-native professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in Proposed Project Corridor Ephemeral creek place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. Corridor Alternatives Pond This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for Wildflower field 0 750 1,500 planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Seasonal wetland Feet Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 44 Figure 3, page 45, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.45 See Page 48 See Page 44 Los Banos duct ek WwESCErn AREA POWER ADMINISTRATION -0- . c•- - c;] ~ R eservoir e Los Banos Cr e 1 Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqu 1 A B C D E 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 A B C D E OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under he Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552See Page 47 l Figure 3. Hydro og ffer around Project Area Cana derberry pol Pi dors ic Feature Habitat Type l Di ch Ag Photo poi 1.25-mile bu t ) nt Biological Resources Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. t El Corr peline ream Western review required before public release. ygon Barren iProposed Project Corridor Corridor Alterna i StNW/RI Wetliver and Grassland non-na Ephemeral creek River Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 tive This cartographic product and GIS da h ional practice standards. Dat a were prepared y as accurate as ld not l n accordance w its pri ace or be used iit t profess source and a is onl mary t ves is spatially relati survey data. Ref ve-grade. to met It shou repadata for source and accuracy. in place of er Seasonal wetland 0 750 1,500 Feet This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for lanning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product ipas llowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Figure 3, page 46, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. See Page 44 L o s B a n o s C r e e k Carrisalito Creek Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grassland non-native Great Valley riparian forest River A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 46 See Page 47 Figure 3, page 47, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. See Page 45 Los Ban Los Banos Reservoir Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Great Valley riparian forest Ephemeral creek River Wildflower field A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 50 47 See Page 46 os Reservoir See Page 48 Figure 3, page 48, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Los Banos Reservoir v o i r L o s B a n o s C r ee k L o s B a n o s C r ee k Governor Edm L o s B a n o s C r ee k CORA nest Langdon Rd Pole Line Rd Alvarado Trl Langdon Rd 5 5 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek Pond River A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 51 48 Canyon Rd See Page 47 Banos Reser und G Brown See Page 49 Figure 3, page 49, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.49 Salt Creek Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct SJKF carcass Langdon Rd Pole Line Rd O r t i g a l i ta C r ee k G o v e r n o r Ed m u n d G B r o w n C a l i fo r n i a A q u e d u c t Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grain Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Pond Other wetlands Seasonal wetland A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 52 See Page 48 Figure 3, page 50, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Salt Creek Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 See Page 47 See Page 46See Page 51 50 Figure 3, page 51, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 50See Page 52 51 See Page 48 Ortigalita Creek O r t i g a l i ta C r ee k Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek River A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3, page 52, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. See Page 49 Creek SJKF carcass Ortigalita Creek Governor Edmund G Brown California Aqueduct Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Photo point Species Occurrence 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grain Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek Other wetlands Seasonal wetland A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 52 OrtigalitaSee Page 51See Page 53 Figure 3, page 53, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.See Page 54 See Page 52 See Page 49 Pole Line Rd 5 165 165 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information A ct (5 U.S .C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: S NR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAP A/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of W AP A/DOE. Source: WA PA SNR, Aspen EG, ES RI Photo point 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Barren Grassland non-native Ephemeral creek Intermittent creek Other waters A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 53 Figure 3, page 54, of Appendix C, titled “Biological Resources," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Ou See Page 53 tside Canal Delta-Mendota Canal Dos Amigos Pump Rd Poleline Rd A Lobue Rd Pole Line Rd El Campo Rd Poleline Rd 5 5 165 165 Figure 3. Biological Resources 0 750 1,500 Feet OFFICIAL USE ONLY May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.552) Exemption 2 - Circumvention of statute. Western review required before public release. Name/Org: SNR Date: 4/15/2015 This cartographic product and GIS data were prepared in accordance with professional practice standards. Data is only as accurate as its primary source and is spatially relative-grade. It should not replace or be used in place of survey data. Refer to metadata for source and accuracy. This map and data are the property of WAPA/DOE and are intended for planning and analysis only. No reproduction or copying of this product is allowed without the sole consent of WAPA/DOE. Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, ESRI Existing Substation Photo point 1.25-mile buffer around Project Area Elderberry polygon Corridors Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Hydrologic Feature Canal Ditch Pipeline Stream/River NWI Wetland Habitat Type Grassland non-native Intermittent creek Other waters A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A B C D E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 54  Appendix A Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives  San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-1 April 2015 Chapter 2 Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives This chapter describes the Proposed Project and alternatives; proposed construction, operation and maintenance, and decommissioning activities; and the Environmental Protection Measures (EPMs) and standard construction, operation, and maintenance practices that would be implemented as part of the Project. It also identifies the Environmentally Preferred Alternative. Pending completion of the EIS/EIR, the exact locations and quantities of project components (e.g., transmission line right-of-way, transmission line support structures, new substations or expanded substation areas, access roads, staging areas, pulling sites) are unknown and, in some cases, quantities of project components are estimated. This EIS/EIR uses the term Project area to collectively describe the area within which Project components could be located. A corridor is a linear area within which the easements (also known as rights-of-way) would be located; proposed corridors are part of the Project area. 2.1 Proposed Project Western proposes to construct, own, operate, and maintain about 95 miles of new transmission lines within easements ranging from 125 to 250 feet wide through Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties along the foothills of the Diablo Range in the western San Joaquin Valley. Western also would upgrade or expand its existing substations, make the necessary arrangements to upgrade or expand existing PG&E substations, or construct new substations to accommodate the interconnections of these new transmission lines. An overview of the Proposed Project is illustrated in Figure 2-1. 2.1.1 Overview The Proposed Project consists of: . A 500-kV transmission line. A single-circuit 500-kV transmission line, about 65 miles long, terminating at the existing, expanded, or new substations in the Tracy and Los Banos areas. . 230-kV transmission lines. A single-circuit 230-kV transmission line, about 3 miles long, connecting the San Luis Substation and the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation (called the “tie-line”) and a single-circuit 230-kV transmission line, about 20 miles long, connecting the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations. . A 70-kV transmission line. A single-circuit 70-kV transmission line, about 7 miles long connecting the San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Much of the Proposed Project would be located adjacent to existing high-voltage transmission line easements along the foothills west of Interstate 5 (I-5). Western is proposing to construct two new 500-kV substations: Tracy East Substation and Los Banos West Substation. The Tracy East Substation would be adjacent to and east of the existing Tracy Substation with a footprint of up to 50 acres (see Figure 2-6a). The Los Banos West Substation would be adjacent to and west of the existing Los Banos Substation with a footprint of up to 50 acres (see Figure 2-6c). The existing Tracy, Los Banos, San Luis, and/or Dos Amigos Substations may be expanded to add new or modify existing 230-kV terminal bays. Western would also construct a 230/70-kV transformer bank and associated facilities at the San Luis Substation. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-3 April 2015 The Proposed Project would also include ancillary facilities, such as communication facilities, improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads to facilitate construction activities. Western would acquire the necessary easements and fee land for the Proposed Project. 2.1.1.1 500-kV Transmission Line As shown in Figure 2-1, the proposed single-circuit 500-kV transmission line corridor begins at the Tracy Substation, located at the intersection of Mountain House Road and Kelso Road, about six miles northwest of the City of Tracy in Alameda County. From the substation, the proposed corridor heads east along Kelso Road and turns south, adjacent to an existing 230-kV transmission line through agricultural fields. The proposed corridor then continues south and crosses the Delta-Mendota Canal (Canal) and a 69-kV transmission line. Then, it turns southeast to cross these features again and continues along the northeastern side of the canal and into San Joaquin County, crossing Interstate 205 (I-205) and a 230-kV transmission line. The proposed corridor then turns south, and continues adjacent to two existing 230-kV and 500-kV transmission lines to an area just east of PG&E’s Tesla Substation, south of Patterson Pass Road. Next, the proposed corridor turns south and runs adjacent to the east side of the existing transmission line corridor, which contains up to five high-voltage transmission lines. Along this section, the existing easements adjacent to the proposed corridor contain several 500-, 230-, and 115-kV transmission lines in various configurations. The proposed corridor runs adjacent to these transmission lines, with minor deviations to avoid existing infrastructure, south to the O’Neill Forebay. Just north of the O’Neill Forebay, the proposed corridor turns southeast, around the east side of the O’Neill Forebay and terminates into the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation. 2.1.1.2 230-kV Transmission Lines There are two proposed single-circuit 230-kV transmission lines. The first proposed 230-kV transmission line corridor is between the San Luis Substation and the Los Banos Substation area south of Highway 152; this transmission line is also referred to as the “tie-line.” The second proposed 230-kV transmission line would connect the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations. This proposed transmission line corridor would head east along Highway 152 from San Luis Substation, in the same corridor as the tie-line, to a point just south of the Los Banos Substation; no interconnection with the Los Banos or Los Banos West Substations would occur. At this point, the corridor heads southeast for about 7 miles adjacent to and east of the existing PG&E transmission line. Just south of the Los Banos Reservoir, it crosses to the west of the existing PG&E transmission line corridor and continues southeast for about 7 miles until it crosses I-5 to the Dos Amigos Substation. These proposed corridors are shown in Figure 2-1. 2.1.1.3 70-kV Transmission Line The proposed single-circuit 70-kV transmission line connects the San Luis and O’Neill Substations around the east side of the O’Neill Forebay. This component of the Proposed Project is located within the proposed 230-kV and 500-kV corridors described above (see Figure 2-1). 2.1.1.4 Operational Voltage Options As described in Section 1.2, the operational voltage needed for the project is dependent on the participation of an eligible transmission customer. The Proposed Project described herein assumes participation by the customer. If the customer declines to participate, one of the following operational voltage options may be selected by Western and the Authority in their decision-making processes pursuant to NEPA and CEQA. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-4 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 500-kV Transmission Line operated at 230-kV This voltage option would consist of a 500-kV transmission line constructed between the Tracy and Los Banos Substations. However, it would be operated at 230-kV. The proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be constructed. The 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, as well as the 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations, are the same as the Proposed Project. 230-kV Transmission Line This voltage option would consist of a 230-kV line constructed between the Tracy and San Luis Substations. The proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be constructed. The 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, as well as the 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations, are the same as the Proposed Project. 2.1.2 Project Components 2.1.2.1 Easements Western does not have existing transmission line easements within the Project area, and therefore, would need to acquire easements for the entire Project. Western would locate lines adjacent to existing easements or transmission lines wherever possible. Generally, easements would be 125 to 175 feet wide for a 230-kV transmission line and 200 to 250 feet wide for a 500-kV transmission line. The actual width and location of the proposed easement within the corridor may vary depending on engineering considerations, as well as constraints identified during environmental surveys. 2.1.2.2 Access Roads Improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads would be needed for construction and maintenance of the transmission line. Typically, access roads are 14 feet wide along straightaways and 16 to 20 feet wide through corners to facilitate safe movement of equipment and vehicles. Although specific locations have not been determined, new access roads for the Project would be located to minimize environmental impacts and to accommodate engineering constraints. Access roads would be occasionally graded for maintenance purposes and culverts would be added, as needed. Appendix E quantifies the estimated area of disturbance for proposed new and existing access roads. 2.1.2.3 Structures Tubular steel monopoles or lattice steel structures would be used to support the 500-kV and 230-kV lines of the Proposed Project, and smaller wood or steel monopoles would be used for the 70-kV line. Typical dimensions of the proposed structures are shown in Figures 2-2 through 2-4 and summarized in Table 2-1. Table 2-1. Typical Structure Dimensions Structure Type Height (feet) Structures Per Mile 500-kV single-circuit lattice 100-170 4 to 5 500-kV single-circuit steel pole 140-170 4 to 5 230-kV single- or double-circuit lattice 100-150 4 to 5 230-kV single- or double-circuit steel pole 125-140 4 to 5 70-kV wood or steel pole 50-70 10 to 15 San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-5 April 2015 Ancillary Facilities Communication facilities, including fiber optic overhead ground wires, would be installed on the transmission line structures for control and protection. Construction, expansion, and maintenance of these facilities would occur within the corridors. 2.1.3 Construction 2.1.3.1 Construction Schedule Construction would commence after securing all required permits and land rights. Multiple crews would work simultaneously on different project components. Table 2-2 presents Western’s proposed schedule for constructing the SLTP. Construction generally would take place between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., six days per week, except for those areas where local ordinances and traffic considerations dictate otherwise, in which case working hours would be consistent with local requirements. 2.1.3.2 Ground Disturbance Ground disturbance would occur from grading construction staging areas, grading and drilling holes for new structure foundations, constructing and improving roads for vehicle and equipment access, establishing pull sites for conductor installation, as well as expanding existing and/or construction of new substations. The typical ground disturbance area for each of these activities is shown in Table 2-3. Proposed construction methods are described in the following sections. Table 2-3. Typical Ground Disturbance for Construction Activities1 Activity Temporary Disturbance Permanent Disturbance Staging area 5 acres every 15 miles 0 acres Structure footing 500-kV lattice up to 0.9 acres up to 0.1 acres 500-kV steel pole up to 0.9 acres up to 0.1 acres 230-kV lattice up to 0.6 acres up to 0.1 acres 230-kV steel pole up to 0.6 acres up to 0.1 acres 70-kV wood or steel pole up to 0.1115 acres up to 0.0001 acres Foundation excavation 500-kV and 230-kV lattice and steel poles 40 feet deep,12 feet in diameter 0 acres2 70-kV wood or steel pole 8 to 10 feet deep, 4 feet in diameter 0 acres2 Conductor pull site 0.4 acres 0 acres Access road construction/improvement Up to 30 feet wide 12 feet wide Tracy, Los Banos, San Luis, and Dos Amigos Substation expansion up to 0.1 acres within existing substation up to 0.1 acres within existing substation Tracy East Substation 0 acres up to 50 acres Los Banos West Substation 0 acres up to 50 acres 1 - These dimensions represent worst-case and are used in the impact analysis of Chapter 4, but could be reduced during final engineering design or consultation with resources agencies. Note that these dimensions will be influenced by topography, location, easement width, etc. Also see Appendix E for details on disturbance assumptions. 2 - Included in structure footings Table 2-2. SLTP Proposed Construction Schedule Construction Phases Estimated Days Estimated Schedule Engineering and Design 430 Begin in Fall 2017 Construction 525 Begin in Summer 2018 Final Testing/Operation 135 2021 San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-9 April 2015 2.1.3.3 Construction Equipment and Workforce Typical quantities of personnel and equipment needed for proposed construction activities are shown in Table 2-4. The tasks would be conducted in stages; therefore, personnel and equipment would not be working on all tasks simultaneously at a given location, but there would be some overlap in tasks. Table 2-4. Typical Personnel and Equipment Activity Personnel Equipment Right-of-Way (access roads and vegetation clearing) 2 to 4 equipment operators . 1 motor grader . 2 pickup/trucks . 2 bulldozers . 1 backhoe Excavation for foundations 4 to 8 laborers/equipment operators . 2 augers . 2 backhoes . 2 pickup trucks . 2 compressors Foundation installation (anchor bolt/rebar cages) 4 to 6 laborers/equipment operators 3 to 5 ironworkers . 2 flat-bed trucks . 2 pickup trucks . 2 air compressors . 2 hydro lifts . 2 welders . 2 to 3 mixer trucks per structure for direct-embedded foundations . 10 to 12 mixer trucks per structure anchor bolt foundations Structure assembly and erection 4 to 6 linemen/laborers and crane operators . 2 hydro-cranes . 2 tractors . 2 manlifts . 2 pickup trucks Helicopter use 1 pilot 1 ground person fueler . Helicopter Hughes 500 . fuel truck Conductor stringing 20 to 25 linemen/groundmen . 2 pullers . 2 tensioners . 2 bulldozers . 4 reel trailers . 1 materials truck . 2 manlifts . 5 to 6 pickup trucks . 1 light truck Disturbance area restoration (Cleanup and Revegetation) 3 to 6 laborers . 1 bulldozer w/ripper . 1 blader . 1 front-end loader . 1 tractor/harrow/disc . 1 light truck Substation improvements and expansion 20-25 electricians, linemen, laborers, equipment, operators, and ironworkers . 2 flatbed trucks . 2 bulldozers . 2 cranes . 2 excavators . 5 pickup trucks . 1 fuel truck . 1 puller . 1 tensioner . 2 reel trailers . 1 tractor . 2 materials trucks . 1 blader . 2 mixer trucks . 1 front end loader Substation construction (Tracy East and Los Banos West) 20-40 electricians, linemen, laborers, equipment, operators, and ironworkers . 2 flatbed trucks . 2 bulldozers . 2 cranes . 2 excavators . 5 pickup trucks . 1 fuel truck . 1 puller . 1 tensioner . 2 reel trailers . 1 tractor . 2 materials trucks . 1 blader . 2 mixer trucks . 1 front end loader 2.1.3.4 Construction Staging Temporary construction staging areas would be needed to store and stage materials, construction equipment, and vehicles. Although the exact locations have not been determined, locations would be selected that minimize ground disturbance. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-10 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2.1.3.5 Right-of-Way Access and Improvements Construction of a new transmission line requires access to each tower site for construction crews, materials, and equipment. Access to each site would be on an existing road where possible or new roads. Existing roads may need to be improved. Improving existing access roads would involve brush clearing, grading, erosion control and the installation of culverts or rip-rap to maintain stormwater flows within ephemeral wash areas. Lost surface material would be replaced and the road would be graded and shaped. A motor grader is the primary equipment type used to conduct this work, but bulldozers may be used in some areas. Watering may be required to control dust and to retain fine surface rock. In determining the final location of new roads, large trees or other natural features will be avoided. New access roads would be constructed using a bulldozer or grader, followed by a roller to compact and smooth the ground. Front-end loaders would be used to move the soil locally or offsite. After project construction, existing and new permanent access roads would be used by maintenance crews and vehicles for inspection and maintenance activities. Temporary construction roads not required for future maintenance access would be removed and restored to pre-construction condition to the extent possible. 2.1.3.6 Excavation and Foundation Installation for Transmission Line Structures Installation of structure foundations may require grading and vegetation removal. Where grading is needed, topsoil would be removed and stockpiled for use in site restoration. Temporary topsoil stockpiles would be protected from erosion during construction. Excavating transmission structure foundations is typically done with a backhoe, front-end loader, or pressure auger. Excavation to bedrock or other suitable base material would be required. A rock drill may be used if rock is encountered during excavation. Four holes would be excavated for each lattice structure and one for each tubular steel or wood pole. Reinforced concrete foundations would be used for most structures. After foundation concrete is placed, a mechanical tamp would be used to re-compact soil around the foundation. The disturbed area would be re-graded so that surfaces drain naturally, blend with the natural terrain, and are left in a condition that will facilitate re-vegetation or re-seeding, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. 2.1.3.7 Structure Assembly and Erection Structure components would typically be transported to installation sites by truck or helicopter. Structures are erected with cranes. Structure assembly equipment may include cranes (ground or helicopter), augers, bulldozers, bucket trucks, backhoes, air compressors, electric generators, pickup trucks and other vehicles, machinery, and equipment. Structures would be assembled, erected, and attached to the foundations (see Figure 2-5). 2.1.3.8 Conductor Stringing Conductor stringing would occur at designated pull and tensioning sites (see Figure 2-5). Generally the pull sites would be located within the easement. Angle-structure pull sites would require temporary easement rights if located outside the easement to pull the conductor on a straight line. The locations of pull sites depend on environmental constraints, conductor length, and equipment access. Pull sites would be located within the study area. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-12 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR Large reels of conductor would be transported to the staging areas or pulling sites on flatbed trucks. Other equipment would include stringing trailers, tensioning machines, pullers, bulldozers, and several trucks including a bucket truck. Temporary stringing sheaves or travelers (pulleys) would be attached on the cross-arms of each structure at the bottom of the insulator strings. A sock line (rope or lightweight wire) would then be strung from structure to structure through the stringing sheaves. This may be completed using a helicopter. A pulling line would then be attached to the end of the sock line and pulled back through the sheaves, between pull site locations. Conductor would then be strung using the pulling line. Powered pulling equipment would be used at one end and tensioning equipment would be used at the other end to establish the proper tension and sag for crews to permanently “clip” conductors and ground wires onto structure hardware, and to maintain the proper ground clearance for the conductors. After conductor and ground wire are clipped in, the stringing sheaves would be removed and the new conductor would be connected to the insulators hanging from the cross-arms. Ground wire would be installed last and would be attached to the top of the structures using a pulling technique similar to that used for the conductors. 2.1.3.9 Substations Existing Substations Modifications to and/or expansion of existing substations would be needed to interconnect SLTP facilities. Modifications would include constructing new 230-kV breaker terminal bay facilities at the Tracy, San Luis, Los Banos and/or Dos Amigos Substations. Expansion of existing substations may be required if the existing substations are unable to accommodate a new terminal bay. Western also would construct a new 230/70-kV transformer bank bay and interconnection facility at the San Luis Substation. To accommodate these modifications, the existing substations may be expanded within the limits of the Project area. Proposed New Substations Generally, substation construction would include site grading, property and substation fencing, and landscaping and installation of electrical facilities. The site would be excavated and graded to accommodate the required construction and permanent facility buildings, equipment and electrical structures. A fence would be erected around the substation perimeter. Up to 50 acres would be graded for each new substation. The electrical facilities proposed for the Tracy East Substation would accommodate the termination of one 500-kV transmission line. These facilities would include a 500 kV terminal bay, associated breakers, disconnect switches, protective relays, metering and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system equipment and associated features. The electrical facilities proposed for the Los Banos West Substation would accommodate the termination of three 500 kV transmission lines and one 230-kV transmission line. These facilities would include three 500 kV terminal bays a 230-kV terminal bay, a 500/230-kV transformer bay and associated breakers, disconnect switches, protective relays, metering and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system equipment and associated features. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-13 April 2015 2.1.3.10 Disturbance Area Restoration Areas temporarily disturbed by construction would be restored to pre-construction conditions, to the extent possible. Western would re-grade disturbed areas to establish original contours, and redistribute topsoil. All disturbed soil, other than surfaces intended for permanent access roads, would be seeded with native species free of invasive seed. Where necessary, water diversions (i.e., waterbars) would be constructed along access roads to control surface water drainage and erosion. See Appendix E for SLTP ground disturbance assumptions. 2.1.4 Operation and Maintenance Western must comply with North American Electric Reliability Corporation and Western Electricity Coordinating Council standards and requirements for transmission system reliability, including maintenance and vegetation management. In order to comply with these requirements, Western has a comprehensive O&M program for all of its property and facilities including transmission lines, substations, communication facilities, and legal access roads. This O&M program ensures reliability of the transmission systems and safe, all-weather access to the transmission line structures and other Western facilities. The O&M activities proposed for the SLTP would be consistent with Western’s O&M program, which is presented in Appendix D. 2.1.5 Decommissioning The transmission line would be removed if the facilities are no longer needed. If removed, decommissioning would involve the removal of wire, insulators, hardware, and structures from the easements. All decommissioning activities would occur within the same disturbance area identified for construction. Structures and foundations would be removed. Material would be disposed of in an appropriate manner; and may be salvaged or sold. The equipment required to safely remove the wires and structures would be nearly the same as that required for installation. Following removal, any areas disturbed during line dismantling would be restored and rehabilitated. Disturbed surfaces would be restored to the original contour. All disturbed soil, other than surfaces intended for permanent access roads, would be seeded with native species free of invasive seed. Western would reclaim temporary service roads following abandonment in accordance with land management agency or landowner agreements. Equipment and personnel for restoration operations would be similar to that required at the end of construction. Where required by the land management agency or landowner, compacted areas would be ripped (with a dozer) and appropriate sediment control measures (e.g., revegetation) would be implemented. 2.1.6 Environmental Protection Measures and Construction Standards Western implements Environmental Protection Measures (EPMs) and Construction Standards to reduce environmental consequences associated with its construction and maintenance activities. The analysis of environmental consequences (Chapter 4) assumes that the EPMs listed below and the Construction Standards presented in Appendix F would be implemented as part of the Project. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-14 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Agriculture Where practical and feasible, construction and maintenance activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If this is not possible and damage occurs, the landowner would be compensated. Air Quality Project participants will comply with federal, state, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. Air Quality Equipment and vehicles will be operated in compliance with federal, state, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. Air Quality Vehicles and equipment used in construction and maintenance of the Proposed Project or alternatives will maintain appropriate emissions control equipment and be appropriately permitted. Air Quality Regular watering of exposed soils and unpaved access roads will be conducted during the construction period. Air Quality Engine idling will be in accordance with an idling policy compliant with the California state regulations. Air Quality If new sulfur hexafluoride equipment is installed as part of the Project, these items will be reported to natural resources. Best management practices will be followed to eliminate sulfur hexafluoride emissions during installation and commissioning. Biological Resources Tower locations will be sited, to the extent feasible and practicable, outside of any mapped or known special-status vegetation communities and populations of special-status plant species. Biological Resources All Western and contract crews will complete biological awareness training to ensure they are familiar with project sensitive biological resources and the associated EPMs and mitigation measures. All supervisors and field personnel will have on file a signed agreement that they have completed the training, and understood and agreed to the terms. EPMs and applicable mitigation measures will be written into the contract for construction and O&M work, and contractors will be held responsible for compliance. Biological Resources Vehicle traffic will be restricted to designated access routes and the immediate vicinity of construction and O&M sites. Vehicle speeds will not exceed 15 mph on nonpublic access and maintenance roads and 10 mph on unimproved access routes. Vehicles and equipment will be parked on pavement, existing roads, and previously disturbed areas, to the maximum extent feasible. Biological Resources No pets or firearms will be permitted at project sites. Biological Resources At the end of each work day, construction and O&M workers will leave work areas and adjacent habitats to minimize disturbance to actively foraging animals, and remove food-related trash from the work site in closed containers for disposal. Workers will not deliberately or inadvertently feed wildlife. Biological Resources Nighttime construction and O&M activities will be minimized to emergency situations. If nighttime construction and O&M work is required, lights will be directed to the minimum area needed to illuminate project work areas. If night time work is required, a speed limit of 10 mph will be enforced on all nonpublic access roads. Biological Resources Mortalities or injuries to any wildlife that occur as a result of project- or maintenance-related actions will be reported immediately to the Western Natural Resources Department or other designated point of contact, who will instruct construction and O&M personnel on the appropriate action, and who will contact the appropriate agency if the species is listed. The phone number for the Western Natural Resources Department or designated point of contact will be provided to maintenance supervisors and to the appropriate agencies. Biological Resources Caves, mine tunnels, and rock outcrops will never be entered, climbed upon, or otherwise disturbed. Biological Resources If a pesticide label stipulates a buffer zone width for protection of natural resources that differs from that specified in a project mitigation measure or EPM, the buffer zone width that offers the greatest protection will be applied. Biological Resources At completion of work and at the request of the land owner/manager, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-15 April 2015 Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Biological Resources Prior to any application of herbicide, Western will query the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database, entering location information by county, township, range, and section, entering both the commercial name and the formulation of the desired pesticide, and will follow all use limitations provided to ensure compliance with applicable pesticide standards. This database is currently located at http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/endspec/prescint.htm. The measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database will supersede those in the project EPMs where they are different. Biological Resources Seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. Biological Resources Equipment will be washed prior to entering sensitive areas within the project area to control noxious weeds. The rinse water will be disposed of through the sanitary sewage system or other appropriate disposal method that minimizes the spread of noxious weeds. Biological Resources Measures described in the Suggested Practices for Avian Protection on Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2006 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2006 or more current version) and Reducing Avian Collisions with Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2012 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2012 or more current version) will be implemented during O&M activities to minimize bird mortality and injury. At such time when Western finalizes an Avian Protection Plan, Western will adhere to the guidance in that document. Biological Resources Construction and O&M excavations greater than 3 feet deep will be fenced, covered, or filled at the end of each working day, or have escape ramps provided to prevent the entrapment of wildlife. Trenches and holes will be inspected for entrapped wildlife before being filled. Any entrapped animals will be allowed to escape voluntarily before construction and O&M activities resume, or they may be removed by qualified personnel, with an appropriate handling permit if necessary. Biological Resources A hazardous-spill plan will be developed prior to construction and will remain in effect for all O&M activities. The plan will describe what actions will be taken in the event of a spill of toxic or hazardous materials. The plan will incorporate preventive measures to be implemented for vehicle and equipment staging, cleaning, maintenance, and refueling, and for containment management and storage of hazardous materials, including fuel. In the event of a contaminant spill, work at the site will immediately cease until the contractor has contained and mitigated the spill. The contractor will immediately prevent further contamination, notify appropriate authorities, notify Western’s regional environmental manager, and will mitigate damage as appropriate. Adequate spill containment materials, such as oil diaper mats and hydrocarbon cleanup kits, will be available on site at all times, as will containers for storage, transportation, and disposal of contaminated absorbent materials. Cultural Resources, Paleontological Resources Before construction, all construction personnel will be instructed by Western on the protection of cultural and paleontological resources and that cultural and paleontological resources might be present in the study area. To assist in this effort, the construction contract will address applicable federal and state laws regarding cultural and paleontological resources, including historic and prehistoric resources, and fossils. Construction personnel will be informed of the penalties for collection and removal of such resources, as well as the importance of these resources and the purpose and necessity of protecting them. Contractors will be trained to stop work near any discovery and notify Western’s regional environmental manager immediately, who will ensure that the resource is evaluated and avoided. Known cultural and paleontological resources will be flagged for avoidance and a minimum distance maintained for work disturbances. Cultural Resources Western will have qualified archaeological monitors on site during ground disturbing construction activities. Archaeological monitors will look for any inadvertent cultural resource discoveries or other sensitive resources that may be important to tribes. Archaeologists will stop work in the immediate area should any such resources be uncovered until an assessment of the find can be made by Western. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-16 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Cultural Resources Cultural resources would be considered during post-EIS/EIR phases of Project implementation. Surveys would be completed prior to any ground disturbing activities or project construction activities in order to inventory and evaluate cultural resources of the Preferred Alternative, or of any components that might be added to the project, or any existing components that would be modified. These surveys and any resulting historic property evaluation and analysis of effects would be conducted in accordance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO). If adverse effects to historic properties cannot be avoided, Western would develop a Programmatic Agreement (PA) or Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) in consultation with the SHPO to determine appropriate mitigation to avoid lessen any adverse effects to cultural resources. Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources Erosion control measures will be implemented to prevent loss of soil. Construction will be in conformance with Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management Environmental Guidance Manual. Land Use and Agriculture Post proper signage in areas within the easement that will require temporary closure or limited access to accommodate certain land uses. Land Use and Agriculture On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads will be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. Land Use and Agriculture During construction, movement will be limited (to the greatest extent possible) to the access roads and within a designated area in the easement to minimize damage to agricultural land. Land Use and Agriculture Damaged fences and gates will be repaired or replaced to restore them to their pre-construction condition. Land Use Construction and operations will be conducted in a manner that prevents unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings and to preserve the natural landscape to the extent practicable. Land Use No permanent discoloring agents will be applied to rocks or vegetation to indicate limits of survey. Noise All vehicles and equipment will be equipped with required exhaust noise abatement suppression devices. Traffic and Transportation Western will restrict all necessary lane closures or obstructions on major roadways associated with construction activities to off-peak periods to avoid substantial traffic congestion and delays. Traffic and Transportation Western will ensure that roads or sidewalks damaged by construction activities will be properly restored to their pre-construction condition. Traffic and Transportation Conform with safety requirements for maintaining the flow of public traffic and conduct construction operations to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience to public transportation. Traffic and Transportation Mark structures and/or shield wire with highly visible devices for identified locations, as required by applicable laws and regulations (for example, the Federal Aviation Administration regulations). Water Resources, Wetlands Runoff from the construction and O&M sites will be controlled and meet RWQCB storm water requirements and the conditions of a construction storm water discharge permit. A storm water pollution prevention plan will be prepared and implemented. Water Resources and Floodplains All contaminated discharge water created by construction and O&M activities (e.g., concrete washout, pumping for work area isolation, vehicle wash water, drilling fluids) will be contained and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local regulations. Water Resources and Floodplains All fill or rip-rap placed within a stream or river channel will be limited to the minimum area required for access or protection of existing Western facilities. Water Resources and Floodplains All equipment will be stored, fueled, and maintained in vehicle staging areas 300 feet or the maximum distance possible from any aquatic habitat (vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, seasonal wetland, seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh) and no closer than 200 feet unless a bermed (no ground disturbance) and lined refueling area is constructed and hazardous-material absorbent pads are available in the event of a spill. Vehicles and construction equipment will be inspected daily for fluid leaks before leaving staging areas during construction and O&M activities. Fluid leaks will be repaired before equipment is moved from staging areas. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-17 April 2015 Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Water Resources and Floodplains All instream work, such as culvert replacement or installation, bank recontouring, or placement of bank protection below the high-water line, will be conducted during no-flow or low-flow conditions and in a manner to avoid impacts to water flow, and will be restricted to the minimum area necessary for completion of the work. Water Resources and Floodplains All equipment used below the ordinary high-water mark will be free of exterior contamination. Water Resources and Floodplains Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. Water Resources and Floodplains Non-biodegradable debris will be collected and removed from the easement daily and taken to a disposal facility. Slash and other biodegradable debris will be left in place or disposed of. Water Resources and Floodplains All soil excavated for structure foundations will be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Excess soil will be removed from the site and disposed of appropriately. Areas around structure footings will be reseeded with native plants. Water Resources and Floodplains Wherever possible, new structures and access roads will be sited out of floodplains. Bridges will be used at new stream crossings wherever possible. If avoidance is not possible, Western will consult with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and obtain permits as required. Water Resources and Floodplains If wet areas cannot be avoided, Western will use wide-track or balloon tire vehicles and equipment and/or timber mats. Water Resources and Floodplains Construction vehicle movement outside of the easement will be restricted (to the greatest extent possible) to approved access or public roads. Water Resources and Floodplains Where feasible, all construction activities will be rerouted around wet areas while ensuring that the route does not cross sensitive resource areas. 2.2 Alternatives Development One of the most important aspects of the NEPA and CEQA processes is the identification and assessment of reasonable alternatives that have the potential for avoiding or minimizing the impacts of a Proposed Project. This EIS/EIR presents a range of alternatives based on whether or not the alternatives meet (1) most of the project objectives/purpose and need; (2) are considered feasible; and (3) would avoid or substantially lessen any potential significant effects of the Proposed Project. For additional information on the alternatives development process refer to the Alternatives Screening Report in Appendix A. 2.2.1 Corridor Alternatives The alternatives presented below have been chosen for detailed analysis in the EIS/EIR through the alternative screening process. Alternatives corridors begin and end at points in common with the Proposed Project and other alternatives. The Project area was divided at the common points into four segments in order to facilitate a fair or equal comparison between the impacts of the alternatives and the Proposed Project. Table 2-6 and Figures 2-6a through 2-6e present the segments and the alternatives retained for analysis within each segment. Table 2-6. Alternatives by Segment Segments Number of Alternatives Alternative Name(s) North Segment 0 None Central Segment 1 Patterson Pass Alternative San Luis Segment 2 Butts Road Alternative West of Cemetery Alternative 1 (70-kV) West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative South Segment 2 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Billy Wright Road Alternative San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-18 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2.2.1.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative An alternative corridor would extend from a point near Patterson Pass Road in the north to a point near Butts Road in the south. It would run parallel to the Proposed Project, but on the western side of the existing high-voltage transmission lines, further from I-5 for approximately 48 miles. 2.2.1.2 Butts Road Alternative At Butts Road, this alternative corridor would continue south on the west side of the existing transmission corridor for approximately 2.2 miles. At about McCabe Road, this alternative would turn southwest for about 4.0 miles, crossing State Route (SR) 152 and bypassing the existing San Luis Substation. This alternative would then head east paralleling SR 152 to the south for 2.8 miles where it would interconnect with the Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation, using the same corridor as tie-line. This alternative is about 10 miles long. 2.2.1.3 West of Cemetery Alternative At Butts Road, this alternative would head west and then south from the existing transmission corridor and then extend around the west side of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery (Cemetery) for approximately 2.6 miles. At this point, it would begin to follow an existing PG&E 500-kV corridor for about 1.4 miles until it turns southwest, crossing SR 152 and bypassing the existing San Luis Substation. This alternative would then head east paralleling SR 152 to the south for 2.8 miles where it would interconnect with either the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation, using the same corridor as the tie-line. This alternative is about 10 miles long. 2.2.1.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative corridor would extend from the San Luis Substation, cross SR 152, and run northeast for about one mile. At this point, it would begin to follow an existing PG&E transmission corridor for about 2.6 miles around the west side of the O’Neill Forebay to a point just north of McCabe Road. At that point, it would turn east and then turn to the southeast, around the northeast side of the Forebay, following another PG&E high-voltage transmission corridor, to a point where it would terminate at the O’Neill Substation. 2.2.1.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative would start at San Luis Substation and would parallel SR 152 heading east for approximately 2.8 miles, using the same corridor as the tie-line, to a point near the Los Banos Substation; no interconnection with the Los Banos or Los Banos West Substations would occur. At this point, this alternative corridor would extend approximately 6 miles south along the western side of the existing high-voltage transmission lines. Just north of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, this alternative would cross the existing high-voltage transmission lines and would join the Proposed Project corridor for approximately 8 miles extending to the Dos Amigos Substation. This alternative is about 17 miles long. 2.2.1.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative would start at San Luis Substation and would parallel SR 152 heading east for approximately 2.8 miles, using the same corridor as the tie-line, to a point near the Los Banos Substation; no interconnection with the Los Banos or Los Banos West Substations would occur. At this point, the alternative corridor would head south adjacent to and east of the existing PG&E 500-kV transmission lines for approximately 9 miles, before turning due east for approximately 4.5 miles to join the Proposed Project corridor as it extends to the Dos Amigos Substation. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES April 2015 2-24 Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2.2.2 Alternatives Considered and Eliminated The alternatives listed in Table 2-7 were eliminated from consideration in the EIS/EIR. Detailed descriptions of these alternatives and the reasons for their elimination are presented in the ASR (Appendix B). Table 2-7. Alternatives Considered and Eliminated Alternative Description Mountain House Road 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative to minimize the length of the Proposed Project and reduce impacts to houses in the Mountain House Developments. This alternative corridor would exit the Tracy Substation and extend due south for about 0.9 miles along Mountain House Road, then turn southeast for approximately 0.8 miles through agricultural fields before intersecting the Proposed Project at the existing transmission corridor. In comparison to the Proposed Project, however, it would result in greater agricultural and visual impacts and construction disturbance to nearby school and residents. Grant Line Road 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to minimize canal crossings. It would deviate from the Proposed Project and the existing transmission line corridor to remain along the east side of the Delta-Mendota Canal for about 0.7 miles. This short alternative segment would be about the same length as the Proposed Project. However, it would be about 0.25 miles closer to a new residential community along Grant Line Road in unincorporated Tracy, and therefore result in greater visual impacts. Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative in response to comments requesting an alternative that uses the corridor between the Delta-Mendota Canal and Interstate 580, to avoid houses west of the Proposed Project near Patterson Pass Road. The California Aqueduct runs down the center of this corridor and therefore, more specifically, the route would be located between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580. This alternative also avoids impacts to the Tracy Hills conservation easements located west of Interstate 580. This corridor would deviate from the Proposed Project just south of the California Aqueduct and would continue south for about 7.3 miles between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 until it turns southwest, across Interstate 580, to rejoin the Proposed Project. In comparison to the Proposed Project, it would reduce land use and biological resource impacts. However, this alternative would be outside of any existing transmission corridor, thereby resulting in greater potential visual impacts than the Proposed Project. Furthermore, It would be technically infeasible as certain locations between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 are too narrow to allow for construction, operation, and maintenance of a transmission line. East of Delta-Mendota Canal 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to address public comments about the proximity of the Proposed Project to houses near Patterson Pass Road. It would provide another option to the Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 Alternative. It would deviate from the Proposed Project 0.1 miles south of Interstate 205 and continue southeast on the east side of the Delta-Mendota Canal for about 3 miles. It would then cross the California Aqueduct and extend southeast, traversing agricultural fields, between the Delta-Mendota Canal and the California Aqueduct for about 1.3 miles before crossing the California Aqueduct to join the Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 Alternative. In comparison to the Proposed Project, this alternative would potentially reduce land use and biological resource impacts, but would potentially increase visual and agricultural impacts. Furthermore, this alternative is infeasible due to engineering constraints. West of Cemetery 2 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to avoid approved solar development and to reduce visual impacts to visitors of the San Joaquin National Cemetery. It would provide another option to the West of Cemetery Alternative that is further from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. This alternative would extend south from the West of Cemetery Alternative Corridor at about 1.4 miles northeast of the Cemetery. This corridor would follow a valley, behind a ridge line, until it turns east to rejoin the West of Cemetery Alternative about one mile southeast of the Cemetery. In comparison to the Proposed Project, this alternative would reduce potential land use conflicts and visual impacts. However, due to the ruggedness of the terrain this alternative would potentially cause soil erosion and water quality impacts, and may be technically infeasible. San Luis Transmission Project 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT AND ALTERNATIVES Revised Administrative Draft EIS/EIR 2-25 April 2015 Table 2-7. Alternatives Considered and Eliminated Alternative Description Forebay 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to shorten the length of the Project and maximize use of existing transmission corridors. This alternative would provide another option to the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative. This alternative would deviate from the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative where that alternative turns southwest towards the San Luis Substation. This alternative would continue southeast following two existing PG&E 500-kV transmission lines across the southeastern portion of the O’Neill Forebay to the Los Banos Substation. A 0.7-mile segment of this alternative would cross the O’Neill Forebay in the existing transmission corridor. This alternative would maximize the use of existing transmission line easements. However, construction in the Forebay would result in potential water quality, soil erosion, and recreation impacts. Jasper Sears Road Alternative Western developed this alternative in response to scoping comments about potential land use conflicts of the Proposed Project with proposed solar development (Wright Solar Park), and current and proposed residential development (The Villages of Laguna San Luis), south of the Los Banos Substation. Scoping comments suggested an alternative alignment along Jasper Sears Road to minimize conflicts to The Villages of Laguna San Luis. This alternative corridor would exit the Los Banos Substation from the south and follow Jasper Sears Road and Western’s existing 500-kV transmission line for about 9 miles before turning due east for about 5.3 miles to join the Proposed Project. This alternative would avoid proposed solar development; however, it would conflict with the planned Agua Fria development. It would result in more ground disturbance than the Proposed Project. 2.3 No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction of the San Luis Transmission Project would not occur. Western would arrange for transmission service for the San Luis Unit from the CAISO using existing electric infrastructure. Western has studied and compared the total cost of CAISO service with the estimated costs of constructing, operating, and maintaining the SLTP over the life of the project. Refer to Section 1.2 for additional information on the economic analysis. 2.4 Comparison of Alternatives The section identifies the environmentally preferred alternative and presents detailed justification for its selection pursuant to the requirements of NEPA and CEQA. 2.4.1 Regulatory Requirements for Alternatives Comparison California Environmental Quality Act CEQA requires the following for alternatives analysis and comparison: The EIR shall include sufficient information about each alternative to allow meaningful evaluation, analysis, and comparison with the Proposed Project. A matrix displaying the major characteristics and significant environmental effects of each alternative may be used to summarize the comparison. If an alternative would cause one or more significant effects in addition to those that would be caused by the project as proposed, the significant effects of the alternative shall be discussed, but in less detail than the significant effects of the project as proposed. Guidelines Section 15126.6(d) If the environmentally superior alternative is the No Project Alternative, CEQA requires identification of an environmentally superior action alternative among the other alternatives [CEQA Guidelines Section 15126.6(e)(2)]. In this EIS/EIR, the term environmentally preferred alternative is analogous to CEQA’s environmentally superior alternative.  Appendix B List of Affected and Adjacent Quads (43)  US Fish and Wildlife Service Species List for All Affected Quads  California Natural Diversity Database Records Search (Summary Table) for Affected and Adjacent Quads   Appendix C Habitat Codes  List of Codes for Habitat Types in Proposed and Alternative Corridors San Luis Transmission Project, April–May 2014 and March 2015 Based on Preliminary Descriptions of the Terrestrial Natural Communities of California (Holland 1986) Agriculture, rice (Agri): rice fields, note if flooded or fallow Agriculture, orchard (Agor): fruit trees, note type if can Agriculture, pasture (Agps): note if irrigated Agriculture, grain (Aggr): alfalfa, hay: note if irrigated Agriculture, vineyard (Agvn): grapes, kiwi Barren (Bar): rock, pavement, sand, etc. Commercial, industrial (Com): developed land use other than residential or farms  Coyote brush scrub (Cbsc): coyote brush (Baccharis pilularis) dominant species, characterized by low shrubs, usually dense with scattered grassy openings.  Elderberry, isolated (Ebis): elderberry shrub not in savanna setting Grasslands, non-native annual/naturalized (Gnn): soft chess, wild oats, ripgut, ryegrass: <3,000’ Grasslands, native perennial (Gnp): soft chess, orchardgrass, oatgrass, fescue, hairgrass  Other (Oth): describe habitat type with dominant species—for SLTP the Oth type included areas mapped as eucalyptus groves; areas noted as planted trees, such as planted pines, oaks, and eucalyptus, including a possible mitigation site with planted native trees; an area of native California sagebrush (Artemisia californica); and an area mapped as a debris pile consisting of a pile of old branches and pieces of wood.  Riparian, Great Valley forest (Rgf): valley oak, black walnut, sycamore, cottonwood, elderberry: <500 feet elevation Riparian, Great Valley scrub (Rgs): willows, elderberry, verbena, blackberry: <1,000 feet elevation Waters, creek, intermittent (Waci): intermittent creek, < 20 feet wide Waters, creek, perennial (Wacp): continually flowing, < 20 feet wide Waters, pond (Wapd): small, <6’ deep Waters, lake (Walk): large, > 6’ deep Waters, river (Warv): perennial/intermittent, > 20 feet wide Waters, impoundment (Waim): stock pond, man-made ponding feature Waters, drainage (Wadr): ditches, agriculture drainages (usually well vegetated and shallow) Waters, irrigation canal (Waic): flooded up to supply irrigation water to fields, usually deeper Waters, other (Waot): in the SLTP project area this habitat code was applied to the Delta-Mendota Canal, California Aqueduct, a man-made drainage with culvert, a man-made overflow channel with no wetland vegetation, and other drainage features that were not rivers, creeks, ponds, lakes, or irrigation ditches.  Wetlands, freshwater marsh (Wfm): perennial sedge, rushes, nutgrass, cattail, bulrush: <7,500’ Wetlands, other (Wot): wetland not classified in other categories Wetlands, seasonal (Wse): seasonal ponding, ryegrass, barley, curly dock, rushes, eleocharis Wetlands, vernal pool (Wvp): seasonal ponding, coyote thistle, popcorn flower, downingia, toad rush, goldfields, typically with colorful, concentric rings: hydrologically connected to a creek or drainage: jurisdictional under USACE guidelines.  Wildflower field (Wldf): vegetation dominated more by forbs than grasses noted for conspicuous annual wildflower displays: usually on poor sites low in nutrients: can have 50 percent or more bare ground: associated with grasslands or oak woodlands.  Appendix D Plants and Wildlife Seen During Spring 2014 and Spring 2015 Reconnaissance Surveys  Appendix Table D-1. List of plants observed on San Luis Transmission project during spring reconnaissance surveys in 2014 and 2015.  Scientific Name Common Name Native Achyrachaena mollis Blow-wives yes Acmispon strigosus Bishop lotus yes Allenrolfea occidentalis Iodine bush yes Allium sp. Onion yes Amarantha sp. Amaranth no Amsinckia menziesii Fiddleneck yes Anthemis cotula Mayweed no Anthoxanthum odoratum Sweet vernal grass no Artemisia californica California sage yes Arundo donax Giant reed no Asclepias fascicularis Narrow-leaved milkweed yes Astragalus sp. Milk vetch yes Atriplex fruticulosa Ball saltbush no Atriplex lentiformis Big saltbush yes Atriplex semibaccata Australian saltbush no Avena barbata Slender wild oats no Avena fatua Wild oats no Baccharis pilularis Coyate brush yes Baccharis salicifolia Mulefat yes Bolboschoenus maritimus ssp. paludosus Alkali bulrush yes Brassica nigra Black mustard no Brassica rapa Field mustard no Briza minor Little quacking grass no Brodiaea elegans Harvest brodiaea yes Bromus caroli-henrici Weedy brome no Bromus diandrus Ripgut brome no Bromus hordeaceus Soft chess no Bromus madritensis Red brome no Calandrinia ciliata Red maids yes California macrophylla- CNPS Rank 1B Round-leaved filaree yes Capsella bursa-pastoris Shepherd’s purse no Carduus pycnocephalus Italian thistle no Carduus tenuiflorus Winged thistle no Carex sp. Sedge yes Castilleja exserta Purple owl’s clover yes Centaurea melitensis Tocalote no Centaurea solstitialis Yellow star thistle no Centromadia fitchii Fitch’s spikeweed yes Centromadia sp. Tar plant yes Chenopodium album White lambsquarters yes Chenopodium murale Nettle-leaf goosefoot no Chenopodium sp. Lambsquarters yes Chlorogalum pomeridianum Soap plant yes Scientific Name Common Name Native Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus Green rabbitbrush yes Clarkia purpurea ssp. quadrivulnera Winecup clarkia yes Clarkia sp. Clarkia yes Conium maculatum Poison hemlock no Convolvulus arvensis Field bindweed no Convolvulus simulans - CNPS Rank 4 Small-flowerd morning-glory yes Cotula coronopifolia Brass buttons no Crassula connata Sand pygmyweed yes Croton setiger Turkey mullein yes Cyperus eragrostis Tall flatsedge yes Datura wrightii Sacred datura yes Delphinium parryi ssp. parryi San Bernardino larkspur yes Dichelostemma capitatum Blue dicks yes Distichlis spicata Salt grass yes Dittrichia graveolens Stinkweed no Eleocharis macrostachya Creeping spikerush yes Elymus caput-medusae Medusa-head no Elymus ponticus Rush wheatgrass no Elymus triticoides Beardless wildrye yes Eriogonum sp. Buckwheat yes Erodium botrys Long-beaked filaree no Erodium cicutarium Red-stem filaree no Erodium moschatum White-stem filaree no Eryngium sp. Coyote thistle yes Eschscholzia californica California poppy yes Eucalyptus globulus Blue gum no Eucalyptus sp. Eucalyptus no Festuca myuros Rattail fescue no Festuca perennis Italian ryegrass no Frankenia salina Alkali heather yes Gilia tricolor Tricolor gilia yes Grindelia camporum Gum plant yes Gutierrezia microcephala Small-headed matchweed yes Heliotropium curassavicum var. oculatum Seaside heliotrope yes Helminthotheca echioides Bristly ox-tongue no Hemizonia sp. Tar plant yes Herniaria hirsuta Hairy rupturewort no Hesperevax caulescens- CNPS Rank 4 Hogwallow starfish yes Heterotheca sp. Telegraph weed yes Hirschfeldia incana Shortpod mustard no Holocarpha virgata Sticky tarweed yes Hordeum marinum ssp. gussoneanum Mediterranean barley no Hordeum murinum ssp. leporinum Lepor barley no Hypochaeris glabra Smooth cat’s ears no Hypochaeris radicata Rough cat’s ear no Juglans sp. Walnut no Scientific Name Common Name Native Juncus balticus Baltic rush yes Juncus bufonius Toad rush no Juncus sp. Rush yes Kochia sp. (?) Kochia no Koeleria macrantha Junegrass yes Lactuca serriola Prickly lettuce no Lamium sp. Hen bit no? Lasthenia californica California gold fields yes Lasthenia fremontii Fremont’s goldfields yes Lasthenia gracilis Common goldfields yes Lepidium dictyotum Alkali pepperweed yes Lepidium latifolium Perennial pepperweed no Lepidium latipes Dwarf peppergrass yes Lepidium nitidum Common peppergrass yes Logfia gallica Daggerleaf cottonrose no Lonicera involucrata (planted) Twin-berry yes Lotus corniculatus Bird’s foot trefoil no Lupinus sp. Lupine yes Madia nutans Nodding madia yes Malva parviflora Cheeseweed no Malvella leprosa Alkali mallow yes Marrubium vulgare Horehound no Matricaria discoidea Pineapple weed no Medicago polymorpha Bur-clover no Medicago sativa Alfalfa no Melilotus indicus Small melilot no Melilotus officinalis Yellow sweet clover no Micropus californicus Q-tips yes Microseris douglasii ssp. douglasii Douglas’ microseris yes Mimulus guttatus Swamp monkelflower yes Monolopia major Cupped monolopia yes Muhlenbergia rigens (planted) Deer grass yes Phacelia ciliata Phacelia yes Phalaris aquatica Harding grass no Phalaris paradoxa Hood canary grass no Pinus sp. (ornamental) Pine tree no Plagiobothrys greenei Greene’s popcorn flower yes Plagiobothrys sp. Popcorn flower yes Plagiobothrys stipitatus Slender popcorn flower yes Plantago erecta Foothill plantain yes Platanus racemosa Sycamore yes Poa annua Annual bluegrass no Poa bulbosa Bulbous bluegrass no Polypogon monspeliensis Rabbits-foot grass no Populus fremontii Fremont’s cottonwood yes Prosopis glandulosa var.torreyana Honey mesquite yes Prunus dulcis Almond no Scientific Name Common Name Native Prunus spp. Fruit trees no Psilocarhpus tenellus Wooly marbles yes Quercus sp. (ornamental) Oak no Ranunculus muricatus Spiny-fruited buttercup no Ranunculus sp. Buttercup yes Raphanus raphanistrum Wild radish no Raphanus sativus Wild radish no Rosa sp. Rose no Rubus armeniacus Himalayan blackberry no Rumex crispus Curly dock no Rumex sp. Dock no Salix exigua Narrow-leaved willow yes Salix lasiolepis Arroyo willow yes Salix sp. Willow yes Salsola tragus Russian thistle no Sambucus nigra ssp. canadensis Blue elderberry yes Schoenoplectus acutus var. occidentalis Tule, bulrush yes Schoenoplectus americanus Olney’s three-square bulrush yes Senecio vulgaris Common groundsel no Silybum marianum Milk thistle no Sinapis arvensis Charlock mustard no Sisymbrium irio London rocket no Solanum elaeagnifolium White horse-nettle no Sonchus asper Prickly sow thistle no Sonchus oleraceus Common sow thistle no Spergularia sp. Sand spurry yes Stephanomeria virgata Tall stephanomeria yes Stipa pulchra Purple needle grass yes Tamairx parviflora Fourstamen tamarisk no Trichostemma lanceolatum Vinegar weed yes Trifolium albopurpureum Indian clover yes Trifolium depauperatum var. amplectens Pale sack clover yes Trifolium hirtum Rose clover no Triteleia laxa Ithuriel’s spear yes Tropidocarpum gracile Dobie pod yes Typha angustifolia Narrow-leaved cattail yes Urtica dioica Stinging nettles yes Vicia villosa Hairy vetch no Vitis vinifera Wine grapes no Xanthium strumarium Cocklebur no  Appendix Table D-2. General wildlife species or their sign seen or heard during spring 2014 and spring 2015 surveys in the San Luis Transmission project area.   Reptiles and Amphibians American bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus California toad (formerly western toad) Anaxyrus boreas halophilus Northern Pacific rattlesnake Crotalus oreganus oreganus Pacific gopher snake Pituophis catenifer catenifer Sierran treefrog (formerly Pacific treefrog) Pseudacris sierra Side-blotched lizard Uta stansburiana Western fence lizard Sceloporus occidentalis Western pond turtle Emys marmorata  Birds American avocet Recurvirostra americana American coot Fulica americana American crow Corvus brachyrhynchos American kestrel Falco sparverius American robin Turdus migratorius American wigeon Anas americana Anna's hummingbird Calypte anna Ash-throated flycatcher Myiarchus cinerascens Barn swallow Hirundo rustica Black phoebe Sayornis nigricans Brewer's blackbird Euphagus cyanodephalus Brown-headed cowbird Molothrus ater Bufflehead Bucephala albeola Bullock’s oriole Icterus bullockii Burrowing owl Athene cunicularia California gull Larus californicus California horned lark Eremophila alpestris actia California quail Callipepla californica Canada goose Anser canadensis Cliff swallow Hirundo pyrrhonota Common raven Corvus corax Cooper’s hawk Accipiter cooperi Double-crested cormorant Phalacrocorax auritus Eared grebe Podiceps nigricollis Eurasian collared dove Streptopelia decaocto European starling Sturnus vulgaris Ferruginous hawk Buteo regalis Gadwall Anas strepera Golden eagle Aquila chrysaetos Great blue heron Ardea herodias Great egret Ardea alba Great horned owl Bubo virginianus Greater yellowlegs Tringa melanoleuca House finch Carpodacus mexicanus House sparrow Passer domesticus Killdeer Charadrius vociferus Lark sparrow Chondestes grammacus Lewis’s woodpecker Melanerpes lewis Lincoln’s sparrow Melospiza lincolnii Loggerhead shrike Lanius ludovicianus Long-billed curlew Numenius americanus Mallard Anas platyrhynchos Marsh wren Cistothorus palustris Mourning dove Zenaida macroura Northern flicker Colaptes auratus Northern harrier Circus cyaneus Northern mockingbird Mimus polyglottos Northern rough-winged swallow Stelgidopteryx serripennis Pied-billed grebe Podylimbus podiceps Red-tailed hawk Buteo jamaicensis Red-winged blackbird Agelaius phoeniceus Rock pigeon Columba livia Rock wren Salpinctes obsoletus Ruddy duck Oxyura jamaicensis Savannah sparrow Passerculus sandwichensis Say’s phoebe Sayornis saya Snowy plover Charadrius [alexandrinus] nivosus Song sparrow Melospiza melodia Swainson’s hawk Buteo swainsoni Tree swallow Tachycineta bicolor Turkey vulture Cathartes aura Western bluebird Sialia mexicana Western kingbird Tyrannus verticalis Western meadowlark Sturnella neglecta Western scrub-jay Aphelocoma californica White-crowned sparrow Zonotrichia leucophrys Yellow-billed magpie Pica nuttallii  Mammals Black-tailed hare Lepus californicus Black-tailed deer Odocoileus hemionus Botta’s pocket gopher (burrows) Thomomys bottae Brush rabbit Sylvilagus bachmani California ground squirrel Otospermophilus beecheyi Coyote Canis latrans Deer mouse Peromyscus maniculatus Desert cottontail Sylvilagus audubonii Red fox (carcass) Vulpes vulpes San Joaquin kit fox (carcass) Vulpes macrotis mutica Striped skunk (two skulls) Mephitis mephitis Tule elk Cervus canadensis nannodes    Appendix E Project Area Photos  DSCF7440.JPGIrrigation canal with bullfrog.jpgP631 page 5 Wse.JPGDSCF7760.JPG Photo 1. Agricultural drainage (Wadr) within proposed/alternative corridor.    Photo 2. Irrigation canal (Waic) with many bullfrogs of all age classes, within proposed/alternative corridor.  Photo 3. Seasonal wetland (Wse) within alternative corridor.    Photo 4. Seasonal wetland (Wse) within alternative corridor.  DSCF7394.JPGDSCF7940.JPGDSCF7824.JPGDSCF7941.JPG Photo 5. Impoundment (Waim) outside of but near proposed corridor.   Photo 6. Impoundment (Waim); outside of project corridors (which are in distance) but within zone of overlap of project with California red-legged frog critical habitat.  Photo 7. Impoundment/seasonal wetland adjacent to proposed corridor.   Photo 8. Cliff habitat within Patterson Pass A alternative corridor.  P628 page5 Wace.JPGDSCF7668.JPGP637 map 24 Wace, Gnn.JPGDSCF7863.JPG Photo 9. Intermittent/ephemeral creek facing west from proposed corridor.    Photo 10. Intermittent/ephemeral creek facing east within proposed corridor.   Photo 11. Intermittent/ephemeral creeks in distance, steep terrain; facing south within proposed corridor.   Photo 12. Intermittent/ephemeral creek, steep terrain; facing west from proposed corridor. DSCF7841.JPGP2339 map 146 Baccharis scrub.JPGP2313 map133 Rgf.JPGP2309 map 133 Wfm.JPG Photo 13. Vernal pool (Wvp) with Eryngium in alternative corridor; several other vernal pools in this area outside but adjacent to both corridors.   Photo 14. Coyote brush scrub (Cbsc) in the proposed/alternative corridor east of San Luis Substation.  Photo 15. Great Valley riparian forest (Rgf) within proposed corridor east of O’Neill Forebay.   Photo 16. Freshwater marsh (Wfm) within proposed corridor east of O’Neill Forebay. DSCF7466.JPGDSCF7576.JPGDSCF7611.JPGDSCF7708.JPG Photo 17. Mountain House Creek with impoundment facing south along proposed/alternative corridor.   Photo 18. Patterson Run facing east toward proposed/alternative corridor.  Photo 19. Corral Hollow Creek near proposed corridor.    Photo 20. Lone Tree Creek facing west from proposed corridor; eucalyptus grove and adjacent cottonwood, site of 10+ species of nesting bird. DSCF7688.JPGDSCF7862.JPGDSCF7731.JPGDSCF7743.JPG Photo 21. Hospital Creek facing north within proposed corridor.    Photo 22. Martin Creek facing west from proposed corridor.   Photo 23. Del Puerto Creek within alternative corridor.    Photo 24. Del Puerto Creek and freshwater marsh (Wfm) within proposed corridor. DSCF7807.JPGDSCF7936.JPGDSCF7928.JPGP557 map 13 Gnn disturbed.JPG Photo 25. Salado Creek facing west from proposed corridor into alternative corridor; flowering elderberry bushes in lower right (more in distance, not visible).   Photo 26. Crow Creek facing west from within proposed corridor toward alternative corridor.  Photo 27. Garzas Creek in proposed and alternative corridors.    Photo 28. Romero Creek within proposed corridor.   Appendix F Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Table Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard Memo  From Dos Amigos Substation in the south to Santa Nella in the north, assessment of habitat suitability for blunt-nosed leopard lizard (in order of descending milepost numbers). Surveys conducted spring 2014.  Table F-1. BNLL Habitat Assessment Reach Milepost* MP-P = Preferred Corridor MP-A = Alternative Corridor BNLL Suitability Comments Dos Amigos Substation SW to I-5 MP-P 82.25-82.00 Low Heavily disturbed by roadways and land use I-5 NW to Mercey Springs Rd (Hwy 165) MP-P 82.00-81.25 Low Steep E-facing slopes (>20%); rangeland; drainages are narrow, steep Across from Hwy 165 NW to Ortigalita Creek MP-P 81.25-78.50 Low Steep E-facing slopes (>20%); rangeland; unnamed drainages and contributive slopes are flatter Ortigalita Creek NW to Arburua Road MP-P 78.50-78.00 Moderate to High Ortigalita Creek channel is flat; contributive slopes to E and W are relatively flat; rangeland; little to no shrub cover, but rodent burrows common Arburua Road NW to unnamed drainage MP-P 78.00-77.75 None Active agriculture Unnamed drainage NW to Salt Creek MP-P 77.75-76.75 Moderate Variable topography (steep to moderate slopes), but unnamed drainages are relatively flat, but narrow Just south of Salt Creek NW to just north of Salt Creek MP-P 76.75-76.5 High Salt Creek narrow, incised, but widens upstream of project corridor; some areas show evidence of past disking Salt Creek NW to Canyon Road MP-P 76.5-75.25 Low Portions disked in the past; some areas with no burrows; disked areas are recovering Canyon Road NW to Los Banos Creek MP-P 75.25-74.50 Low to Moderate Much of this reach has been disked in past (low); slopes heading into Los Banos Creek look better for BNLL (moderate potential here) Los Banos Creek MP-P 74.50 High Creekbed beneath existing power poles not suitable, but downstream floodplain provides good habitat Los Banos Creek NW to Dirt Road and Fence MP-P 74.50-74.00 MP-A 60.75-60.25 High Rangeland; gentle to moderate slopes Dirt Road and Fence NW to Farmland MP-P 74.0-73.25 MP-A 60.25-59.25 Low Disked in recent past  MP-P 73.25-71.75 None Agricultural land; cultivated Farmland NW to Billy Wright Road MP-P 71.75-70.25 MP-A 58.00-56.50 Low to Moderate Patchy land use; some actively dryfarmed (low); some rangeland (moderate) Billy Wright Road NW to Los Banos Substation MP-P 70.25-67.25 MP-A 56.50-54.75 High High-quality, relatively flat rangeland (steep slopes in some ravines); areas around Los Banos Substation support shrubs (Baccharis) Los Banos Substation to San Luis Substation MP-P 67.25-64.50 Moderate to High Best BNLL habitat is between MP-P 64.50-66.75; MP-P 66.75-67.25 is marshy in places (low potential here) Table F-1. BNLL Habitat Assessment Reach Milepost* MP-P = Preferred Corridor MP-A = Alternative Corridor BNLL Suitability Comments Hwy 152 N to end of State property MP-A 54.25-52.50 Low to Moderate Low-lying areas near San Luis Forebay are marshy or support dense vegetation; uplands from MP-A 54.00 northward have patchy good BNLL habitat, but side slopes are steep (>20%) State property N to McCabe Road MP-A 52.50-50.25 Moderate Rangeland; much on flats or gently sloping ground Los Banos Substation to O’Neill Forebay Outfall MP-P 64.50-63.25 Moderate to High Dense grassland (rangeland) on flats O’Neill Forebay Outfall to Small Drainage MP-P 63.25-61.25 None Too wet Small Drainage N to O’Neill Substation MP-P 61.25-60.50 Low to Moderate Grassland; potentially too much human disturbance O’Neill Substation N to Disked Area MP-P 60.50-59.0 Moderate to High Grassland (rangeland); suitability reduced in places by disking *Mileposts are approximate    From Gonzaga Road in the north SE to Interstate 5 in the south (Billy Wright Road alternative corridor), assessment of habitat suitability for blunt-nosed leopard lizard (in order of ascending milepost numbers). Surveys conducted spring 2015.  Table F-2. BNLL Habitat Assessment Reach Milepost* MP-A = Billy Wright Road Alternative BNLL Suitability Comments Los Banos West site No MPs assigned Moderate to High Heavily disturbed by OHV use (trails) but site supports shrub-grassland habitat; historic BNLL records in vicinity Los Banos Power Station SSE to parcel boundary MP-A 71.75-72.00 Moderate to High Level ground; rangeland; historic records for BNLL in vicinity Parcel boundary SSE to next parcel boundary MP-A 72.00-72.25 None Level ground, but actively dry-farmed Parcel boundary SSE to access road MP-A 72.25-72.75 Low to Moderate Rangeland on >20% E-facing slopes (low), but flat ground to east (moderate); vegetation is classified as ‘wildflower fields’, which has less vegetation density than non-native grassland; rodent burrows uncommon to absent Access road SSE to S-facing slope N of stock pond MP-A 72.75-73.25 Low Rangeland on >20% E-facing slopes with dense annual grassland; no rodent burrows observed Table F-2. BNLL Habitat Assessment Reach Milepost* MP-A = Billy Wright Road Alternative BNLL Suitability Comments S-facing slope N of stock pond to base of N-facing slope S of stock pond MP-A 73.25-73.50 Moderate to High Wildflower fields on slopes have less dense vegetation (moderate); flat swale associated with stock pond provides good BNLL habitat (high) Hills S of stock pond MP-A 73.50-74.00 Low Steep E- or S-facing slopes with dense annual grassland; few to no rodent burrows N of Billy Wright Rd S to parcel boundary MP-A 74.00-75.00 Moderate to High Rangeland on variable topography, mostly low hills (moderate) separated by broad swales (high); some rodent burrows; vegetation varies from dense grassland to wildflower fields; historic BNLL records from this area Parcel boundary SE to swale MP-A 75.00-75.25 Low to Moderate Rangeland on steep (>20%) slopes; appears to be dense grassland Swale SE to hills MP-A 75.25-75.75 Moderate to High Level grassland in broad swale Hills SE to swale MP-A 75.75-76.25 Low to Moderate Rangeland on steep (>20%) slopes; appears to be dense grassland Swale MP-A 76.25-76.50 Moderate Narrow swale bordered by steep slopes that connects to broad swale noted in MP 3.6-3.9 Swale SE to Los Banos Creek MP-A 76.50-77.00 Low to Moderate Rangeland on steep, variable topography; appears to be dense grassland Los Banos Creek SE to vicinity Salt Creek MP-A 77.00-79.00 Low Dense annual grassland and steep (> 20%) slopes of variable direction; few rodent burrows, scattered rock outcrops Vicinity Salt Creek SE to pt. where route angles to E MP-A 79.00-80.25 High Rangeland on gentle to moderate slopes; rodent burrows; broad, flat swales in drainages; historic BNLL records from vicinity Angle pt. E to Arburua Rd MP-A 80.25-81.00 High Rangeland on gentle to moderate slopes; rodent burrows; broad, flat swales in drainages; historic BNLL records from this area Arburua Rd E to parcel boundary MP-A 81.00-81.75 None to Low Active dry farming in recent past Parcel boundary E to Interstate 5 MP-A 81.75-84.75 Moderate to High Rangeland on variable slopes and grassland of variable density (moderate), but Ortigalita Creek and tributaries have flat, broad swales with lower grass density and some shrubs (high) *Mileposts are approximate  PROJECT MEMORANDUM: SAN LUIS TRANSMISSION PROJECT  Agoura Hills . San Francisco . Sacramento . Davis . Inland Empire . Palm Springs . Phoenix  Date: March 18, 2014 To: Tish Saare (Western) From: Lawrence Hunt (Hunt and Associates) and Heather Blair (Aspen) Subject: Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (Gambelia sila) habitat requirements Topography Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (BNLL) inhabit flat or open to rolling slopes and alluvial fans sparsely vegetated with grassland, alkali flats, and washes on the San Joaquin Valley floor and in the surrounding foothills. Vegetation On the Valley floor, BNLL are most commonly found in: . Non-native annual grassland; . Valley needlegrass grassland; . Valley sink scrub, characterized as low, open to dense succulent shrublands dominated by alkalitolerant chenopod shrubs and having a sparse to absent understory (this plant community has been almost completely extirpated, the remaining fragments are seasonally flooded); . Valley saltbush scrub, similar to Valley sink scrub, but with a herbaceous annual understory; . Interior Coast Range saltbush scrub (much of this community has been converted to non-native annual grassland as a result of grazing); and . Alkali playa. The common denominator across these plant communities is that BNLL prefer open scrub communities with little or no understory. Long-term studies show BNLL population trends have dramatically declined in population density following consecutive above-average rainfall years (Germano et al. 2004; Germano et al. 2005; Germano and Williams 2005; Germano in litt. 2006; Williams in litt. 2006). BNLL generally avoid areas of dense vegetation, such as dense grasses, that appear during years of above-average rainfall. Microhabitat use and home range characteristics of BNLL were compared at two sites near Elk Hills in Buena Vista Valley that differed in ground cover (Warrick et al. 1998). These authors reported that BNLL microhabitat use differed significantly between the two study sites. At the more densely vegetated site, blunt-nosed leopard lizards used dry wash areas significantly more than grassland, floodplain, and road habitats. Conversely, at the more sparsely vegetated site, grassland was used more than wash habitat, and hills were used less than all other habitats. In general, BNLL are absent from steep slopes, dense vegetation, or areas subject to seasonal flooding. The average male home range size is about 10 acres and the average female home range size is about 5 acres (Warrick et al., 1998), which is large enough to encompass more than one plant community. The following exotic species are frequently observed within BNLL habitat, and have adversely affected the species by producing dense live vegetative biomass and residual thatch accumulation: Bromus rubens madritensis (red brome), Vulpia myuros (mouse-tail fescue) Schismus arabicus (Arabian grass), Hordium murinum glaucum (foxtail), Bromus diandrus (ripgut brome), and Bromus bordeaceus (soft pict0066 nggid041134 ngg0dyn 280x200x100 00f0w010c010r110f110r010t010 Blunt nosed Leopard LizardsPICT0005 300x225 Blunt nosed Leopard Lizardschess) (Germano et al. 2001). Introduced grasses and herbs often create an impenetrable thicket for small ground-dwelling vertebrates. BNLL movement is restricted in dense herbaceous cover, as observed with the ease of catching them by hand in dense grass compared to more open habitats (Germano et al. 2001; Germano et al. 2004). Radiotelemetry studies near the Elk Hills have documented that BNLL are generally restricted to more open habitats (e.g. washes, roads, grazed pastures) when grass cover is thick, but they may use grassland areas if the herbaceous cover is sparse (Warrick et al. 1998). Overgrazing may negatively affect BNLL by compacting soil, damaging rodent burrows that the lizards depend on for cover, and stripping away vegetative cover used by both the lizard and its prey (Hansen et al. 1994). However, the cessation of grazing is likely to be even more detrimental to blunt-nosed leopard lizard due to the dense growth of exotic grasses (Germano et al. 2001; Germano et al. 2005). Grazing is used as a management technique to reduce exotic grass and weed infestations in many BNLL preserves (USFWS, 2010).   Typical BNLL microhabitat (left) and habitat (right)—open scrub and non-native annual grassland on relatively level ground (photos taken from www.wanderingherpetologist.com) Blunt-nosed leopard lizards also inhabit Valley Saltbush Scrub, which is a low shrubland with an annual grassland understory, that occurs on the gently sloping alluvial fans of the foothills of the southern San Joaquin Valley and adjacent Carrizo Plain. This community is dominated by the chenopod shrubs, common saltbush (Atriplex polycarpa) and spiny saltbush (Atriplex spinifera), and is associated with non-alkaline, sandy or loamy soils. Similar to this community, but dominated principally by common saltbushes, are the Sierra-Tehachapi saltbush scrub (extending from the southern Sierra Nevada north of Porterville to the Grapevine in the Tehachapi Mountains) and Interior Coast Range saltbush scrub. The latter plant community ranges from Pacheco Pass to Maricopa but, for the most part, has been converted by grazing and fire to non-native annual grassland by intensive livestock grazing. Other foothill communities that occur within the range of BNLL are Upper Sonoran subshrub scrub and serpentine bunchgrass (Holland 1986). The San Luis Transmission Project occurs within the latter region (i.e., Pacheco Pass to Maricopa). Breeding Germano and Williams (2005) compared data from the Elkhorn Plain study area with a Valley floor study area and noted the following differences in breeding behavior among the two regions: on the Elkhorn Plain, females were generally gravid by late April or early May, while some females were found with eggs in early July. Clutch size on the Elkhorn Plain ranged from 1 to 6 eggs, with a mean clutch size of 3.4 eggs. Many females produced multiple clutches in a year with up to four clutches observed in a single female. On Valley floor sites, clutch size ranged from 2 to 5 eggs with a mean of 2.9 to 3.3 eggs per clutch, and only a few females produced a second clutch. The greater clutch size and greater frequency of multiple clutches observed on the Elkhorn Plain compared to the Valley floor was attributed to greater prey abundance with the irruptive population growth of grasshoppers in 1992 (Germano and Williams 2005). This comparison demonstrates BNLL populations show regional, opportunistic variation in breeding effort and breeding season, depending on food resources. Seasonal and Thermal Activity In drought years, BNLL activity may be depressed. For example, Germano and Williams (2005) reported that BNLL activity was completely absent for 21 months from July 1989 until April 1991 as individuals remained below ground due to dry conditions. Conversely, as previously noted, localized population declines have been observed following consecutive years of above-average precipitation. The following information is summarized from the California State University Stanislaus Endangered Species Recovery Program website (http://esrp.csustan.edu/), which is a compilation from various sources: Seasonal above-ground activity in BNLL habitat is correlated with weather conditions, primarily temperature. Optimal activity occurs when air temperatures are between 25 degrees and 35 degrees Celsius (77 and 95 degrees Fahrenheit) and ground temperatures are between 22 degrees and 36 degrees Celsius (72 and 97 degrees Fahrenheit). Some activity has been observed at temperatures as high as 50 degrees Celsius (122 degrees Fahrenheit). Body temperatures range from 32.2 to 42 degrees Celsius (90 and 108 degrees Fahrenheit). Because diurnal activity is temperature dependent, BNLL are most likely to be observed in the morning and late afternoon during the hotter days. Smaller lizards and young have a wider activity range than the adults. This results in the smaller, subadult lizards emerging from hibernation earlier than adults, remaining active later in the year, and being active during the day earlier and later than adults. Adults are active above ground in the spring months from about March or April through June or July, with the amount of activity decreasing so that by the end of June or July almost all sightings are of subadult and hatchling leopard lizards. Following the breeding season, males tend to cease surface activity sooner than females. Adults captured on the surface in August are about 70 percent females. Adults retreat to their burrows and enter a dormancy period beginning in August or September, but hatchlings are active until mid-October or November, depending on weather  Summary Table of BNLL Habitat Criteria Suitability Criteria Present Absent Geographic Range and Project Route Merced County: Extant populations occur from just north of San Luis Reservoir southeastward to Dos Amigos substation (approximately 22 miles of project route). Potentially suitable habitat may occur north of San Luis Reservoir. Contra Costa, Alameda, and Stanislaus Cos. Topography Plains, alkali flats, rolling hills, dissected alluvial fans Slopes > 20% Vegetation Sparse annual grassland Native perennial grassland Valley sink scrub Valley saltbush scrub Inner Coast Range saltbush scrub Alkali playa Dense annual grassland Woodlands and savanna Coastal sage scrub Chaparral Riparian and riparian scrub Land Use - Rangeland (grazing) - Rangeland containing infrastructure (electrical transmission towers, oil and natural gas pipelines, and other lowerintensity development - Disused agricultural land adjacent to rangeland (not routinely disked) - Oil Fields - Dirt roads through rangeland - Row-crop agriculture - Irrigated pasturage (e.g., alfalfa, barley, etc.) - Regularly disked fallow fields - Paved roadways Seasonal Activity - Abundance relatively high and stable in consecutive “normal” rainfall years - Adults: 15 Apr to 15 July - Subadults and hatchlings: March-Sept - Abundance depressed in consecutive drought or wet years - Adults: 15 July to 15 Apr - Subadults and hatchlings: Oct-Feb Diurnal Activity After sunrise to 1400 hrs (or if maximum air temperature is reached first); activity is bimodal (morning and late afternoon) in July and August - 1400 hrs to sunset (or when air temperature rises above 95F) - Nighttime Thermal Regime Optimal air temperature: 77-95F. Optimal ground temperature: 72-97F.  Air temperature: < 77F; > 95F. Ground temperature: < 72F; > 97F. References California Dept. Fish and Wildlife. 2004. Approved survey methodology for the blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Fresno, CA. May. 5 pp. Germano, D.J., G.B. Rathbun, and L. R. Saslaw. 2001. Managing exotic grasses and conserving declining species. Wildlife Society Bulletin 29:551-559. Germano, D.J., D.F. Williams, and P. Kelly. 2004. Long-term fluctuation of a population of blunt-nosed leopard lizards in relation to precipitation and herbaceous plant biomass. Presented at the San Joaquin Natural Communities Conference, May 25, 2004, Bakersfield, California. Germano, D.J., G.B. Rathbun, E. Cypher, L.R. Saslaw, and S. Fitton. 2005. Effects of livestock grazing on a community of species at risk of extinction in the San Joaquin Valley, California. 2005 Annual Report. The Lokern Grazing Study Project. Bureau of Land Management, Bakersfield, California. Available on the internet at http://www.csub.edu/~dgermano/GrazingWebSite.htm and www.esrp.scustan.edu. Accessed on 19 March 2014. Germano, D. J., and D. F. Williams. 2005. Population ecology of blunt-nosed leopard lizards in high elevation foothill habitat. Journal of Herpetology 39:1-18. Hansen, R.W., R.R. Montanucci, and K.H. Switak. 1994. Blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Life on the Edge. Volume 1: Wildlife 1:272-273. Holland, R.F. 1986. Preliminary descriptions of the terrestrial natural communities of California. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, California 156 pp. USFWS. 2010. Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (Gambelia sila) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento, CA. February. 79 pp. Warrick, G.D., T.K. Kato, and B.R. Rose. 1998. Microhabitat use and home range characteristics of bluntnosed leopard lizards. Journal of Herpetology. 32(2): 183-191.   Appendix D Operation & Maintenance Operation and Maintenance Plan This document presents the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for Western Area Power !dministration’s (Western) Sierra Nevada Region (SNR) transmission line systems. D.1 Inspection/System Management In compliance with Western’s Reliability Centered Maintenance Program, Western would conduct aerial, ground, and climbing inspections of its existing transmission infrastructure since initial construction. The following paragraphs describe Western’s inspection requirements. !erial Inspections Aerial inspections would be conducted a minimum of every 6 months by helicopter or small plane over the entire transmission system to check for hazard trees1 or encroaching vegetation, as well as to locate damaged or malfunctioning transmission equipment. Typically, aerial patrols would be flown between 50 and 300 feet above Western’s transmission infrastructure depending on the land use, topography, and infrastructure requirements. In general, the aerial inspections would pass over each segment of the transmission line within a one-minute period. Ground Inspections Annual ground inspections would check access to the towers/poles, tree clearances, fences, gates, locks, and tower hardware, and ensure that each structure would be readily accessible in the event of an emergency. They would allow for the inspection of hardware that would not be possible by air, and identify redundant or overgrown access roads that should be permanently closed and returned to their natural state. Ground inspections would typically be conducted by driving a pickup truck along the ROW and access roads. Detailed ground inspections would be performed on 20 percent of all lines and structures annually, for 100 percent inspection every 5 years. Ground inspections would involve a shake test, which includes manually shaking the knee braces of the tower to see if there is anything loose on the structure.  limbing Inspections Climbing inspections would be performed on all antenna towers at least once every 7 years to identify deterioration in hardware that could not be detected from either ground or aerial patrols. In addition, climbing of transmission line structures would occur if problems were identified during ground inspections. Typically, such activities would involve the use of a pickup truck or bucket truck. D.2 Maintenance !ctivities In general, Western O&M activities for Sierra Nevada Region transmission line systems would include the following: • Vegetation maintenance (transmission line and access road ROWs). Vegetation maintenance would ensure that vegetation did not interfere with human safety, transmission line conductors, towers, other hardware, or impede access to the transmission line for maintenance crews. In general, vegetation maintenance could be performed using a variety of methods including manual methods Trees located within or adjacent to the easement or permit area that present an immediate hazard to the facility or have the potential to encroach within the safe distance to the conductor as a result of bending, growing, swinging, or falling toward the conductor. (hand-controlled, powered, or non-powered tools such as chainsaws and clippers), mechanical methods (such as heavy-duty mowers), and herbicidal applications (used either to prohibit or retard vegetative growth). • Access road maintenance. Access road maintenance would include activities to ensure that legal access roads were in appropriate condition for all-weather access to transmission lines by maintenance and inspection crews. These activities would include grading, surfacing, erosion-control measures, and constructing water diversions such as culverts, ditches, and water bars. • Transmission line and associated structure, hardware, and equipment maintenance. This category of activities would include equipment and system maintenance and upgrades, routine aerial and ground patrols of transmission lines and ROWs, and transmission system repairs. The methods used to complete maintenance activities would be selected in consultation with the appropriate land managers. D.2.1 Vegetation Maintenance Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management (IVM) program identifies the correct vegetation maintenance approach (also referred to as prescription) for specific areas based on the sensitivity of resources, reliability and safety issues, and environmental laws and regulations. Western’s intent is to secure and maintain a manageable and stable ROW that minimizes vegetative threats to transmission system safety, security and reliability, and ultimately does not require frequent re-treatments. Achieving this desired condition is a process that may take several iterations over an extended period of time. The desired condition serves as the guide for future vegetation management decisions and treatment activities. Once achieved, it is intended that the desired condition will be proactively maintained. Western also encourages landowners and governmental entities to manage lands adjacent to the ROW in a manner which further reduces vegetation and wildfire hazards which are a threat to the safe, secure, and reliable operation of the power facility. Western’s desired condition, on and adjacent to its ROW and fee lands is consistent with ANSI A300 Part 7, which may be used for additional guidance and reference, and is characterized by: • Stable, compatible plant communities free from noxious or invasive plants. Compatible plant communities will typically be comprised of native plant species, which, at a mature height, will not interfere with the safety, security, and reliability of the transmission system. Western’s goal is to manage vegetation for the exclusion of incompatible plant species and the retention and recruitment of compatible species • Vegetation managed to reduce wildfire risk and enhance wildfire survivability. The density of vegetation after treatment and areas of regeneration will be managed to reduce the overall fire risk. Vegetation debris from intensive or repetitive treatments may also require mitigation to reduce wildfire risk and enhance the survivability of the transmission facility. • Adequate access routes to provide for efficient and cost effective vegetation treatment activities. Western will manage undesirable vegetation in which action clearance thresholds are established and proactively monitored. For those areas that are in violation of the threshold, all possible control options are evaluated, selected, and implemented. Control options are based on worker and public safety, environmental impact, effectiveness, site characteristics, and economics. Initially, the ROW is restored through the removal of undesirable vegetation. The ROW is then enhanced via various management techniques to protect facilities, reduce the potential for fire, and provide habitat for wildlife and a variety of plant species. Western would implement a combination of vegetation management practices that are consistent with the principles of IVM and in concert with land owner goals and policies. Western would develop specific prescriptions to manage vegetation along the ROWs. The following paragraphs describe the general vegetation management methodologies. Manual Vegetation ontrol Methods Manual vegetation control is defined as the application of powered and non-powered handheld tools or installation of synthetic or natural barriers to manage vegetative growth. The primary benefit of manual methods is selectivity; only unwanted or target vegetation is removed, while non-target vegetation is not disturbed. The primary disadvantages of manual methods are that they are labor intensive and they are only effective in vegetation with relatively low density. The manual vegetation control techniques currently employed by Western are described below. Cutting The most commonly used manual method to control vegetation is cutting target plants with power saws. Other manually operated tools such as axes, machetes, and clippers may also be used. This method is highly effective on species that do not resprout. For species that resprout, including most deciduous trees, sprouts may resurge to original heights within several years and at much greater density than the original stems. Access for subsequent manual treatments is thereby hindered. Girdling Girdling involves manually cutting away bark and cambium tissues around the trunk of target trees. This treatment is rarely practiced by Western, but could be appropriate in some cases (e.g., where large trees cannot be felled by cutting). Conifer species are killed by girdling, but hardwoods frequently will resprout below the girdle unless the cut is treated with herbicide. Girdling results in standing dead trees or snags, which are left to decompose and fall on their own. Snags are left at the land owner’s request and provide habitat for cavity-nesting species and other wildlife. Girdling could pose a fuels-management problem by mixing standing dead fuel with live fuel, which could significantly increase the potential for a crown fire. Topping and Trimming Topping involves cutting a tree at a specific height to prevent it from growing into transmission lines or microwave beam paths without felling the whole tree. This treatment is used in rare cases by Western as the situation dictates. Trimming or pruning is the removal of selected branches from tree trunks for the same purposes. Directional pruning is practiced by Western, whereby the trees are pruned to direct growth away from the conductors. Western uses these highly labor-intensive techniques in special situations where it is desirable to leave trees in place as visual screens (e.g., along roads, streams, and rivers) or where easement contracts and land/resource plans dictate such tree removal or trimming criteria (e.g., in orchards and along streams) (Western 2007). Under the buffered vegetation management approach, limbing or trimming of the individual branches that encroach into the buffered vegetation area would be the preferred method. Within the buffered vegetation management area, topping would not be acceptable because it could encourage faster growth in an undesirable direction. Slash Disposal/Fuels Reduction Manual cutting operations by Western are sometimes followed by slash disposal techniques designed to reduce fire hazards or to improve aesthetic appeal. Slash refers to the debris left within the vegetation treatment area. Depending on land-owner preference, access limitations, and fire safety, the slash can be treated by one of the following methods: it can be chipped and left on site; burned in piles; removed from the site; or lopped and scattered. Western acknowledges land manager concerns related to fuels left in the ROW and would reduce fuel load during vegetation management activities, to the extent feasible. Mechanical Vegetation ontrol Methods Mechanical methods employ machines to remove or control vegetation. These methods are often nonselective in that certain plants cannot be either targeted for removal or avoided. Mechanical methods, however, may be highly effective at controlling brush on gentle topography with few site obstacles. Most pieces of mechanical equipment are not safe to operate on slopes over 30 to 35 percent; mechanical methods are also constrained where soils are susceptible to compaction or erosion. Site obstacles such as rocks, stumps, or logs also reduce efficiency of these methods (Western 2007). Western would use mechanical methods to remove vegetation in portions of the ROW. Herbicide ontrol Methods Western would coordinate with land managers and local agencies to ensure that its use of herbicides would be consistent with local regulations and guidelines. An herbicide is a chemical used to kill or suppress the growth of nonnative or invasive plants. The most satisfactory classification of herbicides is based upon how they are used for noxious-weed control and how they work. Accordingly, herbicides are classified into two major types: • Selective herbicides kill certain plants but do not significantly affect the most desirable plants. For example, some selective herbicides kill broadleaf plants (including brush) but do not affect grasses. • Nonselective herbicides are chemicals that are generally toxic to plants without regard to species. • Plants differ in susceptibility to any specific chemical, and the choice of herbicide and application rate depends on the species to be controlled. Western proposes using only those herbicides that have been approved for use in ROW maintenance based on evaluations of toxicity, solubility, soil adsorption potential, and persistence in water and soil. Further, these herbicides must be registered for use in California by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Western would use only employees or contractors with required applicator licenses/certificates. Western would follow strict safety procedures and best management practices (BMPs) while applying herbicides. These practices, described in Western’s IVM Program (Western 2007), are a part of the Master O&M Program and would include: • Reviewing federal and California pesticide regulations for restrictions on use of particular herbicides; • Reviewing interagency agreements for herbicide type or application method restrictions; • Using herbicides approved by the respective land management agency; • Observing site conditions to match specific herbicides and application methods to those conditions, including the plants that are to be controlled, seasonal limitations, presence of sensitive environmental areas (such as listed and/or sensitive species, habitat, and wetlands), presence/proximity of non-target vegetation, presence/proximity of crops, and vegetation conditions (such as height and amount of tall-growing brush); • Following all restrictions and guidance listed on the herbicide label; • Calibrating equipment to ensure proper mixture and volume of herbicide; • Selecting the proper nozzle tip to avoid overspray; • Handling herbicides carefully to avoid accidental spills and ensure worker and public safety; • Adjusting herbicide application methods and equipment based on wind speed and direction, which could include avoiding application on windy days when drift potential exceeds that which is recommended on the label; • Providing the land owner and/or appropriate agency with the following information after completion of a particular activity: herbicide used, amount (including concentration), location of application, and method and date of application. There are several different ways to apply herbicides, and the method selected depends on the type of control needed, the type of vegetation, and the site situation (i.e., site conditions, location). Application methods Western would use include stump treatment, basal spray treatment, foliage spray treatment, soils treatment, and under-surfacing materials treatment. Stump Treatment Western currently applies either an oil-based herbicide mixture or a ready-to-use non-oil solution. This type of treatment is used when vegetation is cut to the ground. This method is primarily used after initial clearing and during maintenance clearing when trees have grown too tall to use foliage spray or when drift is an issue. As needed, cut surfaces of stumps would be treated with registered borax fungicide (e.g. Sporax) soon after the tree is felled. Basal Spray Treatment This treatment method involves spraying the lower part of the stem and the exposed roots of incompatible vegetation with an oil-based formula. Basal spray treatment would be used on resprouting species and nonnative and invasive plant species. This method is more selective than a foliage spray and does not cause immediate brownout of vegetation. In general, this treatment is prescribed where: • brush is too tall to use foliage spray without causing unacceptable drift; • the ROW is adjacent to cropland, residences, susceptible vegetation, or other sensitive areas, and drift is a problem; • the ROW contains a high density of compatible species, and a foliage spray cannot be applied without injuring the compatible cover. Foliar Spray Treatment Foliar spraying is a common method of applying herbicides on brush up to 15 feet tall. This method uses a water-based formulation that is applied to the entire plant’s foliage and stems. Because it is sprayed into the air, drift can be a problem under certain atmospheric conditions. Also, most foliage sprays cause immediate brownout of vegetation. This method would not be used in areas where drift and brownout are concerns (e.g., adjacent to cropland, residences, susceptible vegetation, or other environmentally or visually sensitive areas). Documentation and Reporting Per federal regulations, Western would document and report information pertaining to herbicide application within the ROW and associated facilities. This information could include herbicide type, quantity, and application area. Reporting format and frequency would be decided in coordination with the appropriate land manager. D.2.2 !ccess Road Maintenance As part of the O&M program, Western must maintain safe and reliable access roads to the existing infrastructure. Western would notify land managers before work begins and would comply with applicable specifications, as required. Western would also take into account land-manager guidelines. In addition, land managers would be notified when work was completed so that they have an opportunity to inspect the work. For all access road work, any equipment will be cleaned and inspected prior to operations. All ditches, existing culverts, and inlet assemblies will be cleaned. Slash and debris may be scattered, but will not be placed near or in stream channels, culvert inlets, or ditches. There will be a clearing limit of 4 feet on both sides of the existing roadbed. Trees over 6 inches in diameter within the clearing limit that do not impede blading will be limbed to a height of 14 feet and left standing. The following paragraphs describe Western’s general approach to maintaining its existing legal access roads.  learing ulverts and Ditches Existing culverts and ditches would be kept free of debris and obstructions. Ditches on newly constructed roads could require frequent cleaning and checking after each major storm until revegetation has occurred. !dditionally, it would be Western’s goal to check each culvert at least once a year after spring rains and before winter rains; additional culvert checks will be performed as needed to keep culverts clean and unobstructed. During inspection and clearing of culverts and ditches, Western would: • leave grass in the ditch unless it had filled with sediment and were no longer functioning; • check for undercutting road shoulders and banks; • check culverts for blockage by debris; • not leave a berm on the side of the road; as berms would channel water down the road.  ulvert and Ditch Design Culverts Culverts would be made of corrugated metal or corrugated steel. Western would clear an area 10 feet upstream and 10 feet downstream of a culvert, with a width 2 feet wider than the diameter of the culvert. • Western understands the potential for adverse environmental effects if a culvert is installed without consideration of existing biological resources. As such, Western would consider the following guidelines when constructing new culverts: • Whenever possible, low-water crossings would be installed instead of a culvert; • Applicable permits (including national regulatory permits for wetlands and state water-quality certification) would be obtained as appropriate; • Projects would be scheduled so that they did not coincide with fish migrations, spawning, and eggincubation periods; • The appropriate erosion and sediment controls would be installed on disturbed soils as soon as possible (i.e., before site work was finished) consistent with the terms and conditions of all applicable permits. Culverts would be large enough to pass a 100-year flood at 67 to 75 percent of capacity. They would be designed to accommodate water velocities and flows necessary for fish, frogs, and other aquatic species to swim through the culvert. Culvert diameters would match the width of the stream at an average point. Stream widths would be measured at the top of the banks to best represent the stream size during normal high water or bank-full conditions. The angle or slope of the culvert would be equal to the stream grade to maintain an acceptable water velocity for fish passage. Water Bars A water bar is a ridge that directs water off the road. Water bars would be spaced 200 feet apart for roads with a grade under 6 percent, 125 feet apart for grades between 6 and 10 percent, and 50 feet apart for grades between 10 and 13 percent. Rolling Drain Dips A rolling drain dip allows for cross-drainage. It consists of a shallow dip followed by a hump, along with an earth berm at the edge of one side of the road. Removing Slide Debris Slide debris can cause increased sediment loads in established roadway drainage systems as well as in established streams. In order to prevent this, Western would not sidecast removed material. Should slide debris occur, the cause would be evaluated to determine if removal of the slide debris could exacerbate slope instability by undercutting the toe of the slope. In some instances, removal of some debris could be required and stabilization of the remaining material could prevent further problems. The appropriate erosion and sediment controls would be installed on disturbed soils as soon as possible (i.e., before site work was finished). Mulching and other forms of erosion control would be used to prevent erosion. Repairing Road Structures In order to maintain safe access, associated road structures would be routinely inspected and maintained. Road structures in need of repair could include bridges, culverts, cattle guards, and fences. Should a structure need to be modified, maintenance activities would be designed to reduce erosion and sedimentation in streams. Western would employ the following BMPs: • Be consistent with applicable specifications of the appropriate land manager; • Protect vegetation and minimize the amount of disturbance of plants and soils by equipment; • Work quickly to minimize the time disturbed soils are exposed; • Divert runoff away from exposed soils into vegetated buffers; • Disperse concentrated stream flows; • Provide adequate runoff channels; • Trim slopes to stable configurations and revegetate as soon as possible; • Comply with land manager design and engineering requirements for new or modified structures; • Inspect new or modified structures at least once a year after spring rains and before winter rains; • Mitigate the damage created during emergency road repairs as soon as possible to prevent further damage and erosion.  ontrolling Erosion Western would work with guidance from each land manager to review and annually prioritize roads for repair over a 5 year period. This would involve monitoring for erosion, rehabilitating gullies and rills, and ensuring that there are no ruts deeper than 3 inches. Repairing Damaged !ccess Roads For damaged access roads or roads with existing drainage and erosion problems, Western would replace the surface material lost or worn away, then grade and shape the road surface, turnouts, and shoulders to their original condition, or better. Watering could be required to control dust and to retain fine surface rock. This program would make it a goal to eliminate old erosional features while proactively preventing new problems. While repairing damaged access roads, it would be Western’s goal to adhere to the following BMPs: • Be consistent with applicable specifications of the appropriate land manager; • Minimize the amount of disturbance to plants and soils by equipment; • Work quickly to minimize the time disturbed soils are exposed; • Divert runoff away from exposed soils and into vegetated areas; • Disperse concentrated stream flows; • Provide adequate runoff channels; • Trim slopes to stable configurations and revegetate as soon as possible; • Check road quality at least once a year after spring rains and before winter rains; • Mitigate any damage created by emergency repairs as soon as possible to prevent further damage and erosion. Removing !ccess Roads Western would consider removing access roads that are no longer needed. Western would annually prioritize roads for removal and provide land-management agencies with a plan to restore the abandoned roads to a natural state over a 5- to 6-year period. D.2.3 Transmission System Maintenance The need for repairs and preventative maintenance would be based on the results of inspections or other reports. Repairs and preventative maintenance could include: replacing insulators; tightening, replacing, or repairing towers/poles or hardware; and looking for ROW encroachments. These activities would be performed wherever damage or deterioration of transmission lines or facilities pose a threat to safety or reliability. The type of equipment needed could include a pickup truck, bulldozer, backhoe, bucket truck, and hand tools, and would depend on the required repair or maintenance. For major activities, Western would coordinate with the land manager. D.3 Equipment/System Upgrades For the transmission system to operate in a safe, reliable, and efficient manner, Western would replace or upgrade system components based on the age, condition, and technology of the equipment. System upgrades or replacements could include new conductors, capacitor banks, transformers and breakers, small solar-power arrays, and other electrical equipment. D.4 Regulatory oordination Western would coordinate with resource agencies and land managers on major facilities maintenance and vegetation removal activities. The following bullets describe the process and reporting requirements that Western would follow for category A, B, and C maintenance activities (section 1.4 provides a description of the O&M activity categories). • Identification of maintenance activity. Western is required to conduct aerial and ground inspections of its lines on a periodic basis. During inspections, Western would identify problem areas or equipment. These maintenance projects would be prioritized based on public and worker safety, system reliability, protection of the environment, and funding. Section 1.3.1 describes the frequency of each type of maintenance activity. • Coordination with resource agencies and land managers. Western would coordinate with the appropriate resource agencies and land managers for each major maintenance project, providing a description of the maintenance task and coordinating with them regarding measures. • Training of Western personnel or contractors. Western would train its maintenance personnel on SOPs and other measures on an annual basis. Should a contractor be hired to conduct a particular task, Western would train the contractor prior to project startup. All SOPs would be incorporated into the contractor’s master contract. Western personnel and contractors would be responsible for complying with measures. • Monitor maintenance activity. Western’s personnel would monitor maintenance activities to make sure that the contractor was complying with the applicable SOPs and other measures. Western would also conduct follow-up inspections of the ground-disturbance activity sites. D.4.1 Standard Operating Procedures SOPs would be followed for every O&M activity, regardless of the activity category, throughout the Proposed Action. All Western O&M personnel would be subject to an annual training that includes SOPs, environmental laws and regulations, and applicable agency requirements. SOPs would be included as part of the contract with any contractor selected to conduct O&M activities. Prior to conducting the O&M activity, Western’s O&M personnel would review the SOPs with the selected contractor to make sure the intent and background of each procedure was clearly understood. In addition, Western’s O&M personnel would monitor the contractor during maintenance activities, and conduct follow-up inspections of the job site at periodic intervals after the work had been completed. D.4.2 Projected O&M Frequency Western would continue periodic aerial and ground patrols of the transmission lines and towers. Aerial inspections would be performed a minimum of every 6 months by flying a helicopter at 50 to 300 feet above the conductors. Ground patrols would be conducted semi-annually using a pickup truck to drive along lines. During either type of patrol, problems could be identified that may require immediate repair or replacement of transmission line hardware or vegetation management. Typically, equipment repair or replacement would be conducted by a four-person crew with two or three trucks, a boom line truck, and an aerial and assist truck. Western would also conduct periodic climbing inspections of antenna towers. Western would also monitor vegetation clearance and access roads along the ROWs. Western would prioritize those areas that needed maintenance according to public and worker safety, transmission reliability, environmental protection, and funding. D.5 Operation and Maintenance !ctivity ategories The following is a list of the O&M activities according to their associated activity category. Note that substation and facility maintenance activities are restricted to the confines of the existing fenced substation or facility perimeter. • Category A – Inspection and Minor Maintenance Activities • Category B – Routine Maintenance Activities • Category C – New Infrastructure D.5.1 ategory ! – Inspection and Minor Maintenance !ctivities Maintenance activities in Category A are primarily inspection-type actions, with some minor repairs that would cause minimal, if any, soil disturbance. Typical activities under Category A may include but would not be limited to: Substation Maintenance • Maintenance and replacement of transformers and breakers • Servicing and testing of equipment at existing substations, including oil change-outs • Installation or replacement of bushings • Cleaning or replacement of capacitor banks • Maintenance or installation of propane tanks within a substation yard • Maintenance of switches, voltage regulators, reactors, tap changes, reclosers, and valves • Replacement of wiring in substations and switchyards • Replacement of existing substation equipment including regulators, capacitors, switches, wave traps, radiators, and lightning arresters • Installation of cut-out fuses • Adjustment and cleaning of disconnect switches • Placement of temporary transformers • Maintenance, installation, and removal of solar power arrays and controllers • Installation of foundation for storage buildings above ground mat within existing substation yard • New footings • Ground mat repairs • Remediation of small spill of oil and hazardous materials (less than 1 gallon) • Clearing vegetation by hand within the property boundary of a fenced substation • Application of soil sterilants and herbicides within the property boundary of a fenced substation • Maintenance or installation of oil containment structures Transmission Line Maintenance • Ground and aerial patrols • Ground wire maintenance • Aircraft warning device maintenance • Insulator maintenance • Bird guard maintenance • Cross arms maintenance on wood pole structures • Emergency manual removal and/or pruning of danger trees or vegetation • Steel members of steel transmission line structures • Hardware on wood and steel transmission line structures • X brace and knee brace maintenance • Dampener maintenance • Ground rod maintenance • Armor rod maintenance and clipping-in structures • Conductor upgrade/maintenance  ommunication System • Microwave radio tower maintenance • Communication tower and antennae maintenance • Light beacon maintenance • Microwave dish maintenance Facilities Maintenance • Building maintenance including interior and exterior painting; and roof, ceiling, floor, window, and door maintenance • Emergency placement of rocks at bases of poles or structures to stabilize small eroded areas • Remediation of small spill of oil and hazardous materials (less than 1 gallon) • Antennae maintenance • Structure mile marker maintenance • Ground spike maintenance on wood pole structures • Conductor upgrade, replacement, and/or maintenance • Overhead ground-wire (OHGW) upgrade, replacement, and/or maintenance • Wood preservative maintenance on wooden pole structures • Routine minor erosion prevention at bases of poles or structures • Emergency minor erosion control at bases of poles or structures to stabilize • Parabolic dish maintenance • Periodic antenna tower climbing inspections • Maintenance or installation of propane tanks • Clearing vegetation by hand within the property boundary of fenced maintenance facilities • Application of soil sterilants and herbicides within the property boundary of fenced maintenance facility D.5.2 ategory – Routine Maintenance !ctivities Maintenance activities in Category B include some of the typical repair tasks that would occur along Western’s existing ROW. Category B actions have the potential to cause minimal effects to sensitive resources. Category B maintenance equipment may include, but would not be limited to, rubber-tired vehicles such as bucket trucks, backhoes, front-end loaders, cranes, auger trucks, bobcats, and pole trucks. Typical activities under Category B may include but would not be limited to: Transmission Line Maintenance • Maintenance and repair of existing culverts • Removal of soil deposition around tower legs • Ground anchors maintenance • Filling of erosional features on access roads • Remediation of small spill of oil and hazardous materials (between 1 and 10 gallons) • Grading existing access roads • Application of herbicides • Placement of fill or rock(s) around existing culverts • Placement of fill or rock(s) around existing towers or structures • Wood pole maintenance • Maintenance, grading and repair of existing access roads to approved standards • Remediation of erosional features on access roads, and sources or causes of the erosion • Remediation of small spills  ommunication System Maintenance • Foundations or footings maintenance • Installation of underground and overhead power, communication, or ground electrical line (less than 100 feet) • Installation of cellular equipment onto existing infrastructure • Installation of underground and overhead power, communication, fiber optics, ground wire, or ground electrical line (less than 100 feet) D.5.3 ategory – New Infrastructure • Installation or replacement of underground and overhead power, communication, fiber optics, ground wire, or ground electrical line (less than 100 feet) • Installation or replacement of power, communication, fiber optics, OHGW, or electrical line over water features (less than 100 feet) • Vehicle and equipment staging • Installation and repair of fences and gates • Installation or replacement of underground and overhead power, communication, or ground electrical line (less than 100 feet) • Manual removal and/or pruning of danger trees or vegetation • Mechanical vegetation management by means of masticators or other similar mechanical equipment • Installation of minor rip-rap on creeks and rivers • Installation or replacement of power, communication, fiber optics, OHGW, or electrical line over water features (less than 100 feet) • Installation of equipment on existing towers • Maintenance and repair of existing access roads • Maintenance and repair of existing culverts • Remediation of small spill of oil and hazardous materials (between 1 and 10 gallons) • Application of soil sterilants and herbicides Category C tasks are generally those maintenance activities that would disturb large areas and would utilize heavy equipment. Category C maintenance equipment may include, but would not be limited to, the use of steel-tracked and/or rubber-tired bulldozers, graders, backhoes, and front-end loaders. Typical activities under Category C may include but would not be limited to: Transmission Line and ommunication System Maintenance • Adding new access roads within and outside of existing road easement • Installation of new culverts • Installation of new foundation for storage building at existing facilities • Erosion-control projects at existing facilities • Reconductoring • Mechanical vegetation management by means of bulldozers or other similar mechanical equipment • Installation or replacement of underground and overhead power, communication, fiber optics, or ground electrical line (greater than 100 feet) • Installation or replacement of power, communication, fiber optics, or electrical line over water features (greater than 100 feet) • Tower/pole relocation/realignment within existing ROW • Installation or replacement of underground and overhead power, communication, or ground electrical line (greater than 100 feet) • Remediation of a small spill of oil and hazardous materials (greater than 10 gallons) Appendix E Disturbance Assumptions SLTP Disturbance !ssumptions These disturbance calculations represent best estimates of temporary and permanent ground disturbance based on available information. These estimates are subject to change pending final engineering of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. We anticipate that final disturbance acreages will reasonably match these calculated estimates. North Segment • 500-kV – 5 towers/mile (rounded to the nearest whole number) @ 0.9 acre temporary disturbance (200 feet x 200 feet) and 0.1 acre permanent disturbance. • Existing public or private roads or two track trails would be used as much as possible to access the corridor and road repair or improvement would be as necessary. For disturbance calculations, we estimated the following miles and disturbance acres for roads: North Existing Roads New Roads Segment Units Dirt, gravel, or 2-track trails Temporary Permanent Proposed Miles 20.0 5.0 3.0 Corridor Acreage 34.0 8.0 4.0 • 1 pulling site every 3 miles @ 2.0 acres (600 feet x 150 feet) of disturbance at each pulling site. • Material storage sites every 15 miles, depending on needs, @ 5 acres each (one storage site for this section). • One new substation @ up to 50 acres. Central Segment • 500-kV – 5 towers/mile (rounded to the nearest whole number) @ 0.9 acre temporary disturbance (200 feet x 200 feet) and 0.1 acre permanent disturbance. • Existing public or private roads or two track trails would be used as much as possible to access the corridor and road repair or improvement would be as necessary. For disturbance calculations, we estimated the following miles and disturbance acres for roads: Central Existing Roads New Roads Segment Units Dirt, gravel, or 2-track trails Temporary Permanent Proposed Miles 125.0 2.0 20.0 Corridor Acreage 225.0 3.0 36.0 Patterson Pass Road Miles 130.0 2.0 29.0 Alternative Corridor Acreages 233.0 3.0 51.0 • 1 pulling site every 3 miles @ 2.0 acres (600 feet x 150 feet) of disturbance at each pulling site. • Material storage sites every 15 miles, depending on needs, @ 5 acres each (three storage site for this section). San Luis Segment • 500-kV – 5 towers/mile (rounded to the nearest whole number) @ 0.9 acre temporary disturbance (200 feet x 200 feet) and 0.1 acre permanent disturbance. • Existing public or private roads or two track trails would be used as much as possible to access the corridor and road repair or improvement would be as necessary. For disturbance calculations, we estimated the following miles and disturbance acres for roads: • 1 pulling site every 3 miles @ 2.0 acres (600 feet x 150 feet) of disturbance at each pulling site. • Material storage sites every 15 miles, depending on needs, @ 5 acres each (one storage site for this section). • One new substation @ up to 50 acres. San Luis Existing Roads New Roads Segment Units Dirt, gravel, or 2-track trails Temporary Permanent Proposed Miles 16.0 0.0 4.0 Corridor Acreage 28.0 0.0 6.0 Butts Road Alternative Corridor Miles 15.0 0.0 6.0 Acreage 25.0 0.0 10.0 West of Cemetery Miles 34 0.0 13 Alternative Corridor Acreages 57 0.0 20 San Luis Segment (70-kV Routes) • 15 towers/mile (rounded to the nearest whole number) @ 0.115 acre temporary disturbance (50 feet easement width x 100 feet long) and 0.0001 acre permanent disturbance (5 feet x 5 feet) • Existing roads or two track trails would be used as much as possible to access the corridor and road repair or improvement would be as necessary. A new 50-foot spur road @ 20 feet wide would be constructed for each tower. The spur roads would be maintained at 12 feet wide after completion of tower construction • 1 pulling site every 3 miles @ 2.0 acres (600 feet x 150 feet) of disturbance at each pulling site. • Material storage sites every 15 miles, depending on needs, @ 5 acres each (no storage sites for this section, as this section would share the storage site for the Butts Road to San Luis Substation section) South Segment . 230-kV – 5 towers/mile (rounded to the nearest whole number) @ 0.6 acre temporary disturbance (200 feet x 125 feet) and 0.1 acre permanent disturbance. . Existing public or private roads or two track trails would be used as much as possible to access the corridor and road repair or improvement would be as necessary. For disturbance calculations, we estimated the following miles and disturbance acres for roads: South Existing Roads New Roads Segment Units Dirt, gravel, or 2-track trails Temporary Permanent Proposed Miles 40.0 2.0 7.0 Corridor Acreage 70.0 4.0 13.0 San Luis to Dos Amigos Miles 40 2.0 7.0 Alternative Corridor Acreage 70 4.0 13.0 Billy Wright Road Alternative Miles 32.0 0.0 10.0 Acreages 56.0 0.0 16.0 • 1 pulling site every 3 miles @ 2.0 acres (600 feet x 150 feet) of disturbance at each pulling site. • Material storage sites every 15 miles, depending on needs, @ 5 acres each (one storage site for this section). • It is assumed that there would be double-circuit towers/poles between San Luis and Los Banos substations for approximately 3 miles. The double-circuit towers/poles would support the 230-kV tieline between San Luis and Los Banos substations, as well as a portion of the San Luis/Dos Amigos 230-kV circuit that would be located between San Luis Substation and a point near the Los Banos Substation. Sources Barren Ridge Renewable Transmission Project. Appendix C: Detailed Construction, Operation, and Maintenance Process; POWER Engineers, Inc. Gateway West Transmission Line Project. Appendix B: Transmission Line and Substation Components Common to All Action Alternatives; BLM. Sacramento Area Voltage Support Project. Appendix B: Alternatives Comparison; Western and SMUD. Southwest Intertie Project Construction, Operation and Maintenance Plan. Section 3: Project Components; BLM and Western. This page intentionally blank. Corridor Voltage Total Miles Disturbance Estimates by Project Component New Structures Existing Roads New Roads Pulling Sites Material Storage New Substations Total Temporary Acres Total Permanent Acres Dirt, gravel or 2-track Number Temporary Acres Permanent Acres Miles Permanent (acres) Temporary (miles) Temporary (acres) Permanent (miles) Permanent (acres) Number Temporary Acres Number Temporary Acres Permanent (Acres) North Segment Proposed Project 500-kV 7.7 39 35.1 3.9 20.0 34.0 5.0 8.0 3.0 4.0 3 6 1 5.0 50.0 54.1 91.9 Central Segment Proposed Project 500-kV 48.0 240 216.0 24.0 125.0 225.0 2.0 3.0 20.0 36.0 16 32 3 15.0 0.0 266.0 285.0 Patterson Pass Road Alternative 500-kV 48.0 240 216.0 24.0 130.0 233.0 2.0 3.0 29.0 51.0 16 32 3 15.0 0.0 266.0 308.0 San Luis Segment Proposed Project 500-kV 9.1 46 41.4 4.6 16.0 28.0 0.0 0.0 4.0 6.0 3 6 1 5.0 50.0 52.4 88.6 Butts Road Alternative 500-kV 9.6 48 43.2 4.8 15.0 25.0 0.0 0.0 6.0 10.0 3 6 1 5.0 50.0 54.2 89.8 West of Cemetery Alternative 500-kV 10.3 52 46.8 5.2 34.0 57.0 0.0 0.0 13.0 20.0 3 6 1 5.0 50.0 57.8 132.2 San Luis Segment – 70-kV Proposed Project N/A 7.0 105 12.1 0.01 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.4 1.0 1.4 2 4.0 1 5.0 0.0 23.5 1.4 West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative N/A 7.0 105 12.1 0.01 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.4 1.0 1.4 2 4.0 1 5.0 0.0 23.5 1.4 South Segment Proposed Project N/A 18.0 90 54.0 9.0 40.0 70.0 2.0 4.0 7.0 13.0 6 12 1 5.0 0.0 75.0 92.0 San Luis to Dos Amigos N/A 18.0 90 54.0 9.0 40.0 70.0 2.0 4.0 7.0 13.0 6 12 1 5.0 0.0 75.0 92.0 Billy Wright Road N/A 19.5 98 58.8 9.8 32.0 56.0 0.0 0.0 10.0 16.0 7 14 1 5.0 0.0 77.8 81.8 Appendix F Construction Standards CONSTRUCTION STANDARDSWestern logoSTANDARD 13 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY PROTECTION safety - a habit to live by, logorecycling logotransmission line illustration TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Number  SECTION 13.1—REQUIRED SUBMITTALS, REPORTS, AND PLANS………………………………….13-5  SECTION 13.2--CONTRACTOR FURNISHED DATA ............................................................................ 13-5 1. RECYCLED MATERIALS QUANTITY REPORT .................................................................... 13-5 2. RECOVERED AND BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS REPORT ..................................... 13-5 3. RECLAIMED REFRIGERANT RECEIPT ................................................................................ 13-5 4. WASTE MATERIAL QUANTITY REPORT: ............................................................................. 13-5 5. SPILL PREVENTION NOTIFICATION AND CLEANUP PLAN (Plan) .................................... 13-5 6. TANKER OIL SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PLAN ................................................ 13-5 7. PESTICIDE USE PLAN ........................................................................................................... 13-5 8. TREATED WOOD UTILITY POLES AND CROSSARMS RECYCLING - CONSUMER INFORMATION RECEIPT ....................................................................................................... 13-6 9. PREVENTION OF AIR POLLUTION ....................................................................................... 13-6 10. ASBESTOS LICENSES OR CERTIFICATIONS ..................................................................... 13-6 11. LEAD PAINT NOTICES ........................................................................................................... 13-6 12. WATER POLLUTION PERMITS ............................................................................................. 13-6 13. PCB TEST REPORT ............................................................................................................... 13-6 14. OIL AND OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT RECEIPT ................................................ 13-6 15. OSHA PCB TRAINING RECORDS ......................................................................................... 13-6 16. CLEANUP WORK MANAGEMENT PLAN .............................................................................. 13-6 17. POST CLEANUP REPORT ..................................................................................................... 13-6 SECTION 13.3--ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................... 13-6 SECTION 13.4--LANDSCAPE PRESERVATION ................................................................................... 13-6 1. GENERAL ................................................................................................................................ 13-6 2. CONSTRUCTION ROADS ...................................................................................................... 13-6 3. CONSTRUCTION FACILITIES ................................................................................................ 13-7 SECTION 13.5--PRESERVATION OF CULTURAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES ......... 13-7 1. GENERAL ................................................................................................................................ 13-7 2. KNOWN CULTURAL OR PALEONTOLOGICAL SITES ......................................................... 13-7 3. UNKNOWN CULTURAL OR PALEONTOLOGICAL SITES.................................................... 13-7 SECTION 13.6--NOXIOUS WEED CONTROL ....................................................................................... 13-8 SECTION 13.7--RECYCLED MATERIALS QUANTITIES ...................................................................... 13-8 1. GENERAL ................................................................................................................................ 13-8 2. RECYCLED MATERIAL QUANTITY REPORT ....................................................................... 13-8 SECTION 13.8-- USE OF RECOVERED AND BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS .......................... 13-8 1. RECOVERED MATERIAL PRODUCTS .................................................................................. 13-8 2. BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS ...................................................................................... 13-9 3. RECOVERED AND BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS REPORT ..................................... 13-9 SECTION 13.9--DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIAL ............................................................................ 13-9 1. GENERAL ................................................................................................................................ 13-9 2. HAZARDOUS, UNIVERSAL, AND NON-HAZARDOUS WASTES ......................................... 13-9 3. USED OIL ................................................................................................................................ 13-9 4. RECYCLABLE MATERIAL ...................................................................................................... 13-9 5. REFRIGERANTS AND RECEIPTS ......................................................................................... 13-9 6. HALONS ................................................................................................................................ 13-10 7. SULFUR HEXAFLOURIDE (SF6) ......................................................................................... 13-10 8. WASTE MATERIAL QUANTITY REPORT ............................................................................ 13-10 SECTION 13.10--CONTRACTOR'S LIABILITY FOR REGULATED MATERIAL INCIDENTS ........... 13-10 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-10 2. SUPERVISION ...................................................................................................................... 13-10 SECTION 13.11--POLLUTANT SPILL PREVENTION, NOTIFICATION, AND CLEANUP ................. 13-10 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-10 2. SPILL PREVENTION NOTIFICATION AND CLEANUP PLAN (Plan) .................................. 13-10 3. TANKER OIL SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PLAN .............................................. 13-11 SECTION 13.12--PESTICIDES ............................................................................................................. 13-11 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-11 2. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGISTRATION ........................................... 13-11 3. PESTICIDE USE PLAN ......................................................................................................... 13-11 SECTION 13.13--TREATED WOOD UTILITY POLES AND CROSSARMS RECYCLING OR DISPOSAL .................................................................................................................................. 13-11 SECTION 13.14--PREVENTION OF AIR POLLUTION ........................................................................ 13-12 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-12 2. MACHINERY AIR EMISSIONS ............................................................................................. 13-12 3. DUST ABATEMENT .............................................................................................................. 13-12 SECTION 13.15--HANDLING AND MANAGEMENT OF ASBESTOS CONTAINING MATERIAL ..... 13-12 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-12 2. TRANSPORTATION OF ASBESTOS WASTE ..................................................................... 13-12 3. CERTIFICATES OF DISPOSAL AND RECEIPTS ................................................................ 13-12 SECTION 13.16--MATERIAL WITH LEAD-BASED PAINT ................................................................. 13-12 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-12 2. TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ................................................................................................. 13-12 3. CERTIFICATES OF DISPOSAL AND RECEIPTS ................................................................ 13-12 SECTION 13.7--PREVENTION OF WATER POLLUTION ................................................................... 13-13 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-13 2. PERMITS ............................................................................................................................... 13-13 3. EXCAVATED MATERIAL AND OTHER CONTAMINANT SOURCES ................................. 13-13 4. MANAGEMENT OF WASTE CONCRETE OR WASHING OF CONCRETE TRUCKS ........ 13-13 5. STREAM CROSSINGS ......................................................................................................... 13-13 SECTION 13.18--TESTING, DRAINING, REMOVAL, AND DISPOSAL OF OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT ............................................................................................................. 13-13 1. SAMPLING AND TESTING OF INSULATING OIL FOR PCB CONTENT ............................ 13-13 2. PCB TEST REPORT ............................................................................................................. 13-13 3. OIL CONTAINING PCB ......................................................................................................... 13-14 4. REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF INSULATING OIL AND OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT .......................................................................................................................... 13-14 5. OIL AND OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT RECEIPT .............................................. 13-14  SECTION 13.19--REMOVAL OF OIL-CONTAMINATED MATERIAL ................................................. 13-14 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-14 2. CLEANUP WORK MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................................ 13-14 3. EXCAVATION AND CLEANUP ............................................................................................. 13-14 4. TEMPORARY STOCKPILING ............................................................................................... 13-14 5. SAMPLING AND TESTING ................................................................................................... 13-14 6. TRANSPORTION AND DISPOSAL OF CONTAMINATED MATERIAL ............................... 13-15 7. POST CLEANUP REPORT ................................................................................................... 13-15 SECTION 13.20—CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES .................................................... 13-15 1. GENERAL .............................................................................................................................. 13-15 2. KNOWN OCCURRENCE OF PROTECTED SPECIES OR HABITAT ................................. 13-15 3. UNKNOWN OCCURRENCE OF PROTECTED SPECIES OR HABITAT ............................ 13-15 SECTION 13.1—REQUIRED SUBMITTALS, REPORTS, AND PLANS 1. FINAL PAYMENT: For each section below, final payment may be withheld until the referenced submittal, report, or plan is received.  SECTION 13.2--CONTRACTOR FURNISHED DATA 1. RECYCLED MATERIALS QUANTITY REPORT: Submit quantities of recycled materials listed in Section 13.7, "Recycled Materials Quantities", to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  2. RECOVERED AND BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS REPORT: Provide the COR the following information for purchases of items listed in Section 13.8, "Use of Recovered and Biobased Material Products".  (1) Quantity and cost of listed items with recovered or biobased material content and quantity and cost of listed items without recovered or biobased material content prior to submittal of final invoice.  (2) Written justification of listed items if recovered material or biobased material products are not available: 1) competitively within a reasonable time frame; 2) meeting reasonable performance standards as defined in the Standards or Project Specifications; or 3) at a reasonable price.  3. RECLAIMED REFRIGERANT RECEIPT: A receipt from the reclaimer stating that the refrigerant was reclaimed, the amount and type of refrigerant, and the date shall be submitted to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice in accordance with Section 13.9.5, “Refrigerants and Receipts”.  4. WASTE MATERIAL QUANTITY REPORT: Submit quantities of total project waste material disposal as listed below to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice in accordance with Section 13.9.8, “Waste Material Quantity Report”.  (1) Unregulated Wastes (i.e., trash): Volume in cubic yards or weight in pounds.  (2) Hazardous or Universal Wastes: Weight in pounds.  (3) PCB Wastes: Weight in pounds.  (4) Other regulated wastes (e.g., lead-based paint or asbestos): Weight in pounds (specify type of waste in report).  5. SPILL PREVENTION NOTIFICATION AND CLEANUP PLAN (Plan): Submit the Plan as described in Section 13.11.2, "Spill Prevention Notification and Cleanup Plan”, to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to start of work. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations.  6. TANKER OIL SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PLAN: Submit the Plan as described in Section 13.11.3, "Tanker Oil Spill Prevention and Response Plan”, to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to start of work. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations.  7. PESTICIDE USE PLAN: Submit a plan as described in Section 13.12.3, “Pesticide Use Plan”, to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to the date of intended pesticide application. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations. Within seven days after application, submit a written report in accordance with Standard 2 – Sitework, Section 2.1.1_5, “Soil-Applied Herbicide”.  8. TREATED WOOD UTILITY POLES AND CROSSARMS RECYCLING - CONSUMER INFORMATION SHEET RECEIPT: Submit treated wood utility poles and crossarms - consumer information sheet receipts to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice (see 13.13, “Treated Wood Utility Poles and Crossarms Recycling or Disposal”).  9. PREVENTION OF AIR POLLUTION: Submit a copy of permits, if required, as described in 13.14, “Prevention of Air Pollution” to the COR 14 days prior to the start of work.  10. ASBESTOS LICENSES OR CERTIFICATIONS: Submit a copy of licenses, certifications, Demolition and Renovation Notifications and Permits for asbestos work as described in 13.15, ”Handling and Management of Asbestos Containing Material” to the COR 14 days prior to starting work. Submit copies of certificates of disposal and/or receipts for waste to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  11. LEAD PAINT NOTICES: Submit a copy of lead paint notices with contractor and recipient signatures as described in 13.16, “Material with Lead-based Paint” to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice. Submit copies of certificates of disposal and/or receipts for waste to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  12. WATER POLLUTION PERMITS: Submit copies of any water pollution permits as described in 13.17, “Prevention of Water Pollution” to the COR 14 days prior to start of work.  13. PCB TEST REPORT: Submit a PCB test report as described in 13.18, “Testing, Draining, Removal, and Disposal of Oil-filled Electrical Equipment”, prior to draining, removal, or disposal of oil or oilfilled equipment that is designated for disposal.  14. OIL AND OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT RECEIPT: Obtain and submit a receipt for oil and oil-filled equipment transported and disposed, recycled, or reprocessed as described in 13.19, “Testing, Draining, Removal, and Disposal of Oil-filled Electrical Equipment”, to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  15. OSHA PCB TRAINING RECORDS: Submit employee training documentation records to the COR 14 days prior to the start of work as described in 13.19.1.  16. CLEANUP WORK MANAGEMENT PLAN: Submit a Cleanup Work Management Plan as described in 13.19, “Removal of Oil-contaminated Material” to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to the start of work. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations.  17. POST CLEANUP REPORT: Submit a Post-Cleanup Report as described in 13.19, “Removal of Oilcontaminated Material” to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.    SECTION 13.3--ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS Comply with Federal, State, and local environmental laws and regulations. The sections in this Standard further specify the requirements.  SECTION 13.4--LANDSCAPE PRESERVATION 1. GENERAL: Preserve landscape features in accordance with the contract clause titled “Protection of Existing Vegetation, Structures, Equipment, Utilities, and Improvements.”  2. CONSTRUCTION ROADS: Location, alignment, and grade of construction roads shall be subject to the COR's approval. When no longer required, surfaces of construction roads shall be scarified to facilitate natural revegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. If re-vegetation is required, use seed mixtures as recommended by Natural Resources Conservation Service or other land managing agency as appropriate.  3. CONSTRUCTION FACILITIES: Shop, office, and yard areas shall be located and arranged in a manner to preserve trees and vegetation to the maximum practicable extent and prevent impact on sensitive riparian areas and flood plains. Storage and construction buildings, including concrete footings and slabs, shall be removed from the site prior to contract completion. The area shall be regraded as required so that all surfaces drain naturally, blend with the natural terrain, and are left in a condition that will facilitate natural revegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion or transport of sediment and pollutants. If re-vegetation is required, use seed mixtures as recommended by Natural Resources Conservation Service or other land managing agency as appropriate.  SECTION 13.5--PRESERVATION OF CULTURAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES 1. GENERAL: Do not, at any time, remove, disturb, or otherwise alter cultural artifacts or paleontological resources (fossils). Cultural artifacts may be of scientific or cultural importance and includes, but are not limited to bones, pottery, projectile points (arrowheads), other stone or metal tools, surface features (stone circles, rock piles, etc.), glass, metal, ceramic, or other historic objects, structures and buildings (including ruins). Paleontological resources can be of scientific importance and include mineralized animals and plants or trace fossils such as footprints. Both cultural and paleontological resources are protected by Federal Regulations during Federal construction projects. Contractor shall restrict all ground disturbing activities to areas that have been investigated by Western for cultural or paleontological resources, or have been cleared in writing by the Regional Preservation Officer (RPO) and as specified in accordance with Standard 1 – General Requirements, Sections 1.3.1 Rights-of-way and 1.3.2 Access to the Work and Haul Routes.  2. KNOWN CULTURAL OR PALEONTOLOGICAL SITES: Following issuance of notice to proceed, Western will provide drawings or maps showing sensitive areas located on or immediately adjacent to the transmission line right-of-way and/or facility. These areas shall be considered avoidance areas. Prior to any construction activity, the avoidance areas shall be marked on the ground in a manner approved by the COR in conjunction with the RPO. Instruct employees and subcontractors that vehicular or equipment access to these areas is prohibited. If access is absolutely necessary, first obtain approval from the COR in conjunction with the RPO. Western will remove the markings during or following final cleanup. For some project work, Western will require an archaeological, paleontological or tribal monitor at or near cultural or paleontological site locations. The contractor, contractor’s employees, and subcontractors shall work with the monitor to insure that sensitive areas are avoided. Where monitors are required, the monitor shall meet with the crew each morning to go over the day’s work. The monitor will also conduct awareness training for all contractors prior to any work in the field. Untrained personnel shall not be allowed in the construction area. For sensitive areas requiring a monitor, the contractor may not access those areas without a monitor being present.  3. UNKNOWN CULTURAL OR PALEONTOLOGICAL SITES: On rare occasions cultural or paleontological sites may be discovered during excavation or other earth-moving or other construction activities.  (1) Reporting: If evidence of a cultural or paleontological site is discovered, cease work in the area immediately and notify the COR of the location and nature of the findings. If a monitor is present, the monitor should also be notified. Stop all activities within a 200-foot radius of the discovery and do not proceed with work within that radius until directed to do so by the COR.  (2) Care of Evidence: Protect the area. Do not remove, handle, alter, or damage artifacts or fossils uncovered during construction activities.  SECTION 13.6--NOXIOUS WEED CONTROL Comply with Federal, State, and local noxious weed control regulations. Provide a "clean vehicle policy" while entering and leaving construction areas to prevent transport of noxious weed plants and/or seed. Transport only construction vehicles that are free of mud and vegetation debris to staging areas and the project right-of-way.  SECTION 13.7--RECYCLED MATERIALS QUANTITIES 1. GENERAL: All materials generated from the project that can be recycled, shall be recycled. Record quantities of material by category that is salvaged, recycled, reused, or reprocessed, including:  (1) Transformers, Breakers: Weight without oil.  (2) Aluminum Conductor – Steel Reinforced (ACSR): Weight in pounds or tons.  (3) Steel: Weight in pounds or tons.  (4) Aluminum: Weight in pounds or tons.  (5) Copper: Weight in pounds or tons.  (6) Other Metals: Weight in pounds or tons.  (7) Oil: Gallons (separate by type - less than 2 ppm PCB, 2 to 50 ppm PCB, and 50 or greater ppm PCB).  (8) Gravel, Asphalt, Or Concrete: Weight in pounds or tons.  (9) Batteries: Weight in pounds.  (10) Treated Wood Utility Poles and Crossarms: Weight in pounds.  (11) Wood construction material: Weight in pounds.  (12) Cardboard: Weight in pounds.  (13) Porcelain Insulators: Weight in pounds.  2. RECYCLED MATERIAL QUANTITY REPORT: Submit quantities (pounds or metric tons) of all recycled material by category to the COR within 30 days of recycling and prior to submittal of final invoice.  SECTION 13.8--USE OF RECOVERED MATERIAL AND BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS 1. RECOVERED MATERIAL PRODUCTS: If the products listed below or other products listed at http://www.epa.gov/epawaste/conserve/tools/cpg/products/index.htm are obtained as part of this project, purchase the items with the highest recovered material content possible unless recovered material products are not available: 1) competitively within a reasonable time frame; 2) meeting reasonable performance standards as defined in the Standards or Project Specifications; or 3) at a reasonable price.  Construction Products:  - Building Insulation Products - Carpet - Carpet cushion - Cement and concrete containing coal fly ash, ground granulated blast furnace slag, cenospheres, or silica fume - Consolidated and reprocessed latex paint - Floor Tiles - Flowable fill - Laminated Paperboard - Modular threshold ramps - Nonpressure pipe - Patio Blocks - Railroad grade crossing surfaces - Roofing materials - Shower and restroom dividers/partitions - Signage - Structural Fiberboard  2. BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS: If the products listed at http://www.biobased.oce.usda.gov are obtained as part of this project, purchase the items with the highest biobased content possible and no less than the percent indicated for each product unless biobased material products are not available: 1) competitively within a reasonable time frame, 2) meeting reasonable performance standards as defined in the Standards or Project Specifications, or 3) at a reasonable price. NOTE: All station service and pole mounted transformers will be bio-based oil. Western exempts purchase of bio-based large transformers rated above 5 MVA until May 13, 2015. Large transformers will be evaluated on a best value basis using life cycle cost analysis.  3. RECOVERED MATERIAL AND BIOBASED MATERIAL PRODUCTS REPORT: Provide the COR the following information for purchases of those items listed above:  Quantity and cost of listed items with recovered or biobased material content and quantity and cost of listed items without recovered or biobased material content prior to submittal of final invoice.  Written justification of listed items if recovered material or biobased material products are not available: 1) competitively within a reasonable time frame; 2) meeting reasonable performance standards as defined in the Standards or Project Specifications; or 3) at a reasonable price.  SECTION 13.8--DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIAL 1. GENERAL: Dispose or recycle waste material in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local regulations and ordinances. In addition to the requirements of the Contract Clause “Cleaning Up”, remove all waste material from the construction site. No waste shall be left on Western property, right-of-way, or easement. Burning or burying of waste material is not permitted.  2. HAZARDOUS, UNIVERSAL, AND NON-HAZARDOUS WASTES: Manage hazardous, universal, and non-hazardous wastes in accordance with State and Federal regulations.  3. USED OIL: Used oil generated from the Contractor activities shall be managed in accordance with used oil regulations.  4. RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Reduce wastes, including excess Western material, by recycling, reusing, or reprocessing. Examples of recycling, reusing, or reprocessing includes, but is not limited to, reprocessing of solvents; recycling cardboard; and salvaging scrap metals.  5. REFRIGERANTS AND RECEIPTS: Refrigerants from air conditioners, water coolers, refrigerators, ice machines and vehicles shall be reclaimed with certified equipment operated by certified technicians if the item is to be disposed. Refrigerants shall be reclaimed and not vented to the atmosphere. A receipt from the reclaimer stating that the refrigerant was reclaimed, the amount and type of refrigerant, and the date shall be submitted to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  6. HALONS: Equipment containing halons that must be tested, maintained, serviced, repaired, or disposed must be handled according to EPA requirements and by technicians trained according to those requirements.  7. SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE (SF6): SF6 shall be reclaimed and shall not be vented to the atmosphere. 8. WASTE MATERIAL QUANTITY REPORT: Submit quantities of total project waste material disposal as listed below to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  (1) Unregulated Wastes (i.e., trash): Volume in cubic yards or weight in pounds.  (2) Hazardous or Universal Wastes: Weight in pounds.  (3) PCB Wastes: Weight in pounds.  (4) Other regulated wastes (e.g., lead-based paint or asbestos): Weight in pounds (specify type of waste in report).  SECTION 13.10--CONTRACTOR'S LIABILITY FOR REGULATED MATERIAL INCIDENTS 1. GENERAL: The Contractor is solely liable for all expenses related to spills, mishandling, or incidents of regulated material attributable to his actions or the actions of his subcontractors. This includes all response, investigation, cleanup, disposal, permitting, reporting, and requirements from applicable environmental regulation agencies.  2. SUPERVISION: The actions of the Contractor employees and subcontractors shall be properly managed at all times on Western property or while transporting Western’s (or previously owned by Western) regulated material and equipment.  SECTION 13.11--POLLUTANT SPILL PREVENTION, NOTIFICATION, AND CLEANUP 1. GENERAL: Provide measures to prevent spills of pollutants and respond appropriately if a spill occurs. A pollutant includes any hazardous or non-hazardous substance that when spilled, will contaminate soil, surface water, or ground water. This includes any solvent, fuel, oil, paint, pesticide, engine coolants, and similar substances.  2. SPILL PREVENTION NOTIFICATION AND CLEANUP PLAN (Plan): Provide the Plan to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to start of work. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations. Include the following in the Plan:  (1) Spill Prevention measures. Describe the work practices or precautions that will be used at the job site to prevent spills. These may include engineered or manufactured techniques such as installation of berms around fuel and oil tanks; Storage of fuels, paints, and other substances in spill proof containers; and management techniques such as requiring workers to handle material in certain ways.  (2) Notification. Most States and the Environmental Protection Agency require by regulation, that anyone who spills certain types of pollutants in certain quantities notify them of the spill within a specific time period. Some of these agencies require written follow up reports and cleanup reports. Include in the Plan, the types of spills for which notification would be made, the agencies notified, the information the agency requires during the notification, and the telephone numbers for notification.  (3) Employee Awareness Training. Describe employee awareness training procedures that will be implemented to ensure personnel are knowledgeable about the contents of the Plan and the need for notification.  (4) Commitment of Manpower, Equipment and Material. Identify the arrangements made to respond to spills, including the commitment of manpower, equipment and material. (5) If applicable, address all requirements of 40CFR112 pertaining to Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasures Plans.  3. TANKER OIL SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PLAN: Provide a Tanker Oil Spill Prevention and Response Plan as required by the Department of Transportation if oil tankers with volume of 3,500 gallons or more are used as part of the project. Submit the Tanker Oil Spill Prevention and Response Plan to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to start of work. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations.  SECTION 13.12--PESTICIDES 1. GENERAL: The term “pesticide” includes herbicides, insecticides, rodenticides and fungicides. Pesticides shall only be used in accordance with their labeling and applied by appropriately certified applicators.  2. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGISTRATION: Use EPA registered pesticides that are approved for the intended use.  3. PESTICIDE USE PLAN: Provide a pesticide use plan that contains: 1) a description of the pesticide to be used, 2) where it is to be applied, 3) the application rate, 4) a copy of the label, and 5) a copy of required applicator certifications. Submit the pesticide use plan to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to the date of intended application. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations. Within seven days after application, submit a written final report to the COR, including the pesticide applicators report, in accordance with Standard 2 – Sitework, Section 2.1.1_5. “Soil-Applied Herbicide, (4) Final Report”.  SECTION 13.13--TREATED WOOD UTILITY POLES AND CROSSARMS RECYCLING OR DISPOSAL Whenever practicable, treated wood utility poles and crossarms removed during the project shall be recycled or transferred to the public for some uses. Treated wood utility poles and crossarms transferred to a recycler, landfill, or the public shall be accompanied by a written consumer information sheet for treated wood as provided by Western. Obtain a receipt, part of the consumer information sheet, from the recipient indicating that they have received, read, and understand the consumer information sheet. Treated wood products transferred to right-of-way landowners shall be moved off the right-of-way. Treated wood product scrap, poles, and crossarms that cannot be donated or reused shall be properly disposed in a landfill that accepts treated wood and has signed Western’s consumer information sheet receipt. Submit treated wood utility poles and crossarms consumer information receipts to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  SECTION 13.14--PREVENTION OF AIR POLLUTION 1. GENERAL: Ensure that construction activities and the operation of equipment are undertaken to reduce the emission of air pollutants. Submit a copy of permits for construction activities, if required (e.g., “non-attainment” areas, state implementation plans, or Class I air-sheds), from Federal, State, or local agencies to the COR 14 days prior to the start of work.  2. MACHINERY AIR EMISSIONS: The Contractor and subcontractor machinery shall have, and shall use the air emissions control devices required by Federal, State or Local Regulation or ordinance.  3. DUST ABATEMENT: Dust shall be controlled. Oil shall not be used as a dust suppressant. Dust suppressants shall be approved by the COR prior to use.  4. SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE EMISSIONS:  1) General: The Contractor shall record quantities of SF6, including:  Nameplate capacity in pounds of SF6 containing equipment.  Record pounds of SF6 stored in containers, before transferring into energized equipment.  Record pounds of SF6 left in containers, after transferring into energized equipment.  Pounds of SF6 purchased from equipment manufacturers or distributors.  Pounds of SF6 returned to suppliers.  Scales used to weigh cylinders must be accurate to within +/- 2 pounds and must have current calibration sticker.  2) CONTRACTOR FIELD QUALITY TESTING AND SF6 HANDLING:   The Contractor shall test all functions to verify correct operation and conduct a leak test. No SF6 gas leakage shall be allowed from any equipment or storage containers.   Atmospheric venting of SF6 gas is not allowed.  The Contractor shall remove all empty SF6 gas cylinders and return to supplier.   (3) CERTIFICATES OF DISPOSAL AND RECEIPTS: 1) The Contractor can use Western’s Reporting Form for reporting quantities listed above.  2) The Contractor shall provide receipts of SF6 gas returned to supplier.  3) The Contractor shall submit SF6 gas Reporting Forms and copies of receipts to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.    SECTION 13.15--HANDLING AND MANAGEMENT OF ASBESTOS CONTAINING MATERIAL 1. GENERAL: Obtain the appropriate Federal, State, Tribal or local licenses or certifications prior to disturbing any regulated asbestos-containing material. If a building or portion of a building will be demolished or renovated, obtain an Asbestos Notice of and Permit for Demolition and Renovation from the State or Tribal Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Air Quality (or equivalent). The building(s) shall be inspected by a State-Certified or Tribal accepted Asbestos Building Inspector. The inspector shall certify the presence and condition of asbestos, or non-presence of asbestos, on site as directed on the State or Tribal Demolition and Renovation Notice/Permit. The inspections shall be performed and notifications shall be submitted whether asbestos is present or not. Submit a copy of licenses, certifications, Demolition and Renovation Notifications and Permits for asbestos work to the COR 14 days prior to work. Ensure: 1) worker and public safety requirements are fully implemented and 2) proper handling, transportation, and disposal of asbestos containing material.  2. TRANSPORTATION OF ASBESTOS WASTE: Comply with Department of Transportation, Environmental Protection Agency, and State and Local requirements when transporting asbestos wastes.  3. CERTIFICATES OF DISPOSAL AND RECEIPTS: Obtain certificates of disposal for waste if the waste is a hazardous waste or receipts if the waste is a non-hazardous waste. Submit copies to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  SECTION 13.16--MATERIAL WITH LEAD-BASED PAINT 1. GENERAL: Comply with all applicable Federal, State and local regulations concerning work with lead-based paint, disposal of material painted with lead-based paint, and management of these materials. OSHA and General Industry Standards apply to worker safety and right-to-know issues. Federal EPA and State agencies regulate waste disposal and air quality issues.  2. TRANSFER OF PROPERTY: If lead-based paint containing equipment or material is to be given away or sold for reuse, scrap, or reclaiming, the contractor shall provide a written notice to the recipient of the material stating that the material contains lead-based paint and the Hazardous Waste regulations may apply to the waste or the paint in some circumstances. The new owner must also be notified that they may be responsible for compliance with OSHA requirements if the material is to be cut, sanded, abraded, or stripped of paint. Submit a copy of lead paint notices with contractor and recipient signatures to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  3. CERTIFICATES OF DISPOSAL AND RECEIPTS: Obtain certificates of disposal for waste if the waste is a hazardous waste or receipts if the waste is a non-hazardous waste. Submit copies to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  SECTION 13.17--PREVENTION OF WATER POLLUTION 1. GENERAL: Ensure that surface and ground water is protected from pollution caused by construction activities and comply with applicable regulations and requirements. Ensure that streams, waterways and other courses are not obstructed or impaired unless the appropriate Federal, State or local permits have been obtained.  2. PERMITS: Ensure that:  (1) A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit is obtained from the US Environmental Protection Agency or State as appropriate if the disturbed construction area equals 1 acre or more. Contractor is responsible for preparation and implementation of the associated Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). Disturbed areas include staging, parking, fueling, stockpiling, and any other construction related activities. Refer to www.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater for directions and forms.  (2) A dewatering permit is obtained from the appropriate agency if required for construction dewatering activities.  (3) Copies of permits and plans, approved by the appropriate regulating agencies, are submitted to the COR 14 days prior to start of work.  3. EXCAVATED MATERIAL AND OTHER CONTAMINANT SOURCES: Control runoff from excavated areas and piles of excavated material, construction material or wastes (to include truck washing and concrete wastes), and chemical products such as oil, grease, solvents, fuels, pesticides, and pole treatment compounds. Excavated material or other construction material shall not be stockpiled or deposited near or on streambanks, lake shorelines, ditches, irrigation canals, or other areas where run-off could impact the environment.  4. MANAGEMENT OF WASTE CONCRETE OR WASHING OF CONCRETE TRUCKS: Do not permit the washing of concrete trucks or disposal of excess concrete in any ditch, canal, stream, or other surface water. Concrete wastes shall be disposed in accordance with all Federal, State, and local regulations. Concrete wastes shall not be disposed of on any Western property, right-of-way, or easement; or on any streets, roads, or property without the owner’s consent.  5. STREAM CROSSINGS: Crossing of any stream or other waterway shall be done in compliance with Federal, State, and local regulations. Crossing of some waterways may be prohibited by landowners, Federal or State agencies or require permits.  SECTION 13.18--TESTING, DRAINING, REMOVAL, AND DISPOSAL OF OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 1. SAMPLING AND TESTING OF INSULATING OIL FOR PCB CONTENT: Sample and analyze the oil of electrical equipment (which includes storage tanks) for PCB’s. Use analytical methods approved by EPA and applicable State regulations. Decontaminate sampling equipment according to documented good laboratory practices (these can be contractor developed or EPA standards). Use only laboratories approved by Western. The COR will furnish a list of approved laboratories.  2. PCB TEST REPORT: Provide PCB test reports that contain the information below for disposing of oil-filled electrical equipment. Submit the PCB test report for COR approval prior to draining, removal, or disposal of oil or oil-filled equipment that is designated for disposal.  - Name and address of the laboratory - Description of the electrical equipment (e.g. transformer, breaker) - Serial number for the electrical equipment. - Date sampled - Date tested - PCB contents in parts per million (ppm) - Unique identification number of container into which the oil was drained (i.e., number of drum, tank, tanker, etc.)  3. OIL CONTAINING PCB: Comply with the Federal regulations pertaining to PCBs found at Title 40, Part 761 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR 761).  4. REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF INSULATING OIL AND OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT: Once the PCB content of the oil has been identified from laboratory results, the oil shall be transported and disposed, recycled, or reprocessed according to 40 CFR 761 (if applicable), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) “used oil”, and other applicable regulations. Used oil may be transported only by EPA-registered used oil transporters. The oil must be stored in containers that are labeled “Used Oil.” Use only transporters and disposal sites approved by Western.  5. OIL AND OIL-FILLED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT RECEIPT: Obtain and submit a receipt for oil and oil-filled equipment transported and disposed, recycled, or reprocessed to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice.  SECTION 13.19--REMOVAL OF OIL-CONTAMINATED MATERIAL 1. GENERAL: Removing oil-contaminated material includes excavating, stockpiling, testing, transporting, cleaning, and disposing of these material. Personnel working with PCBs shall be trained in accordance with OSHA requirements. Submit employee training documentation records to the COR 14 days prior to the start of work.  2. CLEANUP WORK MANAGEMENT PLAN: Provide a Cleanup Work Management Plan that has been approved by applicable Federal, State, or Local environmental regulation agencies. Submit the plan to the COR for review and comment 14 days prior to the start of work. Review of the plan is for the purpose of determining compliance with the specifications only and shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for compliance with all Federal, State, and Local regulations. The plan shall address on-site excavation of contaminated soil and debris and include the following:  - Identification of contaminants and areas to be excavated - Method of excavation - Level of personnel/subcontractor training - Safety and health provisions - Sampling requirements including quality control, laboratory to be used - Management of excavated soils and debris - Disposal methods, including transportation to disposal  3. EXCAVATION AND CLEANUP: Comply with the requirements of Title 40, Part 761 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR 761).  4. TEMPORARY STOCKPILING: Excavated material, stockpiled on site during construction, shall be stored on heavy plastic and covered to prevent wind and rain erosion at a location designated by the COR.  5. SAMPLING AND TESTING: Sample contaminated debris and areas of excavation to ensure that contamination is removed. Use personnel with experience in sampling and, in particular, with experience in PCB cleanup if PCBs are involved. Use analytical methods approved by EPA and applicable State regulations.  6. TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF CONTAMINATED MATERIAL: The Contractor shall be responsible and liable for the proper loading, transportation, and disposal of contaminated material according to Federal, State, and local requirements. Use only transporters and disposal sites approved by Western.  7. POST CLEANUP REPORT: Provide a Post-Cleanup Report that describes the cleanup of contaminated soils and debris. Submit the report to the COR prior to submittal of final invoice. The report shall contain the following information:  - Site map showing the areas cleaned - Description of the operations involved in excavating, storing, sampling, and testing, and disposal - Sampling and analysis results including 1) Name and address of the laboratory, 2) sample locations, 3) sample dates, 4) analysis dates, 5) contents of contaminant (e.g. PCB or total petroleum hydrocarbons) in parts per million (ppm) - Certification by the Contractor that the cleanup requirements were met - Copies of any manifests, bills of lading, and disposal certificates - Copies of correspondence with regulatory agencies that support completion of the cleanup  SECTION 13.20—CONSERVATION OF BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 1. GENERAL: Federal law prohibits the “take” of endangered, threatened, proposed or candidate wildlife and plants, and destruction or adverse modification of designated Critical Habitat. Federal law also prohibits the “take” of birds protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act. “Take” means to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect or attempt to engage in any such conduct with a protected animal or plant or any part thereof, or attempt to do any of those things without a permit from U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The Contractor will take precautions to avoid harming other wildlife species. Contractor shall restrict all ground disturbing activities to areas that have been surveyed by Western for natural resources and as specified in accordance with Standard 1 – General Requirements, Sections 1.3.1 Rights-of-way and 1.3.2 Access to the Work and Haul Routes.  2. KNOWN OCCURRENCE OF PROTECTED SPECIES OR HABITAT: Following issuance of the notice to proceed, and prior to the start of construction, Western will provide training to all contractor and subcontractor personnel and others involved in the construction activity if there is a known occurrence of protected species or habitat in the construction area. Untrained personnel shall not be allowed in the construction area. Western will provide drawings or maps showing sensitive areas located on or immediately adjacent to the transmission line right-of-way and/or facility. These sensitive areas shall be considered avoidance areas. Prior to any construction activity, the avoidance areas shall be marked on the ground by Western. If access is absolutely necessary, the contractor shall first obtain written permission from the COR, noting that a Western and/or other Federal or state government or tribal agency biologist may be required to accompany personnel and equipment. Ground markings shall be maintained through the duration of the contract. Western will remove the markings during or following final inspection of the project.  3. UNKNOWN OCCURRENCE OF PROTECTED SPECIES OR HABITAT: If evidence of a protected species is found in the project area, the contractor shall immediately notify the COR and provide the location and nature of the findings. The contractor shall stop all activity within 200 feet of the protected species or habitat and not proceed until directed to do so by the COR.  Appendix G Paleontological Resources Report uite 201 September 12, 2014 Mr. Tom Murphy Applied EarthWorks logoVice President Aspen Environmental Group 8801 Folsom Blvd., Suite 290 Sacramento, CA 95826 133 N. San Gabriel Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91107-3414 (626) 578-0119 RE: Paleontological Resource Overview of the San Luis Transmission Project, Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California  Dear Mr. Murphy:  At your request, on behalf of Western Area Power Administration (Western), Applied EarthWorks, Inc. (Æ) has performed a preliminary assessment of the paleontological resource setting of the proposed San Luis Transmission Project (Project) within the counties of Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced. The scope of work included a museum records search and paleontologic/geologic literature review of the proposed Project area. This letter serves as a summary of our findings.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION  Western proposes to construct, own, operate, and maintain a new 500-kilovolt (kV) transmission line from the Tracy to Los Banos Substations (62 miles in length), a 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations (5 miles), a 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Los Banos Substations (3 miles), and a 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations (18 miles). The transmission line will be located along the eastern flank of the Diablo Range and western Central Valley, roughly parallel to Interstate 5. Western will also consider the following corridor alternatives: Patterson Pass to Horseshoe Road 500-kV line (50 miles), West of Cemetery 500-kV line (7 miles), West of O'Neill Forebay 70-kV line (7 miles), Los Banos to Dos Amigos 230-kV line (6 miles), and Jasper Sears Road 230-kV line (14 miles). The underlying geology of the alternatives was considered under the umbrella of the proposed Project for this resource assessment. The proposed Project is located on land owned by the Bureau of Reclamation (USBR), California Department of Fish and Wildlife, California Department of Parks and Recreation, and privately-held land. Additional Project components would include construction of breaker terminal bays for the Tracy, San Luis, Las Banos, and Dos Amigos Substations, as well as associated facilities, access roads, and improvements. The proposed Project is intended to minimize costs and improve power delivery associated with the San Luis unit.  REGULATORY CONTEXT  Federal  Paleontological resources (i.e., fossils) are the prehistoric remains of once-living organisms and are considered to be nonrenewable scientific resources. As such, paleontological resources are  afforded protection under the various federal laws and regulations including the Antiquities Act of 1906, the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1935, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, and Title 43 of the Code of Federal Regulations, among others. Additionally, the Paleontological Resources Protection Act (PRPA) was recently enacted as a result of the passage of the Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009. The PRPA requires federal land management agencies to manage and protect paleontological resources and affirms the authority of existing policies already in place. Federal laws and regulations apply when projects are located on federal lands or federally managed lands, or when they are federally funded. Portions of the proposed Project area traverse lands managed by the USBR and other federal agencies; therefore, federal laws will apply.  State  Paleontological resources are also protected under various state and local laws and regulations including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Specifically, CEQA (Public Resources Code [PRC] 21000–21889) encourages the protection of all aspects of the environment by requiring state and local agencies to prepare multidisciplinary analyses of the environmental impacts of a proposed project, and to make decisions based on the findings of those analyses.  The procedures, types of activities, persons, and public agencies required to comply with CEQA are defined in the Guidelines for the Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA Guidelines; Title 14, California Code of Regulations [CCR], Chapter 3, Section 15000 et seq.). These guidelines define a historical resource as any object or site that “has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory” (14 CCR 15064.5[a][3][D]), which is typically interpreted as including fossil materials and other paleontological resources (Association of Environmental Professionals [AEP] 2012). More specifically, destruction of a unique paleontological resource or site or unique geologic feature constitutes a significant impact under CEQA (CEQA Guidelines, Appendix G). CEQA does not provide an explicit definition of a “unique paleontological resource,” but a definition is implied by comparable language within the act relating to archeological resources (PRC 21083.2[g]): “An artifact, object, or site about which it can be clearly demonstrated that, without merely adding to the current body of knowledge, there is a high probability that it . . . contains information needed to answer important scientific research questions and that there is a demonstrable public interest in that information.” One of the questions listed in the Environmental Checklist Form (CEQA Guidelines, Appendix G, Section V[c]) is: “Will the proposed project directly or indirectly destroy a unique paleontological resource or site or unique geologic feature?”  Treatment of paleontological resources under CEQA is generally similar to treatment of cultural resources, requiring evaluation of resources in the project; assessment of potential impacts on significant or unique resources; and development of mitigation measures for potentially significant impacts, which may include avoidance, monitoring, or data recovery excavation.  Additionally, PRC 5097.5 affirms that no person shall willingly or knowingly excavate, remove, or otherwise destroy a vertebrate paleontological site or paleontological feature without the express permission of the overseeing public land agency. A violation of this code is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or by  imprisonment in a county jail not to exceed 1 year, or by both. The code further states under PRC 30244 that any development that would adversely impact paleontological resources shall require reasonable mitigation. These regulations apply to projects located on land owned by or under the jurisdiction of the state or any city, county, district, or other public agency.  Local  Alameda, Stanislaus, San Joaquin, and Merced Counties do not have mitigation requirements that specifically address potential adverse impacts to paleontological resources.  THRESHOLDS FOR DETERMINING SIGNIFICANCE  According to CEQA, the threshold of significance for a negative impact to paleontological resources is reached when a project is determined to disturb or destroy a significant paleontological resource. Significant paleontological resources are defined by the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (SVP) (2010) as “identifiable” vertebrate fossils, uncommon invertebrate, plant, and trace fossils that provide taphonomic, taxonomic, phylogenetic, paleoecologic, stratigraphic, or biochronological data. These data are important because they are used to examine evolutionary relationships, provide insight on the development of and interaction between biological communities, establish time scales for geologic studies, and for many other scientific purposes (Scott and Springer 2003; SVP 2010).  In general, the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) guidelines are useful for the management of paleontological resources on certain federally-managed or federally-owned land. The BLM defines a significant paleontological resource as follows:  Any paleontological resource that is considered to be of scientific interest, including most vertebrate fossil remains and traces, and certain rare or unusual invertebrate and plant fossils. A significant paleontological resource is considered to be scientifically important because it is a rare or previously unknown species, it is of high quality and wellpreserved, it preserves a previously unknown anatomical or other characteristic, provides new information about the history of life on earth, or has identified educational or recreational value. Paleontological resources that may be considered to not have paleontological significance include those that lack provenience or context, lack physical integrity because of decay or natural erosion, or that are overly redundant or are otherwise not useful for research [BLM 2008:1-18].  METHODOLOGY  To determine whether or not fossil localities have been previously discovered within a project area or a particular rock unit, a search of pertinent local and regional museum repositories for paleontological localities within and nearby the area of question is performed. For the proposed Project area, a museum records search was performed utilizing the University of California Museum of Paleontology’s (UCMP’s) online database, which contains paleontological records for Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. The records review was supplemented by a literature and geologic map review to determine the geologic setting and identify known significant paleontological localities in the area.  REGIONAL GEOLOGY  The proposed Project area is situated within the Coast Ranges and Great Valley geomorphic provinces of California (Norris and Webb 1976). A geomorphic province is a region of unique topography and geology that is readily distinguished from other regions based on its landforms and diastrophic history. The Coast Ranges extend about 600 miles from the Oregon border south to the Santa Ynez River in Santa Barbara County and are characterized by numerous northsouth–trending peaks and valleys that range in elevation from approximately 500 feet above mean sea level (amsl) to 7,581 feet amsl at the highest summit (Norris and Webb 1976). The width of the range averages 50 miles, and it is bounded on the west by the Pacific Ocean and to the east by the Great Valley geomorphic province; a north-northwest–trending asymmetric structural trough roughly 400 miles long and 50 miles wide (Bartow and Nilsen 1990).  The geology of the Coast Ranges and Central Valley is exceptionally diverse. Although their geomorphological differences are distinct, the two provinces share a common geologic history. The region of the present-day Coast Ranges and Great Valley was covered by marine waters through the Mesozoic and into the Cenozoic (Bartow and Nilsen 1990). During this time, forearc (i.e., the deep marine region between a volcanic arc and the associated subduction zone) marine and nonmarine shale, sandstone, and conglomerate of the Cretaceous Central Valley Sequence were deposited coeval with the accretion of the Franciscan Assemblage (Bartow and Nilsen 1990). Into the late Mesozoic and much of the Cenozoic, unconformable Paleocene to Pliocene marine continental shelf sedimentary rocks were deposited above the Great Valley Sequence within the actively subsiding Central Valley region (Barron 1989; Graymer et al. 1996; Harden 1998). As of the Late Miocene to the Late Pliocene, most of the marine waters in the Great Valley were drained and an orogenic (i.e., mountain-building) episode occurred in the vicinity of the present-day Coast Ranges, resulting in their uplift above sea level (Weissmann et al. 2005). Subsequently, from the Late Pliocene to Holocene, extensive deposits of terrestrial material, including alluvial fans and fluvial sediments, were deposited in the Great Valley and southern Coast Ranges (Norris and Webb 1976). Tectonic activity and extensive faulting continued to occur during the Quaternary period, further uplifting and deforming the Coast Ranges.  The majority of the proposed Project area is situated on the eastern flank of the Diablo Range within the Coast Ranges geomorphic province. The Diablo Range extends approximately 200 miles from Contra Costa County south to Monterey County, and generally consists of rolling hills and grasslands (Norris and Webb 1976). Structurally, the Diablo Range is characterized by anticlinal folds orientated en echelon (i.e., a stepped pattern consisting of parallel structures oblique to the trend), separated by synclinal folds that contain younger sedimentary rocks (Fossen 2010; Norris and Webb 1976). In the vicinity of the proposed Project area, the Diablo Range is highly faulted and transected by many major active or recently active faults, including the northwest-trending Tesla-Ortigalita Fault Zone and the Greenville strike-slip fault (Graymer et al. 1996).  PROPOSED PROJECT AREA GEOLOGY AND PALEONTOLOGY  The proposed Project area is mapped at a scale of 1:24,000 by a series of geologic maps authored by Thomas W. Dibblee Jr. and John A. Minch (2006a-c, 2007a-g). According to these published maps, the proposed Project area is underlain by Cretaceous to Quaternary age terrestrial and marine sedimentary deposits. The lithology, stratigraphy, and paleontology of these units are described in the following sections.  The Cretaceous Great Valley Sequence: Panoche Formation and Moreno Formation  The Panoche Formation and Moreno Formation are members of the Great Valley Sequence, which is extensively exposed throughout the proposed Project area. The Great Valley Sequence records a thick (10,000- to 30,000-foot) accumulation of Jurassic to Paleogene marine mudstone and sandstone deposited within a forearc basin flanked by the Sierra Nevada Batholith to the east and the Franciscan Complex to the west (Harden 1998). The lithology of the Great Valley Sequence reflects the evolution of the Sierran magmatic arc and the unroofing of the Sierran plutons (Bartow and Nilsen 1990). In the eastern Diablo Range, the Cretaceous Panoche Formation rests unconformably on the Coast Range ophiolite and represents the base of the Great Valley Sequence. The Panoche Formation is up to 3,000 feet thick and consists of laterally variable deposits of mudstone and siltstone beds with local sandstone and boulder conglomerate lenses. The unit coarsens upwards into a fine- to medium-grained quartzo-feldspathic sandstonerich deposit, indicative of a regression sequence (Dibblee and Minch 2006a-c; 2007a-g). The Panoche Formation is light gray to light brown in color, moderately to well-bedded, and wellindurated. The overlying Moreno Formation is up to 1,300 feet thick and was deposited conformably on the Panoche Formation during the Late Cretaceous to Paleocene epochs (Throckmorton 1988). The Moreno Formation consists of fine-grained sediments and is composed of commonly laminated, gray to brown micaceous shale with subordinate selenite gypsum, limestone lenses, and fine- to medium-grained grayish-tan arkose (Throckmorton 1988). The Panoche and Moreno Formations were originally defined by Anderson and Pack (1915) for their type section in the Panoche Hills and are continuously exposed for at least 75 miles throughout the eastern Diablo Range. Sedimentation of the Panoche and Moreno Formations occurred in a diverse marine environment; facies include shallow marine shelf, submarine slope, fluvio-deltaic, and deep-sea fan (Bartow and Nilsen, 1990). The Moreno Formation includes an occurrence of the K-P (Cretaceous-Paleogene) boundary; a chronostratigraphic boundary between the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Eras at 66 million years ago (Ma), during which a global mass extinction event occurred, including the disappearance of large reptiles (Bartow and Nilsen, 1990; Shulte et al. 2010).  An abundant Cretaceous age flora and fauna has been recorded within the deposits of the Great Valley Sequence (UCMP 2014). Numerous localities have been recorded within the Panoche and Moreno Formations, which have yielded marine and terrestrial fossils, including specimens of mollusk, foraminifera, diatoms, ammonite, shark, fish, amphibian, and large reptile, conifer wood, and the remains of flowering plants (BLM 2014; Elder and Miller 1993; Haggart and Ward 1984; UCMP online database 2014). The remains of several large marine reptiles have been recovered within the Moreno Formation from within the eastern Diablo Range, including Plotosaurus bennisonii (mosasaur), P. tuckeri (mosasaur), and Plesiotylosaurus crassidens (mosasaur), Hydrotherosaurus alexandrae (plesiosaur), Fresnosaurus drescheri (plesiosaur),  and Aphrosaurus furlong (plesiosaur), and Saurolophus sp. (hadrosaur; terrestrial dinosaur) (Paleobiology Database 2014). In the Panoche Hills, the nearly fully articulated holotype specimen of the plesiosaur Morenosaurus stocki was recovered from within the Moreno Formation. In addition, fossilized wood from the Moreno conifer (Margeriella cretacea) has been exceptionally well preserved within the Moreno Formation (BLM 2014). Fossilized plant remains recovered from within the Moreno Formation include taxa of Palmoxylon sp. (palm), Ulminium mulleri (elm), U. pattersonensis (elm), Plataninium platanoides (sycamore), Plataninium californicum (sycamore), Magnolioxylon panochensis (magnolia), and Tetracentronites panochensis (shrub) (BLM 2014). On the basis of sedimentological and stratigraphic field studies, Elder and Miller (1993) report that many of the macrofossils within the Great Valley Sequence were identified as nearshore fauna transported by turbidity currents into a deep marine environment. Numerous invertebrate remains have been preserved inside reworked sandy clasts within the fine-grained matrix of conglomerate beds. The sandy clasts and fossils are typically only slightly older than the finer matrix and were likely transported and reworked soon after original deposition and cementation.  Tesla Formation and Laguna Seca Formation  The Eocene Tesla Formation is exposed throughout the proposed Project area, where it is unconformable with the underlying Moreno Formation and overlying Domengine Formation (Bartow 1984, 1991; Dibblee and Minch 2006a-c, 2007a-g). The Tesla Formation is up to 675 feet thick near its type section and was first described by Anderson and Pack (1915) and later redescribed by Huey (1937) based on an exposure near the old coal-mining town of Tesla. The Tesla Formation consists of a light gray to light brown arkose, siltstone, claystone, brown carbonaceous shale, and coal deposits, which were mined during the 19th Century. Carbonaceous material and plant fragments are widespread within the siltstones and sandstones. Common sedimentary structures include trough and planar crossbeds, ripple laminations, cross laminations, and convolute bedding (Throckmorton 1988).  South of the San Luis reservoir, Dibblee and Minch (2006a-c, 2007a-g) map the Tesla Formation as the Laguna Seca Formation, to which they assign an older Paleocene to Eocene age. The provenance and depositional environment of the Laguna Seca Formation is comparable to the Tesla Formation and the two units share a similar lithology; however, their correlation is not certain (Throckmorton 1988). Exposures of the Laguna Seca Formation appear to be restricted to the area south of the San Luis Reservoir. The Laguna Seca Formation was named by Briggs (1953) for its type section near Laguna Seca Creek and is composed of well-lithified, light gray to tan, fine-grained arkosic sandstone and pebbly, grayish-yellow sandy conglomerate with interbedded gray argillaceous shale (Paleobiology Database 2014).  In addition to well-preserved plant material and burrows, the Tesla and Laguna Seca Formations have yielded several Paleocene to Eocene age invertebrate localities from paralic deposits near the proposed Project area (Throckmorton 1988; UCMP 2014). Brackish and shallow water marine fauna, including bivalve, gastropod, schaphopod (tusk shell), and coral have been recovered from the siltstone, sandstone, and mudstone beds (Paleobiology Database 2014).  Domengine Formation  The middle Eocene Domengine Formation is intermittently exposed throughout the proposed Project area where it unconformably overlies the Tesla Formation and Cretaceous rocks of the Franciscan Assemblage and Great Valley Sequence (Bartow 1991). The Domengine Formation records a marine transgression during the early Paleogene and was first described by Anderson and Pack (1905) for exposures north of Coalinga (National Geologic Map Database [NGMDB 2014]). The marine unit is extensively exposed throughout central California and is composed of massive, greenish-gray, medium-grained calcareous sandstone and pebble conglomerate. Green glauconitic sand, typically indicative of slow deposition in a continental shelf environment, is locally abundant within the Domengine Formation and is commonly associated with preserved mollusk shells (Pettijohn et al. 1987). The conglomerate beds consist of pebble to cobble size clasts of Franciscan detritus within a medium- to coarse-grained sandy matrix (Bartow 1991; Oakeshott 1958).  The Domengine Formation has yielded hundreds of gastropod and bivalve fossils characteristic of the Domengine west coast molluscan stage (late early Eocene through early middle Eocene) (Throckmorton 1988). In addition, the UCMP online database (2014) reports that at least one vertebrate locality has been recorded within the Domengine Formation within Fresno County, which yielded specimens of shark and bony fish.  Kreyenhagen Formation  The Eocene Kreyenhagen Formation conformably overlies the Domengine Formation and is discontinuously exposed throughout the eastern Diablo Range and proposed Project area (Bartow 1990; UCMP 2014). The Kreyenhagen Formation was defined by Anderson and Pack (1905) for its type section near Canoas Creek in southwestern Fresno County. The unit records a widespread marine transgression during the Eocene and consists of deep marine sediments composed of laminated white diatomaceous shale; porcelaneous mudstone; and brown argillaceous shale with subordinate interbeds of siltstone, limestone, and pebbly green sand (Bartow 1990; NGMDB 2014). In addition, the Kreyenhagen Formation underlies the Great Valley at depth and is a major source of oil and gas in the San Joaquin Valley (Blueford 1984). Over 400 invertebrate, plant, and microfossil localities have been recorded within the Kreyenhagen Formation in Stanislaus, Merced, Fresno, Contra Costa, Monterey, San Benito, Santa Clara, Kern, and Kings Counties. The localities yielded specimens of echinoderm, brachiopod, bivalve, gastropod, foraminifera, and diatom fossils. In addition, five vertebrate localities were recorded within Fresno County, which yielded unspecified vertebrate remains (UCMP 2014).  The San Pablo Group: the Briones Formation, Cierbo Formation, and Neroly Formation  The Miocene San Pablo Group is exposed in the proposed Project area and extends throughout Contra Costa, Alameda, Stanislaus, and Santa Clara Counties (Graymer et al. 1996). In the proposed Project area, the Briones Formation is conformably overlain by the Cierbo Formation and unconformably underlain by the Tesla Formation. The Briones Formation is the oldest member of the San Pablo Group, which includes the overlying Cierbo and Neroly formations (Carpenter et al. 1984; NGMDB 2014). The Briones Formation was first described by Lawton (1914) for its type section near present-day Briones Regional Park in Contra Costa County and  was later assigned to the San Pablo Group by Clark (1930), on the basis of stratigraphic and faunal correlation (Hall 1958; NGMDB 2014). The shallow marine deposit is up to 2,300 feet thick near its type section and consists of indistinctly bedded fine-grained quartz sandstone, lithic wacke, gray to brown conglomerate, interbedded silty claystone, and resistant shell conglomerate (Chetelat 1995; Graymer et al. 1996; NGMDB 2014). Thin interbeds of well-bedded indurated light gray sand and siltstone are locally present near its base. Conglomerate clasts include black and red chert, quartzite, andesite, argillite, siltstone, basalt, felsic tuff, and quartz grains (Graymer et al. 1996). The Briones Formation has yielded an abundant and diverse invertebrate fauna throughout Contra Costa, Alameda, Stanislaus, and Santa Clara Counties, including taxa of bivalve, gastropod, crustacean, echinoid, and brittle stars. In addition, the deposit has yielded numerous vertebrate localities, including specimens of large land mammals, reptiles, fish, birds, sharks, and mollusks (UCMP 2014). Within Alameda County, at least three localities have been reported from within the Briones Formation, which yielded several fossils of Desmostylus hesperus (extinct hippopotamus-like herbivorous mammal) from deposits near Pleasanton and San Jose, including a type specimen.  The Miocene Cierbo Formation was named by Clark (1921) for its type section near the Carquinez straits (NGMDB 2014). The Cierbo Formation consists of poorly to moderately consolidated white to pale yellow brown quartz sandstone interbedded with thin pebble conglomerate lenses and brown shale deposits (Carpenter et al. 1984). The lithology is fine- to coarse-grained, massive to thickly bedded, and moderately friable to indurated. The sandstone is locally crossbedded and is composed of quartz feldspar sand, lithic gravel, and biotite crystals (Barlock 1988). Limonite (an iron oxide-hydroxide mineral that forms due to secondary alteration), black chert, tuff deposits, and carboniferous shale appear locally. The Cierbo Formation is up to 650 feet thick and is mapped as a discontinuous exposure throughout the Coast Ranges, from Solano County in the north to Santa Barbara County in the south (Graymer et al. 1996; UCMP 2014). The fine to coarse lithology indicates a transitional depositional environment that ranged from nearshore to estuarine to terrestrial (Fox 1983). The Cierbo Formation has yielded abundant fossil specimens of Late Miocene invertebrate fauna, including bivalve (clam), gastropod (snail), echinoidea (sea urchin), and scleractinia (stony coral) (UCMP 2014). The Cierbo Formation is especially known for its abundant Ostrea (oyster), often found in the coarse sandstone deposits (Graymer et al. 1996). Additionally, the Cierbo Formation has yielded unnamed vertebrate fossils from within its coarse conglomeritic deposits in Contra Costa County (Fox 1984; UCMP 2014).  The Neroly Formation is the youngest member of the San Pablo Group and was first described by Clark and Woodford (1927) for exposures near Mount Diablo. The unit is up to 1,800 feet thick in the northern Diablo Range and is characterized by its distinctive blue-gray sandstone derived from the andesitic eruptions to the east within the Sierra Nevada (Bartow 1984; Throckmorton 1988). The medium-grained sandstone has a massive texture and is predominately composed of andesite fragments, quartz, feldspar, and mica minerals, and exhibits a local brown color. Subordinate lithology within the Neroly Formation includes blue-gray andesite-bearing pebble conglomerate and tuffaceous shale beds (Carpenter 1984). Sedimentation of the Neroly Formation occurred in a shelf to deltatic environment during the Late Miocene and numerous marine and terrestrial invertebrate, vertebrate, and plant fossils of have been recovered from within the Neroly Formation in Stanislaus and San Joaquin Counties (Graymer et al. 1996). Mammal remains of Clarendonian age (Middle to Late Miocene) have been well preserved  within the Neroly Formation. Recovered taxa include canid, Martinogale alveodens (primitive skunk), Serridentinus productus (proboscidean), antilocaprid, Merycodus (pronghorn), Eucastor lecontei (primitive beaver), and Copemys barstowsensis (primitive New World mouse) (Throckmorton 1988). Additional fossil remains recovered within the Neroly Formation include horse, ground squirrel, eagle ray, gastropod, bivalve, scaphopod, coral, crab, sea urchin, and plants (UCMP 2014).  Oro Loma Formation  The Miocene to Pliocene Oro Loma Formation is exposed within the eastern portion of the proposed Project area where it is unconformable with the underlying Neroly Formation and the overlying Tulare Formation. The Oro Loma Formation was originally defined by Briggs (1953) for its type section near Oro Loma Creek in the Laguna Seca Hills (Graymer et al. 1996; NGMDB 2014). In the vicinity of the Proposed Project area, Dibblee and Minch (2006a-c, 2007a-g) restrict the Oro Loma Formation to Alameda and San Joaquin Counties and refer to similar deposits in Stanislaus and Merced Counties as “unnamed non-marine deposits of Pliocene age.” The two lithostratigraphic units are correlative and will be considered as the same unit for this report (Kelly and Stewart 2008). The Pliocene age deposits of the Oro Loma Formation are up to 300 feet thick near the type section and consist of unconsolidated to moderately consolidated red siltstone, sandstone, and pebble conglomerate interbedded with greenish-gray claystone. Local exposures of cross-bedded calcareous sandstone are common (Graymer et al. 1996; NGMDB 2014).  The Oro Loma Formation has yielded several fossil localities within the eastern Diablo Range (Kelly and Stewart 2008). Although the UCMP database only has one record for a vertebrate locality within Stanislaus County near the proposed Project area, the remains of several terrestrial mammals have been recovered in neighboring Fresno County. During excavations for a power line along Monocline Ridge in Fresno County, between Los Banos and Coalinga, five vertebrate localities (LACM 7664-7668) were identified within the Oro Loma Formation, which yielded four new vertebrate fossils assemblages of Middle to Late Miocene age (Clarendonian to Hemphillian North American Land Mammal Age [NALMA]). Recovered specimens include Hipparion tehonense (horse), Neohipparion leptode (horse), Dinohippus sp. (horse), and Alforjas sp. (camel) (Kelly and Stewart 2008; Paleobiology Database 2014).  Tulare Formation  The Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene Tulare Formation is exposed in Stanislaus, San Joaquin, and Alameda Counties in the vicinity of the proposed Project area (Dibblee and Minch 2006a-c, 2007a-g). The Tulare Formation was defined by Woodring et al. (1940) for exposures in the Kettleman Hills near the old shoreline of Tulare Lake (NGMDB 2014). Near its type section, the Tulare Formation is conformable with the underlying Pliocene San Joaquin Formation; however, near the proposed Project area, the Tulare Formation unconformably overlies the Great Valley Sequence (Page 1983). The Tulare Formation consists of westward-thickening alluvial fan conglomerate, fluvial sandstone, and interbedded lacustrine siltstone and clay deposits, which drained from the Coast Ranges during the Pliocene to Early Pleistocene (Bartow 1990). Near the proposed Project area, the sediments of the Tulare Formation are moderately lithified and composed of thickly-bedded, white to tan marl, massive gray claystone, and local gypsum and  other fresh water evaporates (Dibblee and Minch 2006a-c, 2007a-g). The unit is approximately 1,700 to 3,500 feet thick and is intermittently exposed from the eastern flank of the Diablo Range to the center of the Great Valley, where it interfingers with the Sierran-fed Turlock Lake Formation (Bartow 1991).  Numerous vertebrate localities have been recovered from within the fine-grained sediments of the Tulare Formation within Alameda, San Joaquin, Kern, and Kings Counties, which yielded specimens of horse, cat, bird, dolphin, shark, fish, reptile, and rodent (UCMP 2014). In addition, Woodring et al. (1940) describes a large invertebrate fossil assemblage of freshwater clams and snails recovered from the Tulare Formation near the Kettleman Hills in Kings County (Page 1983). Further, according to the UCMP online database (2014), the remains of several well preserved plants, including taxa of Sequoiadendron sp. (giant sequoia), pine, manzanita, fir, and walnut, were recovered during excavations at the Turlock Walnut Energy Center in Stanislaus County.  Quaternary Older Alluvium  Quaternary alluvial deposits of Pleistocene age have proven to yield significant vertebrate fossil localities throughout Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. Pleistocene age alluvial fan and fluvial deposits are exposed in the eastern and northern portions of the proposed Project area. These deposits consist of unconsolidated coarse to fine sand and silt with abundant pebbles and cobbles, which drained from the Coast Ranges during the Quaternary period. On the eastern flank of the Diablo Range, the Pleistocene age sediments are typically elevated relative to younger alluvial deposits, with well developed soil and dissection by channels that are partially filled with Holocene age alluvium (Helley and Graymer 1997). The total thickness of the Pleistocene deposits varies locally, but is up to 150 feet thick in the vicinity of the proposed Project area (Barlock 1988). The Pleistocene age alluvial sediments have preserved a characteristic Ice Age vertebrate fauna of large land mammals, including specimens of ground sloth, mammoth, horse, bison, camel, tapir, ungulate, mastodon, rabbit, vole, and gopher. During excavations associated with the Delta-Mendota Canal in Alameda, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus Counties, at least 20 vertebrate localities were recorded, which yielded numerous specimens of mammals and birds. The depth of fossil recovery is unreported (UCMP 2014).  Quaternary Alluvium  Holocene age alluvial deposits are widely exposed in the proposed Project area (Dibblee and Minch 2006a-c, 2007a-g). The younger Quaternary deposits consist of alluvial gravel and sands that drained from neighboring highlands. Holocene deposits near the proposed Project area generally consist of alluvial fan facies comprised of unconsolidated brown to tan gravely sand and silt and fluvial facies of brown sand and silty clay (Helley and Graymer 1997). In addition, stream channel deposits composed of poorly to well-sorted sand, silt, gravel, and pebbles are exposed in active washes and embankments within the proposed Project area. Holocene deposits are generally considered too young to contain fossilized remains, but may shallowly overlie older, paleontologically sensitive deposits.  RECORDS SEARCH RESULTS  For this assessment, paleontological locality records maintained by the UCMP online database were reviewed to determine if any previously recorded paleontological resources occur within the proposed Project boundaries or vicinity. The UCMP does not provide specific location data within its online locality database; however, the names of the localities often describe the general area of their recovery. The search indicated that although there are no records for vertebrate fossil localities directly within the corridor of the proposed Project, at least 43 localities have been recovered from within Cretaceous to Pleistocene age deposits near the proposed Project area. The UCMP database contains five locality records for vertebrate fossil remains within the Late Cretaceous to Paleogene Moreno Formation, which yielded specimens of dinosaur, mosasaur, plesiosaur, and fish from Stanislaus and Merced Counties. Additional UCMP locality records for Cenozoic fauna include unspecified vertebrates recovered from within the Panoche Formation in Merced County. At least eight vertebrate localities have been recorded within the Miocene age deposits throughout Alameda, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus Counties, including one from within the Oro Loma Formation, four from within the Briones Formation, and three from the Neroly Formation. Recovered Miocene-age specimens include horse, Desmostylus sp. (hippopotamus-like mammal), tortoise, turtle, canid, and ungulate. Further, the Pliocene- Pleistocene Tulare Formation yielded several fish, bird, and terrestrial mammal specimens from four localities near California Aqueduct in the vicinity of the proposed Project area. Lastly, UCMP collections indicate that at least 26 vertebrate localities have been recorded within Quaternary age sedimentary deposits near the proposed Project area, which yielded specimens of mammoth, horse, bison, ground sloth, mastodon, tapir, rodent, bird, rabbit, and turtle. The UCMP online database also contains records for numerous invertebrate localities for the geologic units that underlie the proposed Project area. Although not typically significant, these invertebrate localities have yielded numerous fossils of bivalve, gastropod, cephalopod, and foraminifera, including several type specimens. Depth for each locality is unreported. The results of the museum records search are presented below in Table 1 (UCMP online database 2014).  Table 1 Vertebrate Localities Reported from within Geologic Units in the Vicinity of the Proposed Project Area in Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Countiesa  Locality No. Geologic Unit  Age Taxa UCMP D715 Panoche Formation Late Cretaceous Unspecified vertebrates UCMP V6418 Moreno Formation Late Cretaceous to Paleogene Morenosaurus stocki (plesiosaur), Encodus ferox (“saber-toothed” bony fish) UCMP V67238 Moreno Formation Late Cretaceous to Paleogene Mosasauridae (mosasaur), Elasmosauridae (plesiosaur), Osteichthyes (bony fish) UCMP V72116 Moreno Formation Late Cretaceous to Paleogene Unspecified vertebrates UCMP V3622 Moreno Formation Late Cretaceous to Paleogene Hadrosaurinae (hadrosaurid dinosaur), Plotosaurus tuckeri (mosasaur) UCMP V3718 Moreno Formation Late Cretaceous to Paleogene P. bennisoni (mosasaur) UCMP V93153 Oro Loma Formation Miocene  Pliohippus sp. (horse) UCMP V3108 Briones Formation Late Miocene Desmostylus sp. (hippopotamus-like herbivorous mammal)  Table 1 (Continued) Vertebrate Localities Reported from within Geologic Units in the Vicinity of the Proposed Project Area in Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Countiesa  Locality No. Geologic Unit Age Taxa UCMP V65415 Briones Formation Late Miocene D. hesperus (Type specimen) UCMP V6534 Briones Formation Late Miocene D. hesperus UCMP V4957 Briones Formation Late Miocene Cryptodira (suborder of tortoises and turtles) UCMP V71106- V71107 (2) Neroly Formation Late Miocene Borophagus sp. (canid), Nannippus sp. (extinct horse), Capromeryx sp. (small ungulate) UCMP V94011 Neroly Formation Late Miocene Unspecified vertebrates UCMP V7079- V7080 (2) Tulare Formation Pliocene to Pleistocene Orthodon microlepidotus (Sacramento blackfish), Acipenser sp. (sturgeon), Archoplites interruptus (Sacramento perch), Actinopterygii (ray-finned fish), Branta sp. (black geese), Equidae (horse), rodent UCMP V70122- V70123 (2) Tulare Formation Pliocene to Pleistocene Osteichthyes UCMP V5005 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Equus sp. (horse) UCMP V6808 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Equus sp. UCMP V93152 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Leporidae (family of rabbits and hares) UCMP V3823 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Pilosa (order includes sloths and anteaters) UCMP V4727- V4728, V4801- V4803, V4816- V4818, V4859- V4862, V69166 (13) Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Bison sp., Elephantidae (mammoths and elephants), Microtus sp. (vole), Mammuthus sp. (mammoth), Equus sp., Glossotherium (Harlan’s ground sloth), Camelidae (camel), Tapirus merriami (tapir) UCMP V3315 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Camelops hesternus (camel) UCMP V66150 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Megalonyx jeffersonii (giant ground sloth) UCMP V4807- V4811, V4819 (6) Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Mammut sp. (mastodon), Thomomys sp. (smooth-toothed pocket gopher), Equidae, Bison sp., Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulate) UCMP V6321 Unspecified Quaternary age deposit Pleistocene Camelidae, Equus sp., Aves (bird), Mammuthus columbi a - UCMP 2014.  FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  Based on the literature review and museum records search results, the geologic units underlying the proposed Project area have a paleontological resource potential ranging from low to high in accordance with the SVP (2010) and BLM’s (2008) Potential Fossil Yield Classification (PFYC) system. The Panoche, Moreno, Oro Loma, Briones, Neroly, and Tulare Formations, as well as the Quaternary older alluvium, are considered to have a high paleontological resource potential in accordance to SVP’s tripartite sensitivity scale, equivalent to PFYC Class 4, because they have proven to yield vertebrate fossils near the proposed Project area and throughout California. Although the UCMP contains no vertebrate localities for the Kreyenhagen, Domengine, and Cierbo Formations within Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, or Merced Counties, these units have yielded intermittent vertebrate localities elsewhere in California; as such, they are assigned to PFYC Class 3 (moderate paleontological resource potential). The Tesla Formation and Laguna Seca Formations are assigned a low paleontological resource potential (PFYC Class 2); although they contain a number of invertebrate localities, they have not yielded significant vertebrate fossils. In addition, Holocene age alluvial deposits have a low paleontological resource potential recommendation (PFYC Class 2) because they are generally too young to preserve fossilized remains; however, these alluvial deposits may shallowly overlie older intact fine-grained Pleistocene-age sediments. Therefore, their paleontological resource potential is low to high, increasing with depth.  In general, the potential for a given project to result in negative impacts to paleontological resources is directly proportional to the amount of ground disturbance associated with the project; thus, the higher the amount of ground disturbances within geological deposits with a known paleontological sensitivity, the greater the potential for negative impacts to paleontological resources. Since this Project entails construction of a new transmission line, new ground disturbances are anticipated. Consequently, the likelihood of impacting scientifically significant fossils because of Project development is high. Therefore, a qualified paleontologist should be retained to develop and implement a Paleontological Resource Mitigation Plan. The following mitigation measures have been developed in accordance with SVP and BLM guidelines; if implemented, these measures will satisfy the requirements of CEQA and NEPA. These measures have been used by professional paleontologists for many years and have proven to be effective in reducing or eliminating adverse impacts to paleontological resources as a result of private and public development projects throughout California and elsewhere.  Preconstruction Survey  It is recommended that a qualified paleontologist be retained to conduct a field reconnaissance survey of the Project area prior to any ground-disturbing activities. Any required permits should be obtained prior to the survey. The purpose of the field survey will be to visually inspect the ground surface for exposed fossils or traces thereof and to evaluate geologic exposures for their potential to contain preserved fossil material at the subsurface. Only Project areas classified as having a PFYC Class 3 or higher will be subject to a pedestrian walkover. Particular attention will be paid to rock outcrops, both inside and in the vicinity of the Project area, and any areas where geologic sediments are well exposed. Areas determined to have a PFYC Class 1 or 2, or areas that are heavily disturbed or otherwise obscured by heavy vegetation will not require a field survey.  All fossil occurrences observed during the course of fieldwork, significant or not, should be adequately documented and recorded at the time of discovery. The data collected for each fossil occurrence should include, at minimum, the following information: Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates, approximate elevation, description of taxa, lithologic description, and stratigraphic context (if known). In addition, each locality should be photographically documented with a digital camera. If feasible, with prior consent of the landowner(s), all significant or potentially significant fossils should be collected at the time they are observed in the field. If left exposed to the elements, fossil materials are subject to erosion and weathering. If the fossil discovery is too large to collect during the survey (e.g., a dinosaur skeleton or bone bed) and requires a large-scale salvage effort, then it will be documented and a mitigation strategy will be devised pursuant to SVP (2010) guidelines.  Worker’s Environmental Awareness Training  Prior to the start of the proposed Project activities, all field personnel will receive a worker’s environmental awareness training module on paleontological resources. The training will provide a description of the fossil resources that may be encountered in the Project area, outline steps to follow in the event that a fossil discovery is made, and provide contact information for the Project Paleontologist and on-site monitor(s). The training will be developed by the Project Paleontologist and may be conducted concurrent with other environmental training (e.g., cultural and natural resources awareness training, safety training, etc.).  Paleontological Mitigation Monitoring  Prior to the commencement of ground-disturbing activities, a qualified and professional paleontologist will be retained to prepare and implement a Paleontological Resource Mitigation Plan for the proposed Project. Initially, full-time monitoring will be required during grounddisturbing activities in the areas of the Project with a recommended paleontological resource potential of Class 4 or higher (i.e., Panoche Formation, Moreno Formation, Oro Loma Formation, Briones Formation, Neroly Formation, Tulare Formation, and Quaternary older alluvium). Part-time monitoring or spot checking will occur in areas of the Project underlain by geologic units with a recommended paleontological resource potential of Class 3. In addition, spot checking will also occur in Project areas underlain by Quaternary alluvial deposits in order to determine if underlying sensitive geologic units are being impacted by construction, and at what depth.  Monitoring will entail the visual inspection of excavated or graded areas and trench sidewalls. In the event that a paleontological resource is discovered, the monitor will have the authority to temporarily divert the construction equipment around the find until it is assessed for scientific significance and collected. All paleontological work on federally managed land must be conducted under the appropriate permit.  Monitoring should include matrix screening for the presence of microfossils, the frequency of which will be determined by the Project Paleontologist. Monitoring is largely a visual inspection of sediments; therefore, the most likely fossils to be observed will be macrofossils of vertebrates (bones, teeth, tusk) or invertebrates (shells). At the discretion of the Project Paleontologist, the monitor will periodically screen sediments to check for the presence of microfossils that can be  seen with the aid of a hand lens (i.e., microvertebrates). Should microvertebrate fossils be encountered during the screening process, then bulk matrix samples will be taken for processing off site. For each fossiliferous horizon or paleosol, a standard sample (4.0 cubic yards or 6,000 pounds) will be collected for subsequent wet-screening per SVP (2010) guidelines.  Fossil Preparation, Curation, and Reporting  Upon completion of fieldwork, all significant fossils collected will be prepared in a properly equipped paleontology laboratory to a point ready for curation. Preparation will include the careful removal of excess matrix from fossil materials and stabilizing and repairing specimens, as necessary. Following laboratory work, all fossils specimens will be identified to the lowest taxonomic level, cataloged, analyzed, and curated. The fossil specimens must be delivered to the accredited museum repository identified on the permit and receipt(s) of collections will be submitted to Western. This delivery should be made as soon as practical but no later than 60 days after all fieldwork is completed. The cost of curation is assessed by the repository and will be the responsibility of Western.  At the conclusion of laboratory work and museum curation, a Paleontological Mitigation Report will be prepared describing the results of the paleontological mitigation monitoring efforts associated with the Project. The report will include a summary of the field and laboratory methods, an overview of the Project area geology and paleontology, a specimen inventory of all taxa recovered (if any), an analysis of fossils recovered (if any) and their scientific significance, the signed receipt of confirmation of museum deposition, and recommendations. The report should be submitted to the designated repository, Western, and any other interested state or federal agencies involved within 45 days following completion of monitoring and laboratory work.  It has been a pleasure assisting you with this Project. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact Jessica DeBusk at jdebusk@appliedearthworks.com or (626) 578-0119.  Sincerely,  signature signature Heather Clifford Jessica DeBusk Associate Paleontologist Paleontology Program Manager Applied EarthWorks, Inc. Applied EarthWorks, Inc.  REFERENCES  Anderson, Robert, and R.W. Pack 1905 A stratigraphic study in the Mount Diablo Range of California. California Academy of Sciences Proceedings, 3rd Series 2(2): 155-248. 1915 Geology and oil resources of the west border of the San Joaquin Valley north of Coalinga, California. U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 603, 220 p.  Association of Environmental Professionals (AEP) 2012 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Statutes and Guidelines. Electronic document, http://ceres.ca.gov/ceqa/docs/CEQA_Handbook_2012_wo_covers.pdf, accessed 4 September 2014.  Barlock, Vincent E. 1988 Geologic Map of the Livermore Gravels, Alameda County, California. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 88-516.  Barron, John A. 1989 Diatom Stratigraphy of the Monterey Formation and Related Rocks, San Jose 30 by 60 Minute Quadrangle, California. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 89-565.  Bartow, J.A. 1984 Revisions in the Tertiary stratigraphy of the east flank of the Diablo Range, central California. In Stratigraphic Notes, U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1605-A. 1990 A Summary of the Cenozoic Stratigraphy and Geologic History of the Coalinga Region, Central California. U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1487.  Bartow, J. A., and T. H. Nilsen 1990 Review of the Great Valley Sequence, Eastern Diablo Range and Northern San Joaquin Valley, Central California. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-226, Menlo Park, California.  Blueford, Joyce R. 1984 Kreyenhagen Formation and Related Rocks – A History. In Blueford, J.R., ed., Kreyenhagen and Related Rocks, Pacific Section, Society for Sedimentary Geology, p. 1–7.  Briggs, L.I., Jr. 1953 Geology of the Ortigolita Peak Quadrangle, California. California Division of Mines Bulletin 167. Scale 1:62,500.  Bureau of Land Management 2008 Assessment and Mitigation of Potential Impacts to Paleontological Resources. Instruction Memorandum No. 2009-011.  Bureau of Land Management (continued) 2014 Paleontological Resources, Hollister Field Office. Electronic document, http://www.blm.gov/ca/st/en/fo/hollister/paleo.print.html, last updated 22 August 2014, accessed 5 September 2014.  Carpenter, D. W., J. J. Sweeney, P. W. Kasameyer, N. R. Burkhard, K. G. Knauss, and R. J. Shleman 1984 Geology of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Adjacent Area. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley.  Chetelat, Guy F. 1995 Provenance of the Upper-Miocene Briones Formation in the Central Diablo Range, California. Unpublished Master’s thesis, San Jose State University, electronic document, http://scholarworks.sjsu.edu/etd_theses/981/, accessed 8 September 2014.  Clark, B. L. 1921 The marine Tertiary of the west coast of the United States; its sequence, paleogeography, and the problems of correlation. Journal of Geology 29(7): 583-614. 1930 Tectonics of the Coast Ranges of Middle California. Geological Society of America Bulletin 41(4):747–828.  Clark, B. L., and A.O. Woodford 1927 The Geology and Paleontology of the Type Section of the Meganos Formation (lower middle Eocene) of California. University of California Publications Bulletin of the Department of Geological Sciences 17(2): 63-142.  Dibblee, T.W., and J.A. Minch 2006a Geologic Map of the Byron Hot Springs & Clifton Court Forebay Quadrangles, Contra Costa, Alameda, & San Joaquin Counties, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-195, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2006b Geologic Map of the Midway & Tracy Quadrangles, Alameda & San Joaquin Counties, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-243, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2006c Geologic Map of the Lone Tree Creek Quadrangle, Alameda, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus Counties, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-242, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2007a Geologic Map of the Ortigalita Peak NW and Charleston School Quadrangles, Merced and Fresno Counties, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF- 331, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2007b Geologic Map of the Los Banos Valley Quadrangle, Merced County, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-332, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2007c Geologic Map of the San Luis Dam and Volta Quadrangles, Merced County, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-335, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara.  Dibblee, T.W., and J.A. Minch (continued) 2007d Geologic Map of the Crevison Peak and Howard Ranch Quadrangles, Merced, Santa Clara, and Stanislaus Counties, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF- 345, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2007e Geologic Map of the Orestimba Peak and Newman Quadrangles, Merced and Stanislaus Counties, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-344, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2007f Geologic Map of the Patterson Quadrangle, Stanislaus County, California. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-342, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara. 2007g Geologic Map of the Solyo and Westerley Quadrangles, San Joaquin and Stanislaus Counties [California]. Dibblee Geological Foundation Map # DF-340, Dibblee Geological Foundation, Santa Barbara.  Elder, William P., and John W. Miller 1993 Map and Checklists of Jurassic and Cretaceous Macrofossil Localities within the San Jose 1:100,000 Quadrangle, California, and Discussion of Paleontological Results. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 93-503.  Fossen, H. 2010 Structural Geology. Cambridge Press, New York.  Fox, Kenneth F. 1983 Tectonic Setting of Late Miocene, Pliocene, and Pleistocene Rocks in Part of the Coast Ranges North of San Francisco, California. U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1239. Washington, D.C.  Graymer, R. W., D. L. Jones, and E. E. Brabb 1996 Preliminary Geologic Map Emphasizing Bedrock Formations in Alameda County, California: A Digital Database. Electronic document, http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/1996/of96-252/. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 96-252.  Haggart, James W., and Peter D. Ward 1984 Late Cretaceous (Santonian and Campanian) Stratigraphy of the Northern Sacramento Valley, California. Geological Society of America Bulletin 95(5):618–627.  Hall, Clarence A. 1958 Geology and Paleontology of the Pleasanton Area, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, California. University of California Publications in Geological Sciences 34(1). University of California Press, Berkeley.  Harden, Deborah R. 1998 California Geology. Prentice Hall, Inc., New Jersey.  Helley, E. J., and R. W. Graymer 1997 Quaternary Geology of Alameda County, and Parts of Contra Costa, Santa Clara, San Mateo, San Francisco, Stanislaus, and San Joaquin Counties, California: A Digital Database. Scale 1:100,000. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 97-97.  Huey, A.S. 1937 Stratigraphy of the Tesla Quadrangle, California. Geological Society of America Proceedings 1936:335–336.  Kelly, Thomas S., and J.D. Stewart  2008 New Records of Middle and Late Miocene Perissodactyla and Artiodactyla from the Western Border of the San Joaquin Valley, Diablo Range, Fresno County, California. Contributions in Science 516:1–29, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County.  Lawton, A. C. 1914 San Francisco Folio, California, Tamalpais, San Francisco, Concord, San Mateo, and Hayward Quadrangles. U.S. Geological Survey Geologic Atlas of the United States Folio # GF-193.  National Geologic Map Database (NGMDB) 2014 Briones Sandstone. GEOlex Database, electronic database, http://ngmdb.usgs.gov/Geolex/ NewRefsmry/sumry_4557.html, accessed September 2014.  Norris, Robert M., and Robert W. Webb 1976 Geology of California. John Wiley & Sons, New York.  Oakeshott, G.B. 1958 Geology and Mineral Deposits of San Fernando Quadrangle, Los Angeles County, California. California Division of Mines and Geology Bulletin 172.  Schulte, Peter, Laia Alegret, Ignacio Arenillas, Jose A. Arz, Penny J. Barton, Paul R. Bown, Timothy J. Bralower, Gail L. Christeson, Philippe Claeys, Charles S. Cockell, Gareth S. Collins, Alexander Deutsch, Tamara J. Goldin, Kazuhisa Goto, José M. Grajales-Nishimura, Richard A. F. Grieve, Sean P. S. Gulick, Kirk R. Johnson, Wolfgang Kiessling, Christian Koeberl, David A. Kring, Kenneth G. MacLeod, Takafumi Matsui, Jay Melosh, Alessandro Montanari, Joanna V. Morgan, Clive R. Neal, Douglas J. Nichols, Richard D. Norris, Elisabetta Pierazzo, Greg Ravizza, Mario Rebolledo-Vieyra, Wolf Uwe Reimold, Eric Robin, Tobias Salge, Robert P. Speijer, Arthur R. Sweet, Jaime Urrutia-Fucugauchi, Vivi Vajda, Michael T. Whalen, and Pi S. Willumsen 2010 The Chicxulub Asteroid Impact and Mass Extinction at the Cretaceous- Paleogene Boundary. Science 327 (5970): 1214-1218.  Page, R.W. 1983 Geology of the Tulare Formation and Other Continental Deposits, Kettleman City Area, San Joaquin Valley, California, with a Section on Ground-Water Management Considerations and Use of Texture Maps. U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Investigations Report 83-4000.  Paleobiology Database 2014 Fossilworks web-based portal. Electronic document, http://fossilworks.org and paleodb.org, accessed September 2014.  Pettijohn, F. J., Paul Edwin Potter, and Raymond Siever 1987 Sand and Sandstone, Second Edition. Springer-Verlag, New York.  Scott, Eric, and Kathleen Springer 2003 CEQA and Fossil Preservation in California. The Environmental Monitor Fall 2003, Association of Environmental Professionals, Sacramento, California.  Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (SVP) 2010 Standard Procedures for the Assessment and Mitigation of Adverse Impacts to Paleontological Resources. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Impact Mitigation Guidelines Revision Committee.  Throckmorton, C. K. 1988 Geology and Paleontology of the Tesla Formation, Alameda and San Joaquin Counties, Central California. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 88-59.  University of California Museum of Paleontology (UCMP) 2014 UCMP Specimen Search, Online Collections. Electronic document, http://ucmpdb.berkeley.edu, accessed on 5 September 2014.  Weissmann, G. S., G. L. Bennett, and A. L. Lansdale 2005 Factors Controlling Sequence Development on Quaternary Fluvial Fans, San Joaquin Basin, California, U.S.A. In Alluvial Fans: Geomorphology, Sedimentology, Dynamics, by A. Harvey, A. Mather, and M. Stokes, p. 169–186. Geological Society of London Special Publication 251.  Woodring, W. P., Ralph Steward, and R.W. Richards 1940 Geology of the Kettleman Hills oil field, California. U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 195. Appendix H SHPO Correspondence U.S. Department of Energy logoDepartment of Energy Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, California 95630-4710 t"OV ~ 3 '" ~. L\ I : Ms. Carol Roland-Nawi, Ph.D. State Historic Preservation Officer California Office ofHistoric Preservation 1725 23rd Street Suite 100 Sacramento, CA 95816 Ms. Roland-Nawi, Ph.D.: The Western Area Power Administration (Western), Sierra Nevada Region (SNR), is a power marketing administration with the U.S. Department of Energy. SNR markets power in northern and central California and portions ofNevada to wholesale and Federal end-use customers such as towns, rural electric cooperatives, public utility and irrigation districts, Federal, state, and military agencies, Native American tribes, power marketers, and Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) water customers. Most power that SNR markets is generated by power plants owned and operated by Reclamation as part of the California Central Valley Project (CVP), including those at Shasta, Folsom, Trinity and New Melones dams. Marketing and ensuring the delivery and reliability of electrical resources to customers is SNR's primary function. In addition, Western operates and maintains 18 substations and 884 miles of69- to 500-kilovolt (k V) CVP transmission lines. In cooperation with Reclamation and the San Luis & Delta Mendota Water Authority (Authority) Western is in the very early planning stages ofpreparing a joint National Environmental Policy Act (NEP A) and California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) document to consider and analyze the potential environmental impacts of a proposed new transmission line(s) construction project between Tracy and San Luis and/or Los Banos, California. The Proposed Project (Undertaking) is referred to as the San Luis Transmission Line Project (SL TP). The purpose of the Proposed SLTP Undertaking is to connect existing CVP facilities into Western's CVP transmission line system. For the purposes of compliance with NEP A and CEQA, Western and the Authority are joint lead agencies. Western is designated the lead federal agency for NEPA compliance and the Authority is the lead state agency for CEQA compliance. The resulting document will be a joint Environmental Impact Statement and Environmental Impact Report (EIS/EIR) scheduled to be finalized at the end of 2016. The first public draft of the EIS/EIR is scheduled to be completed February 2015 . At this time we are writing to initiate consultation with you pursuant to Section 106 ofthe National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) (16 US Code §470 , as amended 2006) and its implementing regulations, 36 CFR Part 800 Protection ofHistoric Properties, (as amended 8/5/2004), regarding the Proposed SLTP Undertaking. Pursuant to §800.2(a)(2), Western is designated Lead Federal agency for the purposes ofSection 106 consultation. The Proposed SLTP Undertaking requires the Authority under CEQA and the California Public Resource Code (PRC) §5024(f) and 5024.5 to provide notification and submit documentation to you regarding any potential adverse effects to state-owned historical resources or historical resources on or eligible for inclusion in the California Register ofHistorical Resources (CRHP). In order to reduce duplicatory consultation requirements between NHPA and CEQA for the same Undertaking, Western will be conducting and/or coordinating all required identification and evaluation steps in consultation with you to satisfy NHP A and CEQA requirements in cooperation with the Authority. Please let Western know ifyou have any objections or concerns regarding this approach. 1. PROJECT BACKGROUND The San Luis Reservoir Unit (SLU), a water pumping and power generation plant located in Merced County, was authorized on June 3, 1960 under CVP, and included construction of needed transmission and distribution facilities. Western owns and operates most ofthe transmission lines constructed under the CVP and in addition has the statutory responsibility to make the necessary arrangements to deliver electrical transmission power to all federally authorized facilities constructed as part ofCVP. Since 1965, the United States has had a contract with the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) to transmit power between Western's Tracy Substation and SLU utilizing PG&E's own transmission/distribution systems. This contract expires in 2016 and will not be extended or replaced. As a result, transmission service is expected to be provided by the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) starting April 1, 2016 (moving Federal power through CAISO controlled grid to SLU generation loads). The cost to SLU users to receive this service from the CAISO is expected to increase by $10 million per year. Reclamation owns, operates, and manages dams, power plants and canals in California that were constructed under CVP. Reclamation is also a water management agency and is the largest wholesaler of water in the country. Reclamation holds water contracts with their water customers. The Authority, established in 1992, consists ofwater agencies representing approximately 2,100,000 acres of29 federal and exchange water service contractors within the western San Joaquin Valley, San Benito, and Santa Clara counties. As a Reclamation customer, the Authority operates and maintains certain Reclamation CVP facilities including SLU. Reclamation's purpose and need ofthe Proposed SLTP Undertaking is to continue to economically pump, store, convey, and deliver federal water resources through the SLU when the current contract with PG&E expires. To meet this need, Reclamation requested Western to investigate various transmission service arrangements that would allow Reclamation to continue economic delivery offederal water when the current contract with PG&E expires. Reclamation submitted to Western a request for electrical transmission service to interconnect several key SLU facilities into Western's CVP transmission line system. Western must respond to Reclamation's transmission request consistent with Western's Open Access Transmission Tariff as well as other existing laws and statutory responsibilities. Reclamation's water contractors have a direct interest in Western's transmission service arrangements to serve the SLU. The Authority must decide on how to participate in the proposed transmission of Federal power from Western's Tracy Substation to the SLU. 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE UNDERTAKING Under the Proposed SLTP Undertaking, Western would construct, own, operate, and maintain about 85 miles ofnew transmission lines that cross Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced counties along the foothills to the west ofthe San Joaquin Valley. Western would also upgrade or expand existing substations or construct two new substations to accommodate the terminations for these new transmission lines. New substations could be constructed adjacent to the existing Tracy and Los Banos substations. Enclosure 1, Cultural Resources Background and Field Strategy Report for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California, June 2014 provides you with an overview map of the Proposed SLTP Undertaking (Figure 1-1). The Proposed SLTP Undertaking would consist of four new transmission line segments. For the purposes ofNEPA/CEQA evaluation and analysis ofthe affected environment, Corridor Study Areas (CSA) ranging from 220 feet to 4,000 feet wide were established for all transmission line segments where a final transmission line right-of-way (ROW) would be considered. The CSA is wider than then what a required ROW would eventually be (125-200 feet width for 230 and 500kV transmission lines) to allow flexibility in siting the transmission structures to minimize environmental impacts or to accommodate engineering constraints. Below are the proposed (Proposed Project Corridors) CSA routes. Much ofthe proposed transmission line corridors would follow existing high-voltage transmission line corridors in the vicinity. • Tracy to Los Banos 500-kilovolt (kV) Corridor. A single-circuit 500-kV transmission line, about 62 miles long connecting the Tracy and Los Banos Substations. • Los Banos to San Luis 230-kV Corridor. A 230-kV transmission line about 1.4 miles long connecting the San Luis and Los Banos Substations. • San Luis to O'Neill 70-kV Corridor. A single-circuit 70-kV transmission line, about 5 miles long connecting the San Luis and O'Neill Substations. • San Luis to Dos Amigos 230-kV Corridor. A 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles long connecting the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations. In addition to the Proposed Project corridors, a number ofAlternative corridors are also being examined. For complete descriptions ofthe Proposed and Alternative corridors please refer again to enclosure 1, Section 1.0, pages 1-6. The Proposed SLTP Undertaking would also include ancillary facilities, such as communication facilities for control and protection and improvements to existing access roads, construction of new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads. Construction staging areas and helicopter landing zones would also be required. Other activities would include, clearing the ROW ofvegetation, excavation and grading for new pole structures, and stringing ofconductor lines. In accordance with §800.4 (a) and (b), we have initiated steps to define the APE for the SLTP Undertaking and to identifY the presence ofhistoric properties and historical resources within the APE. 3. AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS The Area of Potential Effects (APE) for the Undertaking is defmed in accordance with §800.16(d). For the purposes of §800.4, we are currently defming the potential direct effects (DE) to be all Proposed and Alternative CSA and all ancillary areas required for construction of the proposed transmission lines. Potential indirect effects (IE) include visual and noise intrusions that could diminish the historic or aesthetic values ofcertain types ofcultural resources within the purview ofthe proposed SLTP transmission lines. The APE for IE is defined as extending up to 1/4 miles outside ofthe CSA. The CSA parallel several existing transmission line structures with a few exceptions to short segments of Alternatives corridors. Enclosure 2 describes the types ofsurface and subsurface impacts associated with the construction ofthe Proposed SL TP Undertaking. 4. IDENTIFICATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND HISTORICAL RESOURCES WITHIN THE APE. Native American Consultation By letter ofJanuary 22, 2014, we contacted the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) and requested a current contact list ofall Native American groups who might have an interest in the proposed SLTP project area (enclosure 3). We also requested that they conduct a search of their Sacred Lands file to determine the presence ofany sacred sites or traditional cultural properties and landscapes within the APE. By letter of January 29, 2014, NAHC responded with a list of contacts and a negative result ofthe Sacred Lands search (enclosure 4). By letter of March 3, 2014, we contacted all Native American groups on the list provided by the NAHC (enclosure 5). As of this time we have received one response from the California Valley Miwok Tribe who states they have no issues, but request to be notified in the event ofany inadvertent discoveries associated with Miwok artifacts and/or human remains (enclosure 6). Another individual, Mr. Don Hankins contacted us with suggestions for mitigation measures should the Proposed SLTP Project impact sites or areas important to Native Americans, specifically, the Miwok Tribe. We will continue to keep all ofthe Tribal contacts informed of any changes to the Proposed SLTP Undertaking and will continue to be responsive to any future requests for consultation. The APE for the Proposed SLTP Undertaking does not cross tribal reservations or Native American Trust territories. This consultation complies with California State policy as defined in Executive Order B-1 0-11. Class I Inventory Archival and Records Search In further efforts to identify potential historic properties within the APE, Western has completed an archival records check at the appropriate California Information Centers ofthe California Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS). This report entitled, Cultural Resources Background and Field Strategy Report for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California, June 2014 is enclosed for your review along with the appendices (enclosure 1 ). Both a hard copy and electronic copy are provided. In sum, the report presents the environmental and cultural setting ofthe Proposed SL TP Undertaking and provides the results ofa Class I Inventory ofprevious studies and known cultural resources within the Proposed Project Corridors and Alternative corridors, and a onequarter mile radius outside ofthe corridors as defined in the APE. The report includes six sections as well as a series of appendices. Sections include an introduction to the SLTP, specifically its geographic and regulatory setting; a brief overview of the environmental setting ofthe Class I Inventory Study Area; and an outline ofthe cultural history ofthe Class I Inventory Study Area. The results ofthe archival and records search are presented, followed by a discussion of factors likely to influence future field investigations. Maps and tables depicting the locations ofknown cultural resources and previous cultural resource studies are included as appendices, along with copies of confidential cultural resource records and full or partial copies ofprevious cultural resource studies (electronic copies only provided). Finally, based on the results ofthe Class I Inventory, recommendations and conclusions are presented regarding implementation ofa Class III field inventory (pedestrian survey) as are maps ofrecommended field inventory areas. Appendices A, B, and C are bound together in a separate document with enclosure 1 and include: • Appendix A: Maps ofknown cultural resources and previous cultural resource study locations • Appendix B: Tables ofprevious cultural resource studies and known cultural resources • Appendix C: Recommended field inventory areas • Appendix D: DPR forms 523 for known cultural resources within the Class I inventory study area (electronic copy only) • Appendix E: Reports or report sections for previously conducted studies within the Class I inventory study area (electronic copy only) The Class I Inventory shows that a total of 11 7 previous cultural resource studies have been undertaken within this propose Undertaking's APE. The studies encompassed a wide array of investigations, including archival and records search reviews; broad or area-specific effects assessments or environmental impact documents; opportunistic or reconnaissance level surveys involving limited or unsystematic pedestrian survey; "windshield surveys" involving no pedestrian inventory; regional overviews or overview studies focused on particular resource types such as rock art sites or historic period structures; excavation, monitoring, and/or evaluation reports; and studies involving intensive pedestrian inventories, typically conducted in conjunction with archival and records search reviews and/or reconnaissance level surveys. A total of 54 known cultural resources have been formally recorded within the Class I Inventory APE. Those resources include 11 prehistoric sites; seven prehistoric isolated finds; 11 historic period sites; 21 historic period resources encompassing buildings, structures, or objects; two historic period districts; one California Historical Landmark (CHL); and one multi-component resource. Twenty ofthe 54 known cultural resources within the Class I Inventory Study Area intersect the Proposed Project corridor and 17 intersect the Alternative corridor. In addition to formally recorded cultural resources, six additional resources were noted in previous studies but not formally documented, including two isolated fmds, two segments ofthe Delta-Mendota Canal, one Western Pacific Railroad alignment, a possible historic period foundation, and a possible prehistoric quartzite cobble quarry. All but the isolated finds appeared to intersect the Proposed Project or Alternative corridors. Potential cultural resources were also noted through an examination ofhistoric period maps. Those potential resources include three historic period railroad alignments as well as 36 buildings or structures. Though none ofthose resources have been formally recorded, at least eight structures and all three railroad segments were noted within the Proposed Project or Alternative corridors and may be encountered during the course of a field inventory. We are currently in the process of completing a Class III intensive pedestrian survey ofthe APE and will continue consultation with you regarding the results of the field investigations, NRHP and CRHR recommendations and the potential effects ofthe SL TP Undertaking on any historic properties and historical resources identified within the APE. At this time, Western is requesting your comments and or concerns pursuant to §800.4 regarding our definition ofthe APE for the Proposed SLTP Undertaking and initial efforts to identify known cultural resources and potential historic properties or historical resources for the Proposed SLTP Undertaking. Although Western is implementing steps to identify historic properties currently known, the exact physical locations of certain components, such as construction staging areas and access roads would not be identified until such time that a Record ofDecision and a Notice of Determination for the EIS/EIR is made and pre-construction activities begin. The results ofthe environmental analysis for all affected resources could potentially have some impact on the current APE. In addition, most ofthe APE is on private property and Western does not have access to all portions ofthe proposed and alternative corridors at this time. Western would need to conduct cultural resource surveys as access is (or if is) granted. Final assessment of effects on all historic properties and historical resources would need to be deferred until all project components are finalized. Western would need to implement a phased identification and evaluation approach to fully identify historic properties and historical resources within the Proposed SLTP Undertaking's APE. Western believes that a Programmatic Agreement (PA) pursuant to§800.4(b)(2) and §800.14(b)(ii)&(v) would be an appropriate procedure to fully implement our Section 106 responsibilities for this Proposed Undertaking and in conjunction with the EIS/EIR. The PA would stipulate Western's responsibilities regarding the level of effort to continue to identify historic properties and historical resources within the APE for the entire Proposed Undertaking, determine the Proposed Undertaking's effect on historic properties and historical resources, and the appropriate mitigation measures to avoid or lessen potential adverse effects to such properties and resources prior to the implementation ofthe Proposed Undertaking. The PA would also assist with Western's Section 106 responsibilities regarding any current unforeseen engineering design changes or access issues that may require altering the APE as well as stipulating Western's responsibilities under 800.13(a)(l), Post Review Discoveries for the duration of the Proposed Project. Western would prefer to meet with you regarding the Proposed SLTP Undertaking and discuss our determination of a P A to satisfy our Section 106 responsibilities. Please contact me at our SNR office in Folsom at (916) 353-4035 or email at waldear@wapa.gov. For more information regarding the proposed project you can visit: http//sltpeis-eir.com. Your continued assistance and cooperation are appreciated. Sincerely, signatureCherie Johnston-Waldear Regional Preservation Official Sierra Nevada Region 6 Enclosures cc: Mr. Steve Tromly Federal Preservation Officer; CSO, A7400 P.O. Box 281213 Lakewood, CO 80228-8213 Mr. Russell Grimes US Bureau of Reclamation 2800 Cottage Way, MP-152 Sacramento, CA 95825 Ms. Frances Mizuno Assistant Executive Director San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority 15990 Kelso Road Byron, CA 94514 Appendix I Air Quality Emission Calculations Appendix I.1 Air Quality Emission Calculations, Overview and Summary  Appendix I . Air Quality Emission Calculations AQ.GHG Construction Emissions: Overview and Summary Totals Emissions by phase and source type from CalEEMod v 2013.2.2 Emission Rates Fugitive Exhaust Total Fugitive Exhaust Total GWP AR4: 25 298 NOx VOC PM10 PM10 PM10 PM2.5 PM2.5 PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O Proposed Project Source Categories Phase Source Type (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) Year 1 (2018) : Transmission ROW : Subtotal Site Prep Off.Road Equipment 1.55 0.08 1.14 0.07 1.21 0.57 0.07 0.64 1.84 0.00 287.4 0.1 0.0 Grading Off.Road Equipment 3.82 0.19 0.73 0.17 0.91 0.30 0.17 0.48 4.78 0.01 723.4 0.2 0.0 Foundations Off.Road Equipment 3.16 0.16 0.00 0.16 0.16 0.00 0.16 0.16 3.68 0.01 563.3 0.2 0.0 Structures Off.Road Equipment 1.29 0.06 0.00 0.08 0.08 0.00 0.08 0.08 1.58 0.00 222.4 0.1 0.0 Site Prep On.Road Vehicles 0.12 0.01 2.36 0.00 2.36 0.24 0.00 0.24 0.20 0.00 47.9 0.0 0.0 Grading On.Road Vehicles 0.16 0.02 3.88 0.00 3.88 0.39 0.00 0.40 0.27 0.00 66.8 0.0 0.0 Foundations On.Road Vehicles 0.54 0.07 10.46 0.01 10.47 1.06 0.01 1.07 0.93 0.00 201.8 0.0 0.0 Structures On.Road Vehicles 0.31 0.05 7.97 0.01 7.98 0.81 0.00 0.81 0.67 0.00 129.6 0.0 0.0 Year 1 (2018) : Substations : Subtotal Site Prep Off.Road Equipment 7.20 0.37 1.85 0.31 2.17 1.01 0.31 1.32 8.79 0.01 1,364.2 0.4 0.0 Installation Off.Road Equipment 6.51 0.33 0.00 0.31 0.31 0.00 0.31 0.31 8.01 0.01 1,188.6 0.3 0.0 Site Prep On.Road Vehicles 0.61 0.08 0.14 0.01 0.15 0.04 0.01 0.05 1.11 0.00 230.6 0.0 0.0 Installation On.Road Vehicles 0.84 0.13 0.25 0.01 0.26 0.07 0.01 0.08 1.84 0.00 353.8 0.0 0.0 Year 2 (2019) : Transmission ROW : Subtotal Site Prep Off.Road Equipment 0.67 0.03 1.14 0.03 1.17 0.57 0.03 0.60 0.79 0.00 122.0 0.0 0.0 Grading Off.Road Equipment 4.01 0.20 0.73 0.18 0.91 0.30 0.18 0.49 5.01 0.01 747.4 0.2 0.0 Foundations Off.Road Equipment 3.31 0.17 0.00 0.16 0.16 0.00 0.16 0.16 3.86 0.01 582.8 0.2 0.0 Structures Off.Road Equipment 1.89 0.09 0.00 0.11 0.11 0.00 0.11 0.11 2.30 0.00 320.9 0.1 0.0 Restoration Off.Road Equipment 0.47 0.02 0.73 0.02 0.75 0.35 0.02 0.37 0.55 0.00 85.3 0.0 0.0 Stringing Off.Road Equipment 1.45 0.07 0.00 0.07 0.07 0.00 0.07 0.07 1.68 0.00 263.9 0.1 0.0 Site Prep On.Road Vehicles 0.05 0.01 1.56 0.00 1.56 0.16 0.00 0.16 0.08 0.00 20.2 0.0 0.0 Grading On.Road Vehicles 0.16 0.02 3.97 0.00 3.98 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.27 0.00 68.5 0.0 0.0 Foundations On.Road Vehicles 0.52 0.07 10.74 0.01 10.75 1.09 0.01 1.10 0.90 0.00 207.2 0.0 0.0 Structures On.Road Vehicles 0.42 0.06 10.58 0.01 10.59 1.07 0.01 1.08 0.89 0.00 184.5 0.0 0.0 Restoration On.Road Vehicles 0.03 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.05 0.00 14.1 0.0 0.0 Stringing On.Road Vehicles 0.21 0.03 5.32 0.00 5.33 0.54 0.00 0.54 0.37 0.00 85.2 0.0 0.0 Year 2 (2019) : Substations : Subtotal Site Prep Off.Road Equipment 5.17 0.26 1.85 0.23 2.08 1.01 0.23 1.23 6.31 0.01 963.1 0.3 0.0 Installation Off.Road Equipment 6.54 0.33 0.00 0.31 0.31 0.00 0.31 0.31 8.04 0.01 1,175.7 0.3 0.0 Site Prep On.Road Vehicles 0.40 0.05 0.11 0.01 0.12 0.03 0.01 0.04 0.73 0.00 161.8 0.0 0.0 Installation On.Road Vehicles 0.77 0.12 0.25 0.01 0.26 0.07 0.01 0.08 1.70 0.00 346.5 0.0 0.0 Year 3 (2020) : Transmission ROW : Subtotal Restoration Off.Road Equipment 0.86 0.04 0.73 0.04 0.77 0.35 0.04 0.39 1.02 0.00 154.1 0.0 0.0 Stringing Off.Road Equipment 2.68 0.14 0.00 0.12 0.12 0.00 0.12 0.12 3.10 0.01 478.2 0.1 0.0 Restoration On.Road Vehicles 0.05 0.01 1.36 0.00 1.36 0.14 0.00 0.14 0.09 0.00 25.3 0.0 0.0 Stringing On.Road Vehicles 0.34 0.05 7.40 0.01 7.41 0.75 0.01 0.76 0.64 0.00 153.3 0.0 0.0 Helicopters : Subtotal Aircraft 2.67 3.31 .. 0.08 0.08 .. 0.08 0.08 4.12 ... 1,306.3 0.04 0.04 NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2e Total (Full Duration Construction) 58.8 6.6 76.3 2.6 78.8 11.4 2.6 14.0 76.2 0.13 12,929.2 ... ...  Emission Rates Fugitive Exhaust Total Fugitive Exhaust Total NOx VOC PM10 PM10 PM10 PM2.5 PM2.5 PM2.5 CO SOx Proposed Project Source Categories (by calendar year) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) Year 1 (2018) Off.Road Equipment 23.5 1.2 3.7 1.1 4.8 1.9 1.1 3.0 28.7 0.0 On.Road Vehicles 2.6 0.4 25.1 0.0 25.1 2.6 0.0 2.6 5.0 0.0 Year 2 (2019) Off.Road Equipment 23.5 1.2 4.4 1.1 5.6 2.2 1.1 3.3 28.5 0.0 On.Road Vehicles 2.5 0.4 33.5 0.0 33.6 3.5 0.0 3.5 5.0 0.0 Year 3 (2020) Off.Road Equipment 3.5 0.2 0.7 0.2 0.9 0.3 0.2 0.5 4.1 0.0 On.Road Vehicles 0.4 0.1 8.8 0.0 8.8 0.9 0.0 0.9 0.7 0.0 Aircraft 2.7 3.3 .. 0.1 0.1 .. 0.1 0.1 4.1 ... Emissions by year from CalEEMod v 2013.2.2 Emission Rates Fugitive Exhaust Total Fugitive Exhaust Total NOx VOC PM10 PM10 PM10 PM2.5 PM2.5 PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O Proposed Project Activity Subtotals (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) Year 1 (2018) : Transmission ROW : Subtotal 10.96 0.64 26.54 0.50 27.04 3.37 0.50 3.87 13.94 0.03 2,242.7 0.5 0.0 Year 1 (2018) : Substations : Subtotal 15.17 0.91 2.24 0.65 2.89 1.11 0.65 1.76 19.75 0.04 3,137.3 0.8 0.0 Year 2 (2019) : Transmission ROW : Subtotal 13.18 0.78 35.78 0.60 36.38 4.58 0.60 5.18 16.77 0.03 2,701.9 0.6 0.0 Year 2 (2019) : Substations : Subtotal 12.87 0.77 2.21 0.56 2.77 1.10 0.56 1.66 16.78 0.03 2,647.1 0.7 0.0 Year 3 (2020) : Transmission ROW : Subtotal 3.93 0.23 9.49 0.17 9.66 1.24 0.17 1.41 4.86 0.01 810.9 0.2 0.0 Helicopters : Subtotal 2.67 3.31 .. 0.08 0.08 .. 0.08 0.08 4.12 ... 1,306.3 0.04 0.04 Fugitive Exhaust Total Fugitive Exhaust Total NOx VOC PM10 PM10 PM10 PM2.5 PM2.5 PM2.5 CO SOx CO2e Proposed Project Subtotals (by calendar year) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MTCO2e) Year 1 : Subtotal 26.1 1.6 28.8 1.1 29.9 4.5 1.1 5.6 33.7 0.06 5,412.6 Year 2 : Subtotal 26.0 1.5 38.0 1.2 39.1 5.7 1.2 6.8 33.6 0.06 5,381.0 Year 3 : Subtotal 6.6 3.5 9.5 0.3 9.7 1.2 0.3 1.5 9.0 0.01 2,135.6 Proposed Project Activity Subtotals NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O Transmission ROW : Subtotal 28.1 1.6 71.8 1.3 73.1 9.2 1.3 10.5 35.6 0.07 5,755.5 1.3 0.0 Substations : Subtotal 28.0 1.7 4.5 1.2 5.7 2.2 1.2 3.4 36.5 0.07 5,784.3 1.4 0.0 Helicopters : Subtotal 2.7 3.3 ... 0.1 0.1 ... 0.1 0.1 4.1 ... 1,306.3 0.04 0.04 NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2e Total (Full Duration Construction) 58.8 6.6 76.3 2.6 78.8 11.4 2.6 14.0 76.2 0.13 12,929.2  Proposed Project, General Conformity Applicability General Conformity Threshold for San Joaquin Valley Air Basin NOx (tpy) 10.0 VOC (tpy) 10.0 PM10 (tpy) 100.0 PM2.5 (tpy) 100.0 Potential to exceed General Conformity de minimis threshold? Year 1 (2018) Year 2 (2019) Year 3 (2020) Emissions Reductions necessary for No Net Increase (tons) yes yes no 58.8 no no no ... no no no ... no no no ... Proposed Project, CEQA Threshold of Significance for Construction San Joaquin Valley CEQA Threshold of Significance NOx (tpy) 10.0 VOC (tpy) 10.0 PM10 (tpy) 15.0 PM2.5 (tpy) 15.0 CO (tpy) 100.0 SOx (tpy) 27.0 Potential to exceed threshold of significance? Year 1 (2018) Year 2 (2019) Year 3 (2020) Emissions Reductions necessary for No Net Increase (tons) yes yes no 58.8 no no no ... yes yes no 78.8 no no no ... no no no ... no no no ...  Proposed Project Activity (BAAQMD Portion) NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O (in BAAQMD) (fraction) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) 3.5 mi of ROW 0.04 Transmission ROW : (BAAQMD) 1.0 0.1 2.6 0.0 2.7 0.3 0.0 0.4 1.3 0.00 212.0 0.0 0.0 1 new 500.kV Substation 0.5 Substations : (BAAQMD) 14.0 0.8 2.2 0.6 2.8 1.1 0.6 1.7 18.3 0.03 2,892.2 0.7 0.0 3.5 mi of ROW 0.04 Helicopters : (BAAQMD) 0.1 0.1 ... 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.2 ... 48.1 0.00 0.00 CO2e Subtotal (BAAQMD Portion) 15.2 1.0 4.9 0.7 5.5 1.4 0.7 2.1 19.7 0.04 3,172.1 ... ... Proposed Project Activity (SJVAPCD Portion) NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O (in SJVAPCD) (fraction) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) 91.5 mi of ROW 0.96 Transmission ROW : (SJVAPCD) 27.0 1.6 69.2 1.2 70.4 8.9 1.2 10.1 34.3 0.06 5,543.5 1.3 0.0 1 new 500.kV Substation 0.5 Substations : (SJVAPCD) 14.0 0.8 2.2 0.6 2.8 1.1 0.6 1.7 18.3 0.03 2,892.2 0.7 0.0 91.5 mi of ROW 0.96 Helicopters : (SJVAPCD) 2.6 3.2 ... 0.1 0.1 ... 0.1 0.1 4.0 ... 1,258.2 0.04 0.04 CO2e Subtotal (SJVACPD Portion) 43.6 5.6 71.4 1.9 73.3 10.0 1.9 11.9 56.5 0.10 9,757.1 ... ... Proposed Project, with mitigation, example with partial construction fleet of Tier 4 equipment Proposed Project Activity Subtotals (example of partial Tier 4 fleet mix including: loaders/backhoes, excavators, dozers, off.highway trucks, generator sets, and forklifts) For Impact AQ.1 and MM AQ.1 NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx (NOx/ROG/PM control at Tier 3) (NOx/PM control w Tier 4 mix) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) 39% 70% Transmission ROW : Subtotal 13.8 1.6 71.8 0.6 72.4 9.2 0.6 9.8 35.6 0.07 39% 70% Substations : Subtotal 13.8 1.7 4.5 0.6 5.0 2.2 0.6 2.8 36.5 0.07 ... ... Helicopters : Subtotal 2.7 3.3 ... 0.1 0.1 ... 0.1 0.1 4.1 ... NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx Total (partial Tier 4 fleet) 30.3 6.6 76.3 1.3 77.6 11.4 1.3 12.7 76.2 0.1 Proposed Project, screening for Ambient Air Quality Analysis (AAQA) applicability due to new 500.kV Substation (in SJVAPCD) For Impact AQ.3 & Impact AQ.4 NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) Substations : (SJVAPCD) 14.0 0.8 2.2 0.6 2.8 1.1 0.6 1.7 18.3 0.0 Substation construction (New Los Banos West 500 kV) NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) (lb/d) 525 days duration Substation average daily emissions 53.4 3.2 8.5 2.3 10.8 4.2 2.3 6.5 69.6 0.13 Potential to exceed (lb/day)? 100 100 100 100 100 100 no no no no no no  Alternatives, Construction Activity Patterson Pass Road Corridor Alternative NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O (incremental to Project) (added/Proj) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) 9 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.095 Transmission ROW : Subtotal 2.7 0.2 6.8 0.1 6.9 0.9 0.1 1.0 3.4 0.01 545.3 0.1 0.0 0 add'l Substations 0 Substations : Subtotal 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 0.0 0.0 0.0 9 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.095 Helicopters : Subtotal 0.3 0.3 ... 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.4 ... 123.8 0.00 0.00 CO2e Additional to Proposed Project (Patterson Pass Road Alternative) 2.9 0.5 6.8 0.1 6.9 0.9 0.1 1.0 3.8 0.01 673.5 ... ... Butts Road Corridor Alternative NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O (incremental to Project) (added/Proj) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) 2 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.021 Transmission ROW : Subtotal 0.6 0.0 1.5 0.0 1.5 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.7 0.00 121.2 0.0 0.0 0 add'l Substations 0 Substations : Subtotal 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 0.0 0.0 0.0 2 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.021 Helicopters : Subtotal 0.1 0.1 ... 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.1 ... 27.5 0.00 0.00 CO2e Additional to Proposed Project (Butts Road Alternative) 0.6 0.1 1.5 0.0 1.5 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.8 0.00 149.7 ... ... West of Cemetery Corridor Alternative NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O (incremental to Project) (added/Proj) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) 9 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.095 Transmission ROW : Subtotal 2.7 0.2 6.8 0.1 6.9 0.9 0.1 1.0 3.4 0.01 545.3 0.1 0.0 0 add'l Substations 0 Substations : Subtotal 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 0.0 0.0 0.0 9 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.095 Helicopters : Subtotal 0.3 0.3 ... 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.4 ... 123.8 0.00 0.00 CO2e Additional to Proposed Project (West of Cemetery Alternative) 2.9 0.5 6.8 0.1 6.9 0.9 0.1 1.0 3.8 0.01 673.5 ... ... Billy Wright Road Corridor Alternative NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx CO2 CH4 N2O (incremental to Project) (added/Proj) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (MT) (MT) (MT) 3 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.032 Transmission ROW : Subtotal 0.9 0.1 2.3 0.0 2.3 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.00 181.8 0.0 0.0 0 add'l Substations 0 Substations : Subtotal 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 0.0 0.0 0.0 3 mi of add'l ROW or roads 0.032 Helicopters : Subtotal 0.1 0.1 ... 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.1 ... 41.3 0.00 0.00 CO2e Additional to Proposed Project (Billy Wright Road Alternative) 1.0 0.2 2.3 0.0 2.3 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.00 224.5 ... ... Agency Preferred Alternative NOx VOC Fugitive Exhaust PM10 Fugitive Exhaust PM2.5 CO SOx (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) (ton) CO2e Proposed Project Total (Full Duration Construction) 58.8 6.6 76.3 2.6 78.8 11.4 2.6 14.0 76.2 0.13 12,929.2 Additional to Proposed Project (Billy Wright Road Alternative) 1.0 0.2 2.3 0.0 2.3 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.00 224.5 Agency Preferred Alternative Total (Full Duration Construction) 59.7 6.8 78.5 2.6 81.1 11.7 2.6 14.3 77.5 0.13 13,153.7 AQ.GHG estimates 2/12/2016 . Page 5 of 13 AQ.GHG estimates 2/12/2016 . Page 6 of 13  Design Option to Construct as 230 kV line (incremental to Project) 0 mi of additional ROW No new substations. Only modify existing 230 kV 0 mi of additional ROW (added/Proj) 0.000 Transmission ROW : Subtotal .0.9 Substations : Subtotal 0.000 Helicopters : Subtotal Reduction from Proposed Project (230.kV Design Option) NOx (ton) 0.0 .25.2 0.0 .25.2 VOC (ton) 0.0 .1.5 0.0 .1.5 Fugitive (ton) 0.0 .4.0 ... .4.0 Exhaust (ton) 0.0 .1.1 0.0 .1.1 PM10 (ton) 0.0 .5.1 0.0 .5.1 Fugitive (ton) 0.0 .2.0 ... .2.0 Exhaust (ton) 0.0 .1.1 0.0 .1.1 PM2.5 (ton) 0.0 .3.1 0.0 .3.1 CO (ton) 0.0 .32.9 0.0 .32.9 SOx (ton) 0.00 .0.06 ... .0.06 CO2 (MT) 0.0 .5,205.9 0.0 CO2e .5,238.4 CH4 (MT) 0.0 .1.3 0.00 ... N2O (MT) 0.0 0.0 0.00 ... Supporting Details : Subtotal AQ.GHG : Construction Helicopter Activity Helicopters / Aircraft Emissions Calculations Count Power Mean Op. (# units) (hp) (%) Power Hughes/MD500 (SHP < 600) 1 420 0.80 Mean Op. (hp) 336 (kg f/sec) 3.119E.02 Fuel Use per # (kg f/hr) (gal/hr) 112.3 36.4 NOx (g/kg f) 5.74 HCs (g/kg f) 7.13 Exhaust PM10 (g/kg f) 0.18 Exhaust PM2.5 (g/kg f) 0.18 CO (g/kg f) 8.88 SOx (g/kg f) ... CO2 (kg/gal) 9.57 CH4 (kg/gal) 0.00027 N2O (kg/gal) 0.00031 Hughes/MD500 (SHP < 600) Emission Rates NOx HCs (lb/hr) (lb/hr) 1.42 1.77 PM10 (lb/hr) 0.04 PM2.5 (lb/hr) 0.04 CO (lb/hr) 2.20 ... ... CO2 (lb/hr) 767.97 CH4 (lb/hr) 0.02 N2O (lb/hr) 0.02 Overall Use/Activity 375 days 10 hr/day in service (hr per #) Helicopters : Subtotal 3750 NOx (ton) 2.7 HCs (ton) 3.3 PM10 (ton) 0.1 PM2.5 (ton) 0.1 CO (ton) 4.1 ... ... CO2 (MT) 1,306.3 CH4 (MT) 0.0369 N2O (MT) 0.0423 Ref: Swiss Confederation, DETEC and FOCA "Guidance on the Determination of Helicopter Emissions", 2009 GHG Factors: http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/1605/coefficients.html Jet fuel : 6.8 lb/gal  Appendix I . CalEEMod Output Copy and Results Results (Consolidated) NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Dated: 12.17.2015 Operational Phase ROW Operation NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr MT/yr Area 0.0005 4.4096 2.00E.04 2.00E.04 2.00E.04 2.00E.04 0.0555 0 0.1 0.00 0 0.1 Energy 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0.0 Mobile 0.1606 0.0441 4.4122 3.03E.03 4.4152 0.4537 2.79E.03 0.4565 0.555 1.56E.03 113.3 0.00 0 113.4 Offroad 2.2259 0.2365 0.0897 0.0897 0.0825 0.0825 2.0232 5.07E.03 445.0 0.14 0 448.1 Waste 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Water 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Total 2.3871 4.6901 4.4122 0.093 4.5052 0.4537 0.0855 0.5393 2.6337 6.63E.03 558.5 0.15 0 561.6 Substations Operation NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr MT/yr Area 3.40E.04 2.9305 1.30E.04 1.30E.04 1.30E.04 1.30E.04 0.0369 0 0.1 0.00 0 0.1 Energy 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0.0 Mobile 0.1068 0.0293 0.0588 2.01E.03 0.0608 0.0158 1.86E.03 0.0177 0.3688 1.04E.03 75.3 0.00 0 75.4 Waste 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Water 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Total 0.1071 2.9598 0.0588 2.14E.03 0.0609 0.0158 1.99E.03 0.0178 0.4057 1.04E.03 75.4 0.00 0 75.4 Construction Phase ROW Construction NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Year tons/yr MT/yr MT/yr 2018 10.9592 0.6443 26.5442 0.4976 27.0419 3.3748 0.4961 3.8709 13.9421 0.0254 2,242.7 0.52 0 2,253.7 2019 13.1761 0.7755 35.7757 0.6006 36.3763 4.5841 0.5987 5.1828 16.7726 0.0312 2,701.9 0.62 0 2,714.9 2020 3.9307 0.23 9.4889 0.1711 9.66 1.236 0.1705 1.4065 4.8621 9.50E.03 810.9 0.19 0 815.0 Total 28.0659 1.6498 71.8088 1.2694 73.0782 9.1949 1.2653 10.4602 35.5767 0.066 5,755.5 1.34 0 5,783.6 Substations Construction NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Year tons/yr MT/yr MT/yr 2018 15.1673 0.9115 2.2387 0.6485 2.8871 1.1112 0.6466 1.7578 19.7498 0.0354 3,137.3 0.78 0 3,153.7 2019 12.8722 0.7667 2.2122 0.5573 2.7695 1.1039 0.5557 1.6596 16.7838 0.0304 2,647.1 0.66 0 2,660.9 Total 28.0395 1.6782 4.4508 1.2058 5.6566 2.2151 1.2023 3.4174 36.5336 0.0658 5,784.3 1.44 0 5,814.7 CalEE output 2/12/2016 . Page 7 of 13 CalEE output 2/12/2016 . Page 8 of 13  ROW Construction Details 3.2 Site Preparation . 2018 Mitigated Construction On.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust 1.1351 0 1.1351 0.5714 0 0.5714 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Off.Road 1.5479 0.0765 0.0733 0.0733 0.0733 0.0733 1.8391 3.14E.03 287.4 0.09 0 289.2 Total 1.5479 0.0765 1.1351 0.0733 1.2084 0.5714 0.0733 0.6448 1.8391 3.14E.03 287.4 0.09 0 289.2 Mitigated Construction Off.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Hauling 0.1093 0.0103 0.958 1.84E.03 0.9598 0.0972 1.69E.03 0.0989 0.1262 3.90E.04 34.5 0.00 0 34.5 Vendor 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0.0 Worker 7.38E.03 4.35E.03 1.4045 1.10E.04 1.4046 0.1422 1.00E.04 0.1423 0.0702 1.90E.04 13.4 0.00 0 13.4 Total 0.1167 0.0146 2.3624 1.95E.03 2.3644 0.2394 1.79E.03 0.2412 0.1964 5.80E.04 47.9 0.00 0 47.9 3.2 Site Preparation . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust 1.1351 0 1.1351 0.5714 0 0.5714 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Off.Road 0.6676 0.033 0.0316 0.0316 0.0316 0.0316 0.7932 1.36E.03 122.0 0.04 0 122.8 Total 0.6676 0.033 1.1351 0.0316 1.1667 0.5714 0.0316 0.6031 0.7932 1.36E.03 122.0 0.04 0 122.8 Mitigated Construction Off.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Hauling 0.043 4.05E.03 0.9567 7.80E.04 0.9575 0.0967 7.10E.04 0.0974 0.0512 1.70E.04 14.6 0.00 0 14.6 Vendor 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0.0 Worker 2.88E.03 1.68E.03 0.6057 5.00E.05 0.6058 0.0613 4.00E.05 0.0614 0.0273 8.00E.05 5.6 0.00 0 5.6 Total 0.0459 5.73E.03 1.5624 8.30E.04 1.5633 0.158 7.50E.04 0.1588 0.0785 2.50E.04 20.2 0.00 0 20.2 3.3 Grading . 2018 Mitigated Construction On.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust 0.7318 0 0.7318 0.3035 0 0.3035 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Off.Road 3.8235 0.1926 0.1734 0.1734 0.1734 0.1734 4.7791 7.97E.03 723.4 0.21 0 727.9 Total 3.8235 0.1926 0.7318 0.1734 0.9052 0.3035 0.1734 0.4769 4.7791 7.97E.03 723.4 0.21 0 727.9 Mitigated Construction Off.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Hauling 0.1527 0.0144 1.9146 2.56E.03 1.9172 0.1938 2.36E.03 0.1962 0.1762 5.40E.04 48.2 0.00 0 48.2 Vendor 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0.0 Worker 0.0103 6.07E.03 1.9619 1.60E.04 1.9621 0.1987 1.50E.04 0.1988 0.0981 2.70E.04 18.7 0.00 0 18.7 Total 0.163 0.0204 3.8766 2.72E.03 3.8793 0.3925 2.51E.03 0.395 0.2743 8.10E.04 66.8 0.00 0 66.9 3.3 Grading . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust 0.7318 0 0.7318 0.3035 0 0.3035 0.0 0.00 0 0.0 Off.Road 4.0115 0.2021 0.1819 0.1819 0.1819 0.1819 5.0141 8.35E.03 747.4 0.22 0 752.1 Total 4.0115 0.2021 0.7318 0.1819 0.9137 0.3035 0.1819 0.4854 5.0141 8.35E.03 747.4 0.22 0 752.1 CalEE output 2/12/2016 . Page 9 of 13  Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.146 0 9.80E.03 0.1558 ROG 0.0138 0 5.70E.03 0.0195 Fugitive PM10 1.9148 0 2.0584 3.9732 Exhaust PM10 2.64E.03 0 1.60E.04 2.80E.03 PM10 Total 1.9174 0 2.0586 3.976 Fugitive PM2.5 0.1939 0 0.2085 0.4024 Exhaust PM2.5 2.43E.03 0 1.50E.04 2.58E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.1963 0 0.2086 0.4049 CO 0.174 0 0.0929 0.2668 SO2 5.70E.04 0 2.90E.04 8.60E.04 Total CO2 49.6 0.0 18.9 68.5 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 49.7 0.0 18.9 68.6 3.4 Foundation Construction . 2018 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Off.Road Total NOx 3.1589 3.1589 ROG 0.1594 0.1594 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 0.1566 0.1566 PM10 Total 0.1566 0.1566 Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 0.1566 0.1566 PM2.5 Total 0.1566 0.1566 CO 3.6804 3.6804 SO2 6.30E.03 6.30E.03 Total CO2 563.3 563.3 CH4 0.16 0.16 N2O 0 0 CO2e 566.7 566.7 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.3818 0.1345 0.0258 0.5421 ROG 0.0359 0.0186 0.0152 0.0697 Fugitive PM10 4.7866 0.7726 4.9048 10.464 Exhaust PM10 6.41E.03 2.24E.03 3.90E.04 9.04E.03 PM10 Total 4.793 0.7748 4.9052 10.473 Fugitive PM2.5 0.4846 0.0788 0.4967 1.0601 Exhaust PM2.5 5.90E.03 2.06E.03 3.60E.04 8.32E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.4905 0.0808 0.4971 1.0684 CO 0.4406 0.2443 0.2452 0.9301 SO2 1.36E.03 3.90E.04 6.80E.04 2.43E.03 Total CO2 120.4 34.7 46.7 201.8 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 120.4 34.7 46.8 201.9 3.4 Foundation Construction . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category Off.Road Total tons/yr NOx 3.3142 3.3142 ROG 0.1673 0.1673 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 0.1643 0.1643 PM10 Total 0.1643 0.1643 Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 0.1643 0.1643 PM2.5 Total 0.1643 0.1643 CO 3.8614 3.8614 SO2 6.60E.03 6.60E.03 Total CO2 582.8 582.8 CH4 0.17 0.17 N2O 0 0 CO2e 586.3 586.3 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.3651 0.128 0.0245 0.5175 ROG 0.0345 0.0172 0.0143 0.0659 Fugitive PM10 4.787 0.8106 5.1461 10.7436 Exhaust PM10 6.59E.03 2.16E.03 4.10E.04 9.16E.03 PM10 Total 4.7935 0.8128 5.1465 10.7528 Fugitive PM2.5 0.4848 0.0826 0.5212 1.0886 Exhaust PM2.5 6.06E.03 1.98E.03 3.80E.04 8.42E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.4908 0.0846 0.5215 1.097 CO 0.4349 0.237 0.2321 0.904 SO2 1.42E.03 4.10E.04 7.10E.04 2.54E.03 Total CO2 124.1 35.8 47.2 207.2 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 124.1 35.8 47.3 207.2 3.5 Structure Assembly . 2018 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Off.Road Total NOx 1.2941 1.2941 ROG 0.063 0.063 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 0.0754 0.0754 PM10 Total 0.0754 0.0754 Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 0.0754 0.0754 PM2.5 Total 0.0754 0.0754 CO 1.577 1.577 SO2 2.52E.03 2.52E.03 Total CO2 222.4 222.4 CH4 0.05 0.05 N2O 0 0 CO2e 223.6 223.6 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.1527 0.1345 0.0258 0.313 ROG 0.0144 0.0186 0.0152 0.0481 Fugitive PM10 2.2969 0.7726 4.9048 7.9744 Exhaust PM10 2.56E.03 2.24E.03 3.90E.04 5.19E.03 PM10 Total 2.2995 0.7748 4.9052 7.9796 Fugitive PM2.5 0.2324 0.0788 0.4967 0.8079 Exhaust PM2.5 2.36E.03 2.06E.03 3.60E.04 4.78E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.2347 0.0808 0.4971 0.8127 CO 0.1762 0.2443 0.2452 0.6658 SO2 5.40E.04 3.90E.04 6.80E.04 1.61E.03 Total CO2 48.2 34.7 46.7 129.6 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 48.2 34.7 46.8 129.7 3.5 Structure Assembly . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site CalEE output 2/12/2016 . Page 10 of 13  Category Off.Road tons/yr NOx 1.8881 ROG 0.0919 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 0.11 PM10 Total 0.11 Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 0.11 PM2.5 Total 0.11 CO 2.3008 SO2 3.67E.03 Total CO2 320.9 CH4 0.08 N2O 0 CO2e 322.5 Total 1.8881 0.0919 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 2.3008 3.67E.03 320.9 0.08 0 322.5 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor NOx 0.2031 0.178 ROG 0.0192 0.0239 Fugitive PM10 2.2984 1.1272 Exhaust PM10 3.67E.03 3.00E.03 PM10 Total 2.302 1.1302 Fugitive PM2.5 0.2329 0.1149 Exhaust PM2.5 3.37E.03 2.76E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.2363 0.1177 CO 0.2419 0.3296 SO2 7.90E.04 5.70E.04 Total CO2 69.0 49.8 CH4 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 CO2e 69.1 49.8 Worker 0.0341 0.0198 7.1562 5.60E.04 7.1568 0.7247 5.20E.04 0.7253 0.3228 9.90E.04 65.7 0.00 0 65.8 Total 0.4151 0.0629 10.5818 7.23E.03 10.5891 1.0726 6.65E.03 1.0792 0.8943 2.35E.03 184.5 0.00 0 184.6 3.6 Restoration . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust Off.Road NOx 0.4667 ROG 0.0231 Fugitive PM10 0.7286 Exhaust PM10 0 0.0221 PM10 Total 0.7286 0.0221 Fugitive PM2.5 0.348 Exhaust PM2.5 0 0.0221 PM2.5 Total 0.348 0.0221 CO 0.5545 SO2 9.50E.04 Total CO2 0.0 85.3 CH4 0.00 0.03 N2O 0 0 CO2e 0.0 85.8 Total 0.4667 0.0231 0.7286 0.0221 0.7507 0.348 0.0221 0.3701 0.5545 9.50E.04 85.3 0.03 0 85.8 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor NOx 0.03 0 ROG 2.83E.03 0 Fugitive PM10 0.5741 0 Exhaust PM10 5.40E.04 0 PM10 Total 0.5747 0 Fugitive PM2.5 0.0581 0 Exhaust PM2.5 5.00E.04 0 PM2.5 Total 0.0586 0 CO 0.0358 0 SO2 1.20E.04 0 Total CO2 10.2 0.0 CH4 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 CO2e 10.2 0.0 Worker 2.02E.03 1.17E.03 0.4235 3.00E.05 0.4235 0.0429 3.00E.05 0.0429 0.0191 6.00E.05 3.9 0.00 0 3.9 Total 0.0321 4.00E.03 0.9976 5.70E.04 0.9982 0.101 5.30E.04 0.1015 0.0549 1.80E.04 14.1 0.00 0 14.1 3.6 Restoration . 2020 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust Off.Road NOx 0.8626 ROG 0.0426 Fugitive PM10 0.7286 Exhaust PM10 0 0.0409 PM10 Total 0.7286 0.0409 Fugitive PM2.5 0.348 Exhaust PM2.5 0 0.0409 PM2.5 Total 0.348 0.0409 CO 1.0248 SO2 1.75E.03 Total CO2 0.0 154.1 CH4 0.00 0.05 N2O 0 0 CO2e 0.0 155.2 Total 0.8626 0.0426 0.7286 0.0409 0.7694 0.348 0.0409 0.3889 1.0248 1.75E.03 154.1 0.05 0 155.2 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor NOx 0.048 0 ROG 4.80E.03 0 Fugitive PM10 0.5747 0 Exhaust PM10 9.80E.04 0 PM10 Total 0.5757 0 Fugitive PM2.5 0.0583 0 Exhaust PM2.5 9.10E.04 0 PM2.5 Total 0.0592 0 CO 0.0624 0 SO2 2.20E.04 0 Total CO2 18.4 0.0 CH4 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 CO2e 18.4 0.0 Worker 3.42E.03 1.99E.03 0.7826 6.00E.05 0.7827 0.0793 6.00E.05 0.0793 0.0324 1.10E.04 6.9 0.00 0 6.9 Total 0.0514 6.79E.03 1.3573 1.04E.03 1.3584 0.1375 9.70E.04 0.1385 0.0948 3.30E.04 25.3 0.00 0 25.3 3.7 Conductor Stringing . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Off.Road NOx 1.4486 ROG 0.0732 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 0.0663 PM10 Total 0.0663 Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 0.0663 PM2.5 Total 0.0663 CO 1.6782 SO2 2.97E.03 Total CO2 263.9 CH4 0.08 N2O 0 CO2e 265.5 Total 1.4486 0.0732 0.0663 0.0663 0.0663 0.0663 1.6782 2.97E.03 263.9 0.08 0 265.5 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor NOx 0.1502 0.0527 ROG 0.0142 7.06E.03 Fugitive PM10 2.8706 0.3335 Exhaust PM10 2.71E.03 8.90E.04 PM10 Total 2.8733 0.3344 Fugitive PM2.5 0.2903 0.034 Exhaust PM2.5 2.50E.03 8.20E.04 PM2.5 Total 0.2928 0.0348 CO 0.1789 0.0975 SO2 5.90E.04 1.70E.04 Total CO2 51.1 14.7 CH4 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 CO2e 51.1 14.7 CalEE output 2/12/2016 . Page 11 of 13  Worker Total 0.0101 0.2129 5.86E.03 0.0271 2.1174 5.3215 1.70E.04 3.77E.03 2.1176 5.3253 0.2144 0.5387 1.50E.04 3.47E.03 0.2146 0.5422 0.0955 0.372 2.90E.04 1.05E.03 19.4 85.2 0.00 0.00 0 0 19.5 85.3 3.7 Conductor Stringing . 2020 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Off.Road Total NOx 2.6772 2.6772 ROG 0.1353 0.1353 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 0.1225 0.1225 PM10 Total 0.1225 0.1225 Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 0.1225 0.1225 PM2.5 Total 0.1225 0.1225 CO 3.1014 3.1014 SO2 5.48E.03 5.48E.03 Total CO2 478.2 478.2 CH4 0.14 0.14 N2O 0 0 CO2e 481.1 481.1 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.2401 0.0823 0.0171 0.3395 ROG 0.024 0.0113 9.94E.03 0.0453 Fugitive PM10 2.8735 0.6164 3.9132 7.403 Exhaust PM10 4.92E.03 1.44E.03 3.10E.04 6.67E.03 PM10 Total 2.8784 0.6178 3.9135 7.4097 Fugitive PM2.5 0.2913 0.0628 0.3963 0.7505 Exhaust PM2.5 4.53E.03 1.32E.03 2.80E.04 6.13E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.2959 0.0642 0.3966 0.7566 CO 0.3121 0.1668 0.162 0.641 SO2 1.08E.03 3.10E.04 5.40E.04 1.93E.03 Total CO2 92.2 26.6 34.5 153.3 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 92.2 26.6 34.5 153.3 Substation Construction Details 3.2 Site Preparation . 2018 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust Off.Road Total NOx 7.2038 7.2038 ROG 0.3654 0.3654 Fugitive PM10 1.8531 1.8531 Exhaust PM10 0 0.3136 0.3136 PM10 Total 1.8531 0.3136 2.1666 Fugitive PM2.5 1.0081 1.0081 Exhaust PM2.5 0 0.3136 0.3136 PM2.5 Total 1.0081 0.3136 1.3216 CO 8.7904 8.7904 SO2 0.0149 0.0149 Total CO2 0.0 1,364.2 1,364.2 CH4 0.00 0.42 0.42 N2O 0 0 0 CO2e 0.0 1,373.1 1,373.1 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.3826 0.1926 0.0332 0.6085 ROG 0.0359 0.0266 0.0196 0.0821 Fugitive PM10 0.0482 0.0154 0.0733 0.1369 Exhaust PM10 6.42E.03 3.21E.03 5.10E.04 0.0101 PM10 Total 0.0547 0.0186 0.0738 0.1471 Fugitive PM2.5 0.0128 4.42E.03 0.0195 0.0367 Exhaust PM2.5 5.91E.03 2.95E.03 4.70E.04 9.33E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.0187 7.37E.03 0.0199 0.046 CO 0.4416 0.3498 0.316 1.1073 SO2 1.36E.03 5.70E.04 8.80E.04 2.81E.03 Total CO2 120.7 49.7 60.2 230.6 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 120.7 49.7 60.3 230.7 3.2 Site Preparation . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site Category tons/yr Fugitive Dust Off.Road Total NOx 5.1691 5.1691 ROG 0.2622 0.2622 Fugitive PM10 1.8531 1.8531 Exhaust PM10 0 0.225 0.225 PM10 Total 1.8531 0.225 2.0781 Fugitive PM2.5 1.0081 1.0081 Exhaust PM2.5 0 0.225 0.225 PM2.5 Total 1.0081 0.225 1.2331 CO 6.3076 6.3076 SO2 0.0107 0.0107 Total CO2 0.0 963.1 963.1 CH4 0.00 0.30 0.30 N2O 0 0 0 CO2e 0.0 969.5 969.5 Mitigated Construction Off.Site Category tons/yr Hauling Vendor Worker Total NOx 0.2502 0.1253 0.0216 0.3971 ROG 0.0236 0.0168 0.0126 0.053 Fugitive PM10 0.046 0.0111 0.0526 0.1097 Exhaust PM10 4.52E.03 2.11E.03 3.60E.04 6.99E.03 PM10 Total 0.0505 0.0132 0.0529 0.1167 Fugitive PM2.5 0.012 3.17E.03 0.014 0.0291 Exhaust PM2.5 4.16E.03 1.94E.03 3.30E.04 6.43E.03 PM2.5 Total 0.0161 5.11E.03 0.0143 0.0355 CO 0.2981 0.232 0.2046 0.7347 SO2 9.80E.04 4.00E.04 6.30E.04 2.01E.03 Total CO2 85.1 35.0 41.6 161.8 CH4 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 N2O 0 0 0 0 CO2e 85.1 35.1 41.7 161.8 3.3 Building Construction . 2018 Mitigated Construction On.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e CalEE output 2/12/2016 . Page 12 of 13  Category tons/yr Off.Road 6.5134 0.3312 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 8.0088 0.0132 1,188.6 0.35 0 1,195.9 Total 6.5134 0.3312 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 8.0088 0.0132 1,188.6 0.35 0 1,195.9 Mitigated Construction Off.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Hauling 0.3826 0.0359 0.055 6.42E.03 0.0614 0.0144 5.91E.03 0.0203 0.4416 1.36E.03 120.7 0.00 0 120.7 Vendor 0.3852 0.0533 0.0308 6.42E.03 0.0373 8.83E.03 5.90E.03 0.0147 0.6995 1.13E.03 99.4 0.00 0 99.4 Worker 0.0738 0.0435 0.1628 1.13E.03 0.164 0.0433 1.04E.03 0.0443 0.7022 1.95E.03 133.8 0.01 0 133.9 Total 0.8417 0.1327 0.2487 0.014 0.2626 0.0665 0.0129 0.0794 1.8433 4.44E.03 353.8 0.01 0 354.0 3.3 Building Construction . 2019 Mitigated Construction On.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Off.Road 6.5383 0.3325 0.312 0.312 0.312 0.312 8.0394 0.0133 1,175.7 0.35 0 1,183.0 Total 6.5383 0.3325 0.312 0.312 0.312 0.312 8.0394 0.0133 1,175.7 0.35 0 1,183.0 Mitigated Construction Off.Site NOx ROG Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total CO SO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr Hauling 0.35 0.033 0.055 6.32E.03 0.0613 0.0144 5.81E.03 0.0202 0.417 1.37E.03 119.0 0.00 0 119.0 Vendor 0.3506 0.047 0.031 5.91E.03 0.0369 8.87E.03 5.44E.03 0.0143 0.6492 1.13E.03 98.1 0.00 0 98.1 Worker 0.0671 0.039 0.1635 1.11E.03 0.1646 0.0434 1.03E.03 0.0445 0.6359 1.95E.03 129.4 0.01 0 129.6 Total 0.7677 0.1191 0.2494 0.0133 0.2628 0.0667 0.0123 0.079 1.7021 4.45E.03 346.5 0.01 0 346.7  Appendix I . For Input to CalEEMod: Phasing and Typical Personnel and Equipment 2018 2018 2018 2019 2019 2019 2019 2020 2020 Typ Heavy Typ Haul Duty Trips Sum Haul Phasing Activity Personnel / Typical Fleet Equipment Daily Trips Start Days 2Q 3Q 4Q 2019.1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 2020.1Q 2Q Right.of.Way (access roads and vegetation clearing) 2 to 4 equipment operators 4 pcs 4 1,500 3/1/2018 375 X X X X X Excavation for foundations 4 to 8 laborers/equipment operators 8 pcs 8 3,000 6/1/2018 375 X X X X X Foundation installation (anchor 4 to 6 laborers/equipment operators and bolt/rebar cages) 3 to 5 ironworkers 12 pcs 20 7,500 6/1/2018 375 X X X X X 4 to 6 linemen/laborers and crane Structure assembly and erection operators 6 pcs 8 3,600 6/1/2018 450 X X X X X X Helicopter use 1 pilot and 1 ground person fueler [est 10 hr/day] 3/1/2019 375 X X X X X Conductor stringing 20 to 25 linemen/groundmen 10 pcs 20 4,500 10/1/2019 225 X X X Disturbance area restoration (Cleanup and Revegetation) 3 to 6 laborers 4 pcs 4 900 10/1/2019 225 X X X Substation improvements and 20 to 25 electricians, linemen, laborers, expansion equipment, operators, and ironworkers 18 pcs 14 6,300 3/1/2018 450 X X X X X X Substation construction (Tracy 20 to 40 electricians, linemen, laborers, East and Los Banos West) equipment, operators, and ironworkers 20 pcs 14 7,350 3/1/2018 525 X X X X X X X SLTP phasing 2/12/2016 . Page 13 of 13 Appendix I.2 Air Quality Emission Calculations, CalEEMod Output: Right.of.Way Construction Activity 1118 020M SLTP Transmission ROW San Joaquin Valley Unified APCD Air District, Annual 1.0 Project Characteristics 1.1 Land Usage Land Uses Size Metric Lot Acreage Floor Surface Area Population General Heavy Industry 6,019.00 1000sqft 138.18 6,019,000.00 0 1.2 Other Project Characteristics Urbanization Climate Zone Rural 3 Wind Speed (m/s) 2.7 Precipitation Freq (Days) Operational Year 45 2021 Utility Company CO2 Intensity (lb/MWhr) 0 CH4 Intensity (lb/MWhr) 0 N2O Intensity (lb/MWhr) 0 1.3 User Entered Comments & Non-Default Data Project Characteristics - Land Use - proxy metric for ROW in caleemod is 6,019,000 sf industrial or 95 miles at access rd width of 12 ft Construction Phase - based on 75 working days per calendar quarter and six workdays per week Off-road Equipment - 10 pcs during conductor stringing Off-road Equipment - 12 pcs during foundation install Off-road Equipment - 8 pcs for excav for founds Off-road Equipment - 4 pcs during restoration Off-road Equipment - 4 pcs during ROW prep Off-road Equipment - 6 pcs during structure assy Trips and VMT - Haul trips majority during excavation, foundation, assembly of structures On-road Fugitive Dust - 80 percent paved for all trips Grading - 498 acres total temporary disturbance in Appx E Vehicle Trips - Operational at 20 trips daily Road Dust - 95 percent paved for all trips Consumer Products - consumer product ROG not applicable to this project Area Coating - interior coatings not applicable to this project Energy Use - energy use for this land use type not applicable Water And Wastewater - water use for this land use type not applicable Solid Waste - solid waste factors for this land use type not applicable Construction Off-road Equipment Mitigation - Tier 3 fleet minimum and apply soil stabilizers or water 2x and Reg 8 comply Operational Off-Road Equipment - Up to 5 pcs of typ off-road equip for routine ROW ops and maint Table Name Column Name Default Value New Value tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 2.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 2.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 4.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 2.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 7.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 3.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 1.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 7.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 5.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 2.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 13.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 4.00 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 3,100.00 375.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 3,100.00 450.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 3,100.00 225.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 310.00 375.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 120.00 375.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 120.00 225.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase PhaseEndDate 10/22/2020 8/12/2019 tblConstructionPhase PhaseEndDate 1/18/2021 11/7/2019 tblConstructionPhase PhaseEndDate 3/8/2021 6/18/2020 tblConstructionPhase PhaseEndDate 7/22/2020 8/12/2019 tblConstructionPhase PhaseEndDate 7/27/2020 6/18/2020 tblConstructionPhase PhaseStartDate 8/13/2019 6/1/2018 tblConstructionPhase PhaseStartDate 8/13/2019 6/1/2018 tblConstructionPhase PhaseStartDate 6/19/2020 10/1/2019 tblConstructionPhase PhaseStartDate 5/12/2019 6/1/2018 tblConstructionPhase PhaseStartDate 11/8/2019 10/1/2019 tblConsumerProducts ROG_EF 2.14E-05 2E-07 tblEnergyUse LightingElect 3.11 0.00 tblEnergyUse NT24E 4.16 0.00 tblEnergyUse NT24NG 3.84 0.00 tblEnergyUse T24E 2.39 0.00 tblEnergyUse T24NG 17.92 0.00 tblGrading AcresOfGrading 0.00 498.00 tblGrading AcresOfGrading 0.00 498.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 1.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 3.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 3.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 3.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 3.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 3.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 3.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 4.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 4.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 1.00 2.00 tblOnRoadDust HaulingPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust HaulingPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust HaulingPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust HaulingPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust HaulingPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust HaulingPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust VendorPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust VendorPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust VendorPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust VendorPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust VendorPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust VendorPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust WorkerPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust WorkerPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust WorkerPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust WorkerPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust WorkerPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOnRoadDust WorkerPercentPave 100.00 80.00 tblOperationalOffRoadEquipment OperOffRoadEquipmentNumber 0.00 2.00 tblOperationalOffRoadEquipment OperOffRoadEquipmentNumber 0.00 2.00 tblOperationalOffRoadEquipment OperOffRoadEquipmentNumber 0.00 1.00 tblProjectCharacteristics OperationalYear 2014 2021 tblProjectCharacteristics UrbanizationLevel Urban Rural tblRoadDust RoadPercentPave 100 95 tblSolidWaste SolidWasteGenerationRate 7,463.56 0.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 1,500.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 3,000.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 7,500.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 3,600.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 900.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 4,500.00 tblTripsAndVMT VendorTripNumber 987.00 20.00 tblTripsAndVMT VendorTripNumber 987.00 20.00 tblTripsAndVMT VendorTripNumber 987.00 20.00 tblTripsAndVMT WorkerTripNumber 30.00 20.00 tblTripsAndVMT WorkerTripNumber 2,528.00 50.00 tblTripsAndVMT WorkerTripNumber 2,528.00 50.00 tblTripsAndVMT WorkerTripNumber 2,528.00 50.00 tblVehicleTrips ST_TR 1.50 0.01 tblVehicleTrips SU_TR 1.50 0.01 tblVehicleTrips WD_TR 1.50 0.01 tblWater IndoorWaterUseRate 1,391,893,750.00 0.00 2.0 Emissions Summary 2.1 Overall Construction Unmitigated Construction ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Year tons/yr MT/yr 2018 1.8595 18.4016 14.1314 0.0254 104.1657 0.8847 105.0504 11.9649 0.8232 12.7881 0.0000 2,242.672 4 2,242.672 4 0.5233 0.0000 2,253.662 0 2019 1.9942 19.3521 15.6175 0.0312 140.2481 0.9017 141.1497 16.1910 0.8400 17.0310 0.0000 2,701.943 6 2,701.943 6 0.6181 0.0000 2,714.924 4 2020 0.5460 5.1808 4.3295 9.5000e003 37.1186 0.2278 37.3464 4.3306 0.2112 4.5418 0.0000 810.9329 810.9329 0.1940 0.0000 815.0064 Total 4.3997 42.9345 34.0784 0.0660 281.5323 2.0142 283.5465 32.4865 1.8744 34.3609 0.0000 5,755.548 8 5,755.548 8 1.3354 0.0000 5,783.592 8 Mitigated Construction ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Year tons/yr MT/yr 2018 0.6443 10.9592 13.9421 0.0254 26.5442 0.4976 27.0419 3.3748 0.4961 3.8709 0.0000 2,242.670 2 2,242.670 2 0.5233 0.0000 2,253.659 9 2019 0.7755 13.1761 16.7726 0.0312 35.7757 0.6006 36.3763 4.5841 0.5987 5.1828 0.0000 2,701.941 1 2,701.941 1 0.6181 0.0000 2,714.921 9 2020 0.2300 3.9307 4.8621 9.5000e003 9.4889 0.1711 9.6600 1.2360 0.1705 1.4065 0.0000 810.9321 810.9321 0.1940 0.0000 815.0056 Total 1.6498 28.0659 35.5767 0.0660 71.8088 1.2694 73.0782 9.1949 1.2653 10.4602 0.0000 5,755.543 4 5,755.543 4 1.3354 0.0000 5,783.587 4 ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio-CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N20 CO2e Percent Reduction 62.50 34.63 -4.40 0.00 74.49 36.98 74.23 71.70 32.50 69.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.2 Overall Operational Unmitigated Operational ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Area 4.4096 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 Energy 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Mobile 0.0441 0.1606 0.5550 1.5600e003 4.4122 3.0300e003 4.4152 0.4537 2.7900e003 0.4565 0.0000 113.3433 113.3433 3.0800e003 0.0000 113.4080 Offroad 0.2365 2.2259 2.0232 5.0700e003 0.0897 0.0897 0.0825 0.0825 0.0000 445.0331 445.0331 0.1439 0.0000 448.0557 Waste 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Water 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 4.6901 2.3871 2.6337 6.6300e003 4.4122 0.0930 4.5052 0.4537 0.0855 0.5393 0.0000 558.4840 558.4840 0.1473 0.0000 561.5773 2.2 Overall Operational Mitigated Operational ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Area 4.4096 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 Energy 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Mobile 0.0441 0.1606 0.5550 1.5600e003 4.4122 3.0300e003 4.4152 0.4537 2.7900e003 0.4565 0.0000 113.3433 113.3433 3.0800e003 0.0000 113.4080 Offroad 0.2365 2.2259 2.0232 5.0700e003 0.0897 0.0897 0.0825 0.0825 0.0000 445.0331 445.0331 0.1439 0.0000 448.0557 Waste 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Water 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 4.6901 2.3871 2.6337 6.6300e003 4.4122 0.0930 4.5052 0.4537 0.0855 0.5393 0.0000 558.4840 558.4840 0.1473 0.0000 561.5773 ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio-CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N20 CO2e Percent Reduction 5.04 93.25 76.82 76.47 0.00 96.53 1.99 0.00 96.50 15.31 0.00 79.69 79.69 97.71 0.00 79.79 3.0 Construction Detail Construction Phase Phase Number Phase Name Phase Type Start Date End Date Num Days Week Num Days Phase Description 1 Site Preparation Site Preparation 3/1/2018 5/11/2019 6 375 ROW clearing 2 Grading Grading 6/1/2018 8/12/2019 6 375 Excavation foundations 3 Foundation Construction Building Construction 6/1/2018 8/12/2019 6 375 Install foundations 4 Structure Assembly Building Construction 6/1/2018 11/7/2019 6 450 Assemble structures 5 Restoration Site Preparation 10/1/2019 6/18/2020 6 225 Restoration 6 Conductor Stringing Building Construction 10/1/2019 6/18/2020 6 225 Conductor stringing Acres of Grading (Site Preparation Phase): 498 Acres of Grading (Grading Phase): 937.5 Acres of Paving: 0 Residential Indoor: 0; Residential Outdoor: 0; Non-Residential Indoor: 0; Non-Residential Outdoor: 0 (Architectural Coating – sqft) OffRoad Equipment Phase Name Offroad Equipment Type Amount Usage Hours Horse Power Load Factor Site Preparation Rubber Tired Dozers 2 8.00 255 0.40 Site Preparation Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 2 8.00 97 0.37 Grading Air Compressors 2 8.00 78 0.48 Grading Bore/Drill Rigs 2 8.00 205 0.50 Grading Excavators 2 8.00 162 0.38 Grading Graders 1 8.00 174 0.41 Grading Rubber Tired Dozers 1 8.00 255 0.40 Grading Scrapers 2 8.00 361 0.48 Grading Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 2 8.00 97 0.37 Foundation Construction Cranes 1 7.00 226 0.29 Foundation Construction Forklifts 3 8.00 89 0.20 Foundation Construction Generator Sets 1 8.00 84 0.74 Foundation Construction Off-Highway Trucks 3 8.00 400 0.38 Foundation Construction Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 3 7.00 97 0.37 Foundation Construction Welders 2 8.00 46 0.45 Structure Assembly Cranes 2 7.00 226 0.29 Structure Assembly Forklifts 2 8.00 89 0.20 Structure Assembly Generator Sets 1 8.00 84 0.74 Structure Assembly Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 2 7.00 97 0.37 Structure Assembly Welders 1 8.00 46 0.45 Restoration Rubber Tired Dozers 2 8.00 255 0.40 Restoration Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 2 8.00 97 0.37 Conductor Stringing Cranes 1 7.00 226 0.29 Conductor Stringing Forklifts 2 8.00 89 0.20 Conductor Stringing Generator Sets 1 8.00 84 0.74 Conductor Stringing Off-Highway Trucks 4 8.00 400 0.38 Conductor Stringing Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 2 7.00 97 0.37 Conductor Stringing Welders 1 8.00 46 0.45 Trips and VMT Phase Name Offroad Equipment Count Worker Trip Number Vendor Trip Number Hauling Trip Number Worker Trip Length Vendor Trip Length Hauling Trip Length Worker Vehicle Class Vendor Vehicle Class Hauling Vehicle Class Site Preparation 4 10.00 0.00 1,500.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT Grading 12 20.00 0.00 3,000.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT Foundation Construction 13 50.00 20.00 7,500.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT Structure Assembly 8 50.00 20.00 3,600.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT Restoration 4 10.00 0.00 900.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT Conductor Stringing 11 50.00 20.00 4,500.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT 3.1 Mitigation Measures Construction Use Cleaner Engines for Construction Equipment Use Soil Stabilizer Water Exposed Area Reduce Vehicle Speed on Unpaved Roads 3.2 Site Preparation - 2018 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 2.5224 0.0000 2.5224 1.2699 0.0000 1.2699 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.3516 3.7535 2.9604 3.1400e003 0.1903 0.1903 0.1751 0.1751 0.0000 287.3578 287.3578 0.0895 0.0000 289.2364 Total 0.3516 3.7535 2.9604 3.1400e003 2.5224 0.1903 2.7127 1.2699 0.1751 1.4449 0.0000 287.3578 287.3578 0.0895 0.0000 289.2364 3.2 Site Preparation - 2018 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0103 0.1093 0.1262 3.9000e004 3.8809 1.8400e003 3.8828 0.3890 1.6900e003 0.3906 0.0000 34.4768 34.4768 2.5000e004 0.0000 34.4821 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 4.3500e003 7.3800e003 0.0702 1.9000e004 5.6930 1.1000e004 5.6931 0.5703 1.0000e004 0.5704 0.0000 13.3758 13.3758 6.4000e004 0.0000 13.3893 Total 0.0146 0.1167 0.1964 5.8000e004 9.5739 1.9500e003 9.5759 0.9593 1.7900e003 0.9611 0.0000 47.8527 47.8527 8.9000e004 0.0000 47.8714 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.1351 0.0000 1.1351 0.5714 0.0000 0.5714 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.0765 1.5479 1.8391 3.1400e003 0.0733 0.0733 0.0733 0.0733 0.0000 287.3575 287.3575 0.0895 0.0000 289.2361 Total 0.0765 1.5479 1.8391 3.1400e003 1.1351 0.0733 1.2084 0.5714 0.0733 0.6448 0.0000 287.3575 287.3575 0.0895 0.0000 289.2361 3.2 Site Preparation - 2018 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0103 0.1093 0.1262 3.9000e004 0.9580 1.8400e003 0.9598 0.0972 1.6900e003 0.0989 0.0000 34.4768 34.4768 2.5000e004 0.0000 34.4821 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 4.3500e003 7.3800e003 0.0702 1.9000e004 1.4045 1.1000e004 1.4046 0.1422 1.0000e004 0.1423 0.0000 13.3758 13.3758 6.4000e004 0.0000 13.3893 Total 0.0146 0.1167 0.1964 5.8000e004 2.3624 1.9500e003 2.3644 0.2394 1.7900e003 0.2412 0.0000 47.8527 47.8527 8.9000e004 0.0000 47.8714 3.2 Site Preparation - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 2.5224 0.0000 2.5224 1.2699 0.0000 1.2699 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.1426 1.5130 1.2244 1.3600e003 0.0751 0.0751 0.0691 0.0691 0.0000 121.9612 121.9612 0.0386 0.0000 122.7715 Total 0.1426 1.5130 1.2244 1.3600e003 2.5224 0.0751 2.5975 1.2699 0.0691 1.3390 0.0000 121.9612 121.9612 0.0386 0.0000 122.7715 3.2 Site Preparation - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 4.0500e003 0.0430 0.0512 1.7000e004 3.8797 7.8000e004 3.8804 0.3885 7.1000e004 0.3892 0.0000 14.6102 14.6102 1.1000e004 0.0000 14.6124 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 1.6800e003 2.8800e003 0.0273 8.0000e005 2.4554 5.0000e005 2.4554 0.2460 4.0000e005 0.2460 0.0000 5.5609 5.5609 2.6000e004 0.0000 5.5663 Total 5.7300e003 0.0459 0.0785 2.5000e004 6.3350 8.3000e004 6.3359 0.6345 7.5000e004 0.6352 0.0000 20.1711 20.1711 3.7000e004 0.0000 20.1788 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.1351 0.0000 1.1351 0.5714 0.0000 0.5714 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.0330 0.6676 0.7932 1.3600e003 0.0316 0.0316 0.0316 0.0316 0.0000 121.9610 121.9610 0.0386 0.0000 122.7714 Total 0.0330 0.6676 0.7932 1.3600e003 1.1351 0.0316 1.1667 0.5714 0.0316 0.6031 0.0000 121.9610 121.9610 0.0386 0.0000 122.7714 3.2 Site Preparation - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 4.0500e003 0.0430 0.0512 1.7000e004 0.9567 7.8000e004 0.9575 0.0967 7.1000e004 0.0974 0.0000 14.6102 14.6102 1.1000e004 0.0000 14.6124 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 1.6800e003 2.8800e003 0.0273 8.0000e005 0.6057 5.0000e005 0.6058 0.0613 4.0000e005 0.0614 0.0000 5.5609 5.5609 2.6000e004 0.0000 5.5663 Total 5.7300e003 0.0459 0.0785 2.5000e004 1.5624 8.3000e004 1.5633 0.1580 7.5000e004 0.1588 0.0000 20.1711 20.1711 3.7000e004 0.0000 20.1788 3.3 Grading - 2018 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.6263 0.0000 1.6263 0.6743 0.0000 0.6743 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.6080 6.6490 4.6786 7.9700e003 0.3120 0.3120 0.2900 0.2900 0.0000 723.4346 723.4346 0.2117 0.0000 727.8811 Total 0.6080 6.6490 4.6786 7.9700e003 1.6263 0.3120 1.9382 0.6743 0.2900 0.9643 0.0000 723.4346 723.4346 0.2117 0.0000 727.8811 3.3 Grading - 2018 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0144 0.1527 0.1762 5.4000e004 7.7605 2.5600e003 7.7631 0.7774 2.3600e003 0.7798 0.0000 48.1623 48.1623 3.5000e004 0.0000 48.1696 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 6.0700e003 0.0103 0.0981 2.7000e004 7.9528 1.6000e004 7.9530 0.7967 1.5000e004 0.7969 0.0000 18.6853 18.6853 9.0000e004 0.0000 18.7042 Total 0.0204 0.1630 0.2743 8.1000e004 15.7134 2.7200e003 15.7161 1.5741 2.5100e003 1.5767 0.0000 66.8476 66.8476 1.2500e003 0.0000 66.8738 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 0.7318 0.0000 0.7318 0.3035 0.0000 0.3035 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.1926 3.8235 4.7791 7.9700e003 0.1734 0.1734 0.1734 0.1734 0.0000 723.4337 723.4337 0.2117 0.0000 727.8802 Total 0.1926 3.8235 4.7791 7.9700e003 0.7318 0.1734 0.9052 0.3035 0.1734 0.4769 0.0000 723.4337 723.4337 0.2117 0.0000 727.8802 3.3 Grading - 2018 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0144 0.1527 0.1762 5.4000e004 1.9146 2.5600e003 1.9172 0.1938 2.3600e003 0.1962 0.0000 48.1623 48.1623 3.5000e004 0.0000 48.1696 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 6.0700e003 0.0103 0.0981 2.7000e004 1.9619 1.6000e004 1.9621 0.1987 1.5000e004 0.1988 0.0000 18.6853 18.6853 9.0000e004 0.0000 18.7042 Total 0.0204 0.1630 0.2743 8.1000e004 3.8766 2.7200e003 3.8793 0.3925 2.5100e003 0.3950 0.0000 66.8476 66.8476 1.2500e003 0.0000 66.8738 3.3 Grading - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.6263 0.0000 1.6263 0.6743 0.0000 0.6743 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.5875 6.3304 4.7072 8.3500e003 0.2921 0.2921 0.2714 0.2714 0.0000 747.4125 747.4125 0.2213 0.0000 752.0601 Total 0.5875 6.3304 4.7072 8.3500e003 1.6263 0.2921 1.9183 0.6743 0.2714 0.9457 0.0000 747.4125 747.4125 0.2213 0.0000 752.0601 3.3 Grading - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0138 0.1460 0.1740 5.7000e004 7.7607 2.6400e003 7.7633 0.7775 2.4300e003 0.7799 0.0000 49.6488 49.6488 3.6000e004 0.0000 49.6564 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 5.7000e003 9.8000e003 0.0929 2.9000e004 8.3439 1.6000e004 8.3441 0.8359 1.5000e004 0.8361 0.0000 18.8973 18.8973 8.7000e004 0.0000 18.9157 Total 0.0195 0.1558 0.2668 8.6000e004 16.1046 2.8000e003 16.1074 1.6134 2.5800e003 1.6160 0.0000 68.5461 68.5461 1.2300e003 0.0000 68.5721 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 0.7318 0.0000 0.7318 0.3035 0.0000 0.3035 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.2021 4.0115 5.0141 8.3500e003 0.1819 0.1819 0.1819 0.1819 0.0000 747.4116 747.4116 0.2213 0.0000 752.0592 Total 0.2021 4.0115 5.0141 8.3500e003 0.7318 0.1819 0.9137 0.3035 0.1819 0.4854 0.0000 747.4116 747.4116 0.2213 0.0000 752.0592 3.3 Grading - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0138 0.1460 0.1740 5.7000e004 1.9148 2.6400e003 1.9174 0.1939 2.4300e003 0.1963 0.0000 49.6488 49.6488 3.6000e004 0.0000 49.6564 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 5.7000e003 9.8000e003 0.0929 2.9000e004 2.0584 1.6000e004 2.0586 0.2085 1.5000e004 0.2086 0.0000 18.8973 18.8973 8.7000e004 0.0000 18.9157 Total 0.0195 0.1558 0.2668 8.6000e004 3.9732 2.8000e003 3.9760 0.4024 2.5800e003 0.4049 0.0000 68.5461 68.5461 1.2300e003 0.0000 68.5721 3.4 Foundation Construction - 2018 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.4958 4.5561 2.9220 6.3000e003 0.2301 0.2301 0.2153 0.2153 0.0000 563.3231 563.3231 0.1589 0.0000 566.6597 Total 0.4958 4.5561 2.9220 6.3000e003 0.2301 0.2301 0.2153 0.2153 0.0000 563.3231 563.3231 0.1589 0.0000 566.6597 3.4 Foundation Construction - 2018 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0359 0.3818 0.4406 1.3600e003 19.4013 6.4100e003 19.4077 1.9435 5.9000e003 1.9494 0.0000 120.4057 120.4057 8.7000e004 0.0000 120.4241 Vendor 0.0186 0.1345 0.2443 3.9000e004 3.1262 2.2400e003 3.1284 0.3137 2.0600e003 0.3158 0.0000 34.7219 34.7219 2.9000e004 0.0000 34.7279 Worker 0.0152 0.0258 0.2452 6.8000e004 19.8821 3.9000e004 19.8825 1.9918 3.6000e004 1.9922 0.0000 46.7133 46.7133 2.2400e003 0.0000 46.7604 Total 0.0697 0.5421 0.9301 2.4300e003 42.4095 9.0400e003 42.4186 4.2491 8.3200e003 4.2574 0.0000 201.8409 201.8409 3.4000e003 0.0000 201.9124 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.1594 3.1589 3.6804 6.3000e003 0.1566 0.1566 0.1566 0.1566 0.0000 563.3224 563.3224 0.1589 0.0000 566.6590 Total 0.1594 3.1589 3.6804 6.3000e003 0.1566 0.1566 0.1566 0.1566 0.0000 563.3224 563.3224 0.1589 0.0000 566.6590 3.4 Foundation Construction - 2018 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0359 0.3818 0.4406 1.3600e003 4.7866 6.4100e003 4.7930 0.4846 5.9000e003 0.4905 0.0000 120.4057 120.4057 8.7000e004 0.0000 120.4241 Vendor 0.0186 0.1345 0.2443 3.9000e004 0.7726 2.2400e003 0.7748 0.0788 2.0600e003 0.0808 0.0000 34.7219 34.7219 2.9000e004 0.0000 34.7279 Worker 0.0152 0.0258 0.2452 6.8000e004 4.9048 3.9000e004 4.9052 0.4967 3.6000e004 0.4971 0.0000 46.7133 46.7133 2.2400e003 0.0000 46.7604 Total 0.0697 0.5421 0.9301 2.4300e003 10.4640 9.0400e003 10.4730 1.0601 8.3200e003 1.0684 0.0000 201.8409 201.8409 3.4000e003 0.0000 201.9124 3.4 Foundation Construction - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.4662 4.2289 2.9624 6.6000e003 0.2079 0.2079 0.1945 0.1945 0.0000 582.7972 582.7972 0.1653 0.0000 586.2678 Total 0.4662 4.2289 2.9624 6.6000e003 0.2079 0.2079 0.1945 0.1945 0.0000 582.7972 582.7972 0.1653 0.0000 586.2678 3.4 Foundation Construction - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0345 0.3651 0.4349 1.4200e003 19.4017 6.5900e003 19.4083 1.9437 6.0600e003 1.9497 0.0000 124.1220 124.1220 9.1000e004 0.0000 124.1410 Vendor 0.0172 0.1280 0.2370 4.1000e004 3.2799 2.1600e003 3.2821 0.3291 1.9800e003 0.3311 0.0000 35.7912 35.7912 2.9000e004 0.0000 35.7973 Worker 0.0143 0.0245 0.2321 7.1000e004 20.8599 4.1000e004 20.8603 2.0898 3.8000e004 2.0902 0.0000 47.2433 47.2433 2.1900e003 0.0000 47.2892 Total 0.0659 0.5175 0.9040 2.5400e003 43.5415 9.1600e003 43.5506 4.3626 8.4200e003 4.3710 0.0000 207.1565 207.1565 3.3900e003 0.0000 207.2275 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.1673 3.3142 3.8614 6.6000e003 0.1643 0.1643 0.1643 0.1643 0.0000 582.7965 582.7965 0.1653 0.0000 586.2671 Total 0.1673 3.3142 3.8614 6.6000e003 0.1643 0.1643 0.1643 0.1643 0.0000 582.7965 582.7965 0.1653 0.0000 586.2671 3.4 Foundation Construction - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0345 0.3651 0.4349 1.4200e003 4.7870 6.5900e003 4.7935 0.4848 6.0600e003 0.4908 0.0000 124.1220 124.1220 9.1000e004 0.0000 124.1410 Vendor 0.0172 0.1280 0.2370 4.1000e004 0.8106 2.1600e003 0.8128 0.0826 1.9800e003 0.0846 0.0000 35.7912 35.7912 2.9000e004 0.0000 35.7973 Worker 0.0143 0.0245 0.2321 7.1000e004 5.1461 4.1000e004 5.1465 0.5212 3.8000e004 0.5215 0.0000 47.2433 47.2433 2.1900e003 0.0000 47.2892 Total 0.0659 0.5175 0.9040 2.5400e003 10.7436 9.1600e003 10.7528 1.0886 8.4200e003 1.0970 0.0000 207.1565 207.1565 3.3900e003 0.0000 207.2275 3.5 Structure Assembly - 2018 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.2513 2.3080 1.5039 2.5200e003 0.1334 0.1334 0.1255 0.1255 0.0000 222.4183 222.4183 0.0548 0.0000 223.5694 Total 0.2513 2.3080 1.5039 2.5200e003 0.1334 0.1334 0.1255 0.1255 0.0000 222.4183 222.4183 0.0548 0.0000 223.5694 3.5 Structure Assembly - 2018 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0144 0.1527 0.1762 5.4000e004 9.3120 2.5600e003 9.3146 0.9327 2.3600e003 0.9350 0.0000 48.1623 48.1623 3.5000e004 0.0000 48.1696 Vendor 0.0186 0.1345 0.2443 3.9000e004 3.1262 2.2400e003 3.1284 0.3137 2.0600e003 0.3158 0.0000 34.7219 34.7219 2.9000e004 0.0000 34.7279 Worker 0.0152 0.0258 0.2452 6.8000e004 19.8821 3.9000e004 19.8825 1.9918 3.6000e004 1.9922 0.0000 46.7133 46.7133 2.2400e003 0.0000 46.7604 Total 0.0481 0.3130 0.6658 1.6100e003 32.3202 5.1900e003 32.3254 3.2382 4.7800e003 3.2430 0.0000 129.5975 129.5975 2.8800e003 0.0000 129.6579 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.0630 1.2941 1.5770 2.5200e003 0.0754 0.0754 0.0754 0.0754 0.0000 222.4180 222.4180 0.0548 0.0000 223.5691 Total 0.0630 1.2941 1.5770 2.5200e003 0.0754 0.0754 0.0754 0.0754 0.0000 222.4180 222.4180 0.0548 0.0000 223.5691 3.5 Structure Assembly - 2018 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0144 0.1527 0.1762 5.4000e004 2.2969 2.5600e003 2.2995 0.2324 2.3600e003 0.2347 0.0000 48.1623 48.1623 3.5000e004 0.0000 48.1696 Vendor 0.0186 0.1345 0.2443 3.9000e004 0.7726 2.2400e003 0.7748 0.0788 2.0600e003 0.0808 0.0000 34.7219 34.7219 2.9000e004 0.0000 34.7279 Worker 0.0152 0.0258 0.2452 6.8000e004 4.9048 3.9000e004 4.9052 0.4967 3.6000e004 0.4971 0.0000 46.7133 46.7133 2.2400e003 0.0000 46.7604 Total 0.0481 0.3130 0.6658 1.6100e003 7.9744 5.1900e003 7.9796 0.8079 4.7800e003 0.8127 0.0000 129.5975 129.5975 2.8800e003 0.0000 129.6579 3.5 Structure Assembly - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.3230 3.0216 2.1192 3.6700e003 0.1677 0.1677 0.1577 0.1577 0.0000 320.8585 320.8585 0.0787 0.0000 322.5107 Total 0.3230 3.0216 2.1192 3.6700e003 0.1677 0.1677 0.1577 0.1577 0.0000 320.8585 320.8585 0.0787 0.0000 322.5107 3.5 Structure Assembly - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0192 0.2031 0.2419 7.9000e004 9.3135 3.6700e003 9.3171 0.9332 3.3700e003 0.9366 0.0000 69.0429 69.0429 5.0000e004 0.0000 69.0535 Vendor 0.0239 0.1780 0.3296 5.7000e004 4.5611 3.0000e003 4.5641 0.4577 2.7600e003 0.4605 0.0000 49.7721 49.7721 4.0000e004 0.0000 49.7806 Worker 0.0198 0.0341 0.3228 9.9000e004 29.0082 5.6000e004 29.0088 2.9061 5.2000e004 2.9066 0.0000 65.6978 65.6978 3.0400e003 0.0000 65.7616 Total 0.0629 0.4151 0.8943 2.3500e003 42.8828 7.2300e003 42.8900 4.2970 6.6500e003 4.3037 0.0000 184.5127 184.5127 3.9400e003 0.0000 184.5956 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.0919 1.8881 2.3008 3.6700e003 0.1100 0.1100 0.1100 0.1100 0.0000 320.8581 320.8581 0.0787 0.0000 322.5103 Total 0.0919 1.8881 2.3008 3.6700e003 0.1100 0.1100 0.1100 0.1100 0.0000 320.8581 320.8581 0.0787 0.0000 322.5103 3.5 Structure Assembly - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0192 0.2031 0.2419 7.9000e004 2.2984 3.6700e003 2.3020 0.2329 3.3700e003 0.2363 0.0000 69.0429 69.0429 5.0000e004 0.0000 69.0535 Vendor 0.0239 0.1780 0.3296 5.7000e004 1.1272 3.0000e003 1.1302 0.1149 2.7600e003 0.1177 0.0000 49.7721 49.7721 4.0000e004 0.0000 49.7806 Worker 0.0198 0.0341 0.3228 9.9000e004 7.1562 5.6000e004 7.1568 0.7247 5.2000e004 0.7253 0.0000 65.6978 65.6978 3.0400e003 0.0000 65.7616 Total 0.0629 0.4151 0.8943 2.3500e003 10.5818 7.2300e003 10.5891 1.0726 6.6500e003 1.0792 0.0000 184.5127 184.5127 3.9400e003 0.0000 184.5956 3.6 Restoration - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.6190 0.0000 1.6190 0.7733 0.0000 0.7733 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.0997 1.0577 0.8560 9.5000e004 0.0525 0.0525 0.0483 0.0483 0.0000 85.2649 85.2649 0.0270 0.0000 85.8314 Total 0.0997 1.0577 0.8560 9.5000e004 1.6190 0.0525 1.6716 0.7733 0.0483 0.8216 0.0000 85.2649 85.2649 0.0270 0.0000 85.8314 3.6 Restoration - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 2.8300e003 0.0300 0.0358 1.2000e004 2.3279 5.4000e004 2.3284 0.2331 5.0000e004 0.2336 0.0000 10.2142 10.2142 7.0000e005 0.0000 10.2158 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 1.1700e003 2.0200e003 0.0191 6.0000e005 1.7166 3.0000e005 1.7166 0.1720 3.0000e005 0.1720 0.0000 3.8877 3.8877 1.8000e004 0.0000 3.8915 Total 4.0000e003 0.0321 0.0549 1.8000e004 4.0445 5.7000e004 4.0451 0.4051 5.3000e004 0.4056 0.0000 14.1019 14.1019 2.5000e004 0.0000 14.1073 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 0.7286 0.0000 0.7286 0.3480 0.0000 0.3480 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.0231 0.4667 0.5545 9.5000e004 0.0221 0.0221 0.0221 0.0221 0.0000 85.2648 85.2648 0.0270 0.0000 85.8313 Total 0.0231 0.4667 0.5545 9.5000e004 0.7286 0.0221 0.7507 0.3480 0.0221 0.3701 0.0000 85.2648 85.2648 0.0270 0.0000 85.8313 3.6 Restoration - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 2.8300e003 0.0300 0.0358 1.2000e004 0.5741 5.4000e004 0.5747 0.0581 5.0000e004 0.0586 0.0000 10.2142 10.2142 7.0000e005 0.0000 10.2158 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 1.1700e003 2.0200e003 0.0191 6.0000e005 0.4235 3.0000e005 0.4235 0.0429 3.0000e005 0.0429 0.0000 3.8877 3.8877 1.8000e004 0.0000 3.8915 Total 4.0000e003 0.0321 0.0549 1.8000e004 0.9976 5.7000e004 0.9982 0.1010 5.3000e004 0.1015 0.0000 14.1019 14.1019 2.5000e004 0.0000 14.1073 3.6 Restoration - 2020 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.6190 0.0000 1.6190 0.7733 0.0000 0.7733 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.1711 1.7889 1.4915 1.7500e003 0.0875 0.0875 0.0805 0.0805 0.0000 154.1491 154.1491 0.0499 0.0000 155.1961 Total 0.1711 1.7889 1.4915 1.7500e003 1.6190 0.0875 1.7065 0.7733 0.0805 0.8538 0.0000 154.1491 154.1491 0.0499 0.0000 155.1961 3.6 Restoration - 2020 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 4.8000e003 0.0480 0.0624 2.2000e004 2.3285 9.8000e004 2.3295 0.2333 9.1000e004 0.2342 0.0000 18.4402 18.4402 1.4000e004 0.0000 18.4430 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 1.9900e003 3.4200e003 0.0324 1.1000e004 3.1724 6.0000e005 3.1725 0.3178 6.0000e005 0.3179 0.0000 6.8995 6.8995 3.1000e004 0.0000 6.9060 Total 6.7900e003 0.0514 0.0948 3.3000e004 5.5009 1.0400e003 5.5020 0.5512 9.7000e004 0.5521 0.0000 25.3396 25.3396 4.5000e004 0.0000 25.3491 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 0.7286 0.0000 0.7286 0.3480 0.0000 0.3480 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.0426 0.8626 1.0248 1.7500e003 0.0409 0.0409 0.0409 0.0409 0.0000 154.1489 154.1489 0.0499 0.0000 155.1959 Total 0.0426 0.8626 1.0248 1.7500e003 0.7286 0.0409 0.7694 0.3480 0.0409 0.3889 0.0000 154.1489 154.1489 0.0499 0.0000 155.1959 3.6 Restoration - 2020 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 4.8000e003 0.0480 0.0624 2.2000e004 0.5747 9.8000e004 0.5757 0.0583 9.1000e004 0.0592 0.0000 18.4402 18.4402 1.4000e004 0.0000 18.4430 Vendor 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Worker 1.9900e003 3.4200e003 0.0324 1.1000e004 0.7826 6.0000e005 0.7827 0.0793 6.0000e005 0.0793 0.0000 6.8995 6.8995 3.1000e004 0.0000 6.9060 Total 6.7900e003 0.0514 0.0948 3.3000e004 1.3573 1.0400e003 1.3584 0.1375 9.7000e004 0.1385 0.0000 25.3396 25.3396 4.5000e004 0.0000 25.3491 3.7 Conductor Stringing - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.1901 1.8212 1.1779 2.9700e003 0.0821 0.0821 0.0766 0.0766 0.0000 263.9247 263.9247 0.0767 0.0000 265.5363 Total 0.1901 1.8212 1.1779 2.9700e003 0.0821 0.0821 0.0766 0.0766 0.0000 263.9247 263.9247 0.0767 0.0000 265.5363 3.7 Conductor Stringing - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0142 0.1502 0.1789 5.9000e004 11.6395 2.7100e003 11.6422 1.1656 2.5000e003 1.1681 0.0000 51.0710 51.0710 3.7000e004 0.0000 51.0789 Vendor 7.0600e003 0.0527 0.0975 1.7000e004 1.3495 8.9000e004 1.3504 0.1354 8.2000e004 0.1362 0.0000 14.7266 14.7266 1.2000e004 0.0000 14.7291 Worker 5.8600e003 0.0101 0.0955 2.9000e004 8.5830 1.7000e004 8.5831 0.8599 1.5000e004 0.8600 0.0000 19.4387 19.4387 9.0000e004 0.0000 19.4575 Total 0.0271 0.2129 0.3720 1.0500e003 21.5720 3.7700e003 21.5758 2.1609 3.4700e003 2.1644 0.0000 85.2363 85.2363 1.3900e003 0.0000 85.2655 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.0732 1.4486 1.6782 2.9700e003 0.0663 0.0663 0.0663 0.0663 0.0000 263.9243 263.9243 0.0767 0.0000 265.5360 Total 0.0732 1.4486 1.6782 2.9700e003 0.0663 0.0663 0.0663 0.0663 0.0000 263.9243 263.9243 0.0767 0.0000 265.5360 3.7 Conductor Stringing - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0142 0.1502 0.1789 5.9000e004 2.8706 2.7100e003 2.8733 0.2903 2.5000e003 0.2928 0.0000 51.0710 51.0710 3.7000e004 0.0000 51.0789 Vendor 7.0600e003 0.0527 0.0975 1.7000e004 0.3335 8.9000e004 0.3344 0.0340 8.2000e004 0.0348 0.0000 14.7266 14.7266 1.2000e004 0.0000 14.7291 Worker 5.8600e003 0.0101 0.0955 2.9000e004 2.1174 1.7000e004 2.1176 0.2144 1.5000e004 0.2146 0.0000 19.4387 19.4387 9.0000e004 0.0000 19.4575 Total 0.0271 0.2129 0.3720 1.0500e003 5.3215 3.7700e003 5.3253 0.5387 3.4700e003 0.5422 0.0000 85.2363 85.2363 1.3900e003 0.0000 85.2655 3.7 Conductor Stringing - 2020 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.3229 3.0010 2.1023 5.4800e003 0.1326 0.1326 0.1237 0.1237 0.0000 478.1619 478.1619 0.1412 0.0000 481.1274 Total 0.3229 3.0010 2.1023 5.4800e003 0.1326 0.1326 0.1237 0.1237 0.0000 478.1619 478.1619 0.1412 0.0000 481.1274 3.7 Conductor Stringing - 2020 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0240 0.2401 0.3121 1.0800e003 11.6424 4.9200e003 11.6473 1.1667 4.5300e003 1.1712 0.0000 92.2008 92.2008 6.8000e004 0.0000 92.2152 Vendor 0.0113 0.0823 0.1668 3.1000e004 2.4941 1.4400e003 2.4955 0.2503 1.3200e003 0.2516 0.0000 26.5842 26.5842 2.1000e004 0.0000 26.5886 Worker 9.9400e003 0.0171 0.1620 5.4000e004 15.8622 3.1000e004 15.8625 1.5891 2.8000e004 1.5894 0.0000 34.4972 34.4972 1.5600e003 0.0000 34.5301 Total 0.0453 0.3395 0.6410 1.9300e003 29.9986 6.6700e003 30.0053 3.0061 6.1300e003 3.0122 0.0000 153.2822 153.2822 2.4500e003 0.0000 153.3338 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.1353 2.6772 3.1014 5.4800e003 0.1225 0.1225 0.1225 0.1225 0.0000 478.1614 478.1614 0.1412 0.0000 481.1269 Total 0.1353 2.6772 3.1014 5.4800e003 0.1225 0.1225 0.1225 0.1225 0.0000 478.1614 478.1614 0.1412 0.0000 481.1269 3.7 Conductor Stringing - 2020 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0240 0.2401 0.3121 1.0800e003 2.8735 4.9200e003 2.8784 0.2913 4.5300e003 0.2959 0.0000 92.2008 92.2008 6.8000e004 0.0000 92.2152 Vendor 0.0113 0.0823 0.1668 3.1000e004 0.6164 1.4400e003 0.6178 0.0628 1.3200e003 0.0642 0.0000 26.5842 26.5842 2.1000e004 0.0000 26.5886 Worker 9.9400e003 0.0171 0.1620 5.4000e004 3.9132 3.1000e004 3.9135 0.3963 2.8000e004 0.3966 0.0000 34.4972 34.4972 1.5600e003 0.0000 34.5301 Total 0.0453 0.3395 0.6410 1.9300e003 7.4030 6.6700e003 7.4097 0.7505 6.1300e003 0.7566 0.0000 153.2822 153.2822 2.4500e003 0.0000 153.3338 4.0 Operational Detail - Mobile 4.1 Mitigation Measures Mobile ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Mitigated 0.0441 0.1606 0.5550 1.5600e003 4.4122 3.0300e003 4.4152 0.4537 2.7900e003 0.4565 0.0000 113.3433 113.3433 3.0800e003 0.0000 113.4080 Unmitigated 0.0441 0.1606 0.5550 1.5600e003 4.4122 3.0300e003 4.4152 0.4537 2.7900e003 0.4565 0.0000 113.3433 113.3433 3.0800e003 0.0000 113.4080 4.2 Trip Summary Information Average Daily Trip Rate Unmitigated Mitigated Land Use Weekday Saturday Sunday Annual VMT Annual VMT General Heavy Industry 60.19 60.19 60.19 232,542 232,542 Total 60.19 60.19 60.19 232,542 232,542 4.3 Trip Type Information Miles Trip % Trip Purpose % Land Use H-W or C-W H-S or C-C H-O or C-NW H-W or C-W H-S or C-C H-O or C-NW Primary Diverted Pass-by General Heavy Industry 14.70 6.60 6.60 59.00 28.00 13.00 92 5 3 LDA LDT1 LDT2 MDV LHD1 LHD2 MHD HHD OBUS UBUS MCY SBUS MH 0.409403 0.062545 0.156224 0.176363 0.050982 0.007863 0.019891 0.103627 0.001777 0.001579 0.006540 0.000887 0.002320 5.0 Energy Detail 4.4 Fleet Mix Historical Energy Use: N 5.1 Mitigation Measures Energy ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Electricity Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Electricity Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 NaturalGas Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 NaturalGas Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.2 Energy by Land Use - NaturalGas Unmitigated NaturalGa s Use ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kBTU/yr tons/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.2 Energy by Land Use - NaturalGas Mitigated NaturalGa s Use ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kBTU/yr tons/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.3 Energy by Land Use - Electricity Unmitigated Electricity Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kWh/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.3 Energy by Land Use - Electricity Mitigated Electricity Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kWh/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 6.0 Area Detail 6.1 Mitigation Measures Area ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Mitigated 4.4096 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 Unmitigated 4.4096 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 6.2 Area by SubCategory Unmitigated ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e SubCategory tons/yr MT/yr Architectural Coating 4.1847 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Consumer Products 0.2197 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Landscaping 5.1900e003 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 Total 4.4096 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 Mitigated ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e SubCategory tons/yr MT/yr Architectural Coating 4.1847 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Consumer Products 0.2197 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Landscaping 5.1900e003 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 Total 4.4096 5.1000e004 0.0555 0.0000 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 2.0000e004 0.0000 0.1076 0.1076 2.9000e004 0.0000 0.1136 7.0 Water Detail 7.1 Mitigation Measures Water Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category MT/yr Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 7.2 Water by Land Use Unmitigated Indoor/Out door Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use Mgal MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 / 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 7.2 Water by Land Use Mitigated Indoor/Out door Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use Mgal MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 / 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 8.0 Waste Detail 8.1 Mitigation Measures Waste Category/Year Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e MT/yr Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 8.2 Waste by Land Use Unmitigated Waste Disposed Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use tons MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Mitigated Waste Disposed Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use tons MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 9.0 Operational Offroad Equipment Type Number Hours/Day Days/Year Horse Power Load Factor Fuel Type Off-Highway Tractors 2 8.00 260 122 0.44 Diesel Off-Highway Trucks 2 8.00 260 400 0.38 Diesel Rough Terrain Forklifts 1 8.00 260 100 0.40 Diesel UnMitigated/Mitigated ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Equipment Type tons/yr MT/yr Off-Highway Tractors 0.0637 0.6547 0.7925 1.2000e003 0.0317 0.0317 0.0291 0.0291 0.0000 105.6080 105.6080 0.0342 0.0000 106.3253 Off-Highway Trucks 0.1568 1.3617 0.9325 3.4200e003 0.0500 0.0500 0.0460 0.0460 0.0000 300.0624 300.0624 0.0971 0.0000 302.1004 Rough Terrain Forklifts 0.0160 0.2096 0.2982 4.5000e004 8.1200e003 8.1200e003 7.4700e003 7.4700e003 0.0000 39.3628 39.3628 0.0127 0.0000 39.6301 Total 0.2365 2.2259 2.0232 5.0700e003 0.0897 0.0897 0.0825 0.0825 0.0000 445.0331 445.0331 0.1439 0.0000 448.0557 10.0 Vegetation Appendix I.3 Air Quality Emission Calculations, CalEEMod Output: Substation Construction Activity 1118 020M SLTP substations San Joaquin Valley Air Basin, Annual 1.0 Project Characteristics 1.1 Land Usage Land Uses Size Metric Lot Acreage Floor Surface Area Population General Heavy Industry 4,000.00 1000sqft 91.83 4,000,000.00 0 1.2 Other Project Characteristics Urbanization Climate Zone Rural 3 Wind Speed (m/s) 2.7 Precipitation Freq (Days) Operational Year 45 2021 Utility Company CO2 Intensity (lb/MWhr) 0 CH4 Intensity (lb/MWhr) 0 N2O Intensity (lb/MWhr) 0 1.3 User Entered Comments & Non-Default Data Project Characteristics - Land Use - proxy metric for substation in caleemod is about 4,000,000 sf industrial Construction Phase - Demo and coatings phases not applicable Off-road Equipment - 20 pcs during substation construction Off-road Equipment - 18 pcs during prep Trips and VMT - Haul trips at appx 14 per day for full duration Grading - temp disturb 100 ac for two substations Vehicle Trips - Operational trips fewer than 20 daily Consumer Products - consumer product ROG not applicable to this project Energy Use - energy use for this land use type not applicable Water And Wastewater - water use for this land use type not applicable Solid Waste - solid waste factors for this land use type not applicable Construction Off-road Equipment Mitigation - Tier 3 fleet minimum and water 2x and Reg 8 comply Table Name Column Name Default Value New Value tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 4.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 4.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 3.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 1.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 10.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 4.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 3.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 7.00 tblConstEquipMitigation NumberOfEquipmentMitigated 0.00 2.00 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstEquipMitigation Tier No Change Tier 3 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 1,550.00 525.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDays 60.00 450.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase NumDaysWeek 5.00 6.00 tblConstructionPhase PhaseEndDate 4/10/2021 11/2/2019 tblConstructionPhase PhaseStartDate 8/8/2019 3/1/2018 tblConsumerProducts ROG_EF 2.14E-05 2E-07 tblEnergyUse LightingElect 3.11 0.00 tblEnergyUse NT24E 4.16 0.00 tblEnergyUse NT24NG 3.84 0.00 tblEnergyUse T24E 2.39 0.00 tblEnergyUse T24NG 17.92 0.00 tblGrading AcresOfGrading 0.00 100.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 1.00 2.00 tblOffRoadEquipment OffRoadEquipmentUnitAmount 1.00 2.00 tblProjectCharacteristics OperationalYear 2014 2021 tblProjectCharacteristics UrbanizationLevel Urban Rural tblSolidWaste SolidWasteGenerationRate 4,960.00 0.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 6,300.00 tblTripsAndVMT HaulingTripNumber 0.00 7,350.00 tblTripsAndVMT VendorTripNumber 0.00 20.00 tblTripsAndVMT VendorTripNumber 656.00 40.00 tblTripsAndVMT WorkerTripNumber 1,680.00 100.00 tblVehicleTrips ST_TR 1.50 0.01 tblVehicleTrips SU_TR 1.50 0.01 tblVehicleTrips WD_TR 1.50 0.01 tblWater IndoorWaterUseRate 925,000,000.00 0.00 2.0 Emissions Summary 2.1 Overall Construction Unmitigated Construction ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Year tons/yr MT/yr 2018 2.4481 24.5218 18.0574 0.0354 4.5035 1.1166 5.6201 2.3433 1.0324 3.3757 0.0000 3,137.292 0 3,137.292 0 0.7834 0.0000 3,153.744 1 2019 1.9003 18.5146 14.6621 0.0304 4.4770 0.8332 5.3102 2.3360 0.7710 3.1070 0.0000 2,647.056 7 2,647.056 7 0.6610 0.0000 2,660.937 3 Total 4.3484 43.0364 32.7195 0.0658 8.9806 1.9498 10.9303 4.6793 1.8034 6.4827 0.0000 5,784.348 7 5,784.348 7 1.4444 0.0000 5,814.681 4 Mitigated Construction ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Year tons/yr MT/yr 2018 0.9115 15.1673 19.7498 0.0354 2.2387 0.6485 2.8871 1.1112 0.6466 1.7578 0.0000 3,137.289 0 3,137.289 0 0.7834 0.0000 3,153.741 0 2019 0.7667 12.8722 16.7838 0.0304 2.2122 0.5573 2.7695 1.1039 0.5557 1.6596 0.0000 2,647.054 2 2,647.054 2 0.6610 0.0000 2,660.934 8 Total 1.6782 28.0395 36.5336 0.0658 4.4508 1.2058 5.6566 2.2151 1.2023 3.4174 0.0000 5,784.343 1 5,784.343 1 1.4444 0.0000 5,814.675 8 ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio-CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N20 CO2e Percent Reduction 61.41 34.85 -11.66 0.00 50.44 38.16 48.25 52.66 33.33 47.28 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.2 Overall Operational Unmitigated Operational ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Area 2.9305 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 Energy 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Mobile 0.0293 0.1068 0.3688 1.0400e003 0.0588 2.0100e003 0.0608 0.0158 1.8600e003 0.0177 0.0000 75.3237 75.3237 2.0500e003 0.0000 75.3667 Waste 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Water 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 2.9598 0.1071 0.4057 1.0400e003 0.0588 2.1400e003 0.0609 0.0158 1.9900e003 0.0178 0.0000 75.3951 75.3951 2.2400e003 0.0000 75.4421 2.2 Overall Operational Mitigated Operational ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Area 2.9305 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 Energy 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Mobile 0.0293 0.1068 0.3688 1.0400e003 0.0588 2.0100e003 0.0608 0.0158 1.8600e003 0.0177 0.0000 75.3237 75.3237 2.0500e003 0.0000 75.3667 Waste 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Water 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 2.9598 0.1071 0.4057 1.0400e003 0.0588 2.1400e003 0.0609 0.0158 1.9900e003 0.0178 0.0000 75.3951 75.3951 2.2400e003 0.0000 75.4421 ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio-CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N20 CO2e Percent Reduction 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.0 Construction Detail Construction Phase Phase Number Phase Name Phase Type Start Date End Date Num Days Week Num Days Phase Description 1 Site Preparation Site Preparation 3/1/2018 8/7/2019 6 450 Substation prep 2 Building Construction Building Construction 3/1/2018 11/2/2019 6 525 Substation construct Acres of Grading (Site Preparation Phase): 100 Acres of Grading (Grading Phase): 0 Acres of Paving: 0 Residential Indoor: 0; Residential Outdoor: 0; Non-Residential Indoor: 0; Non-Residential Outdoor: 0 (Architectural Coating – sqft) OffRoad Equipment Phase Name Offroad Equipment Type Amount Usage Hours Horse Power Load Factor Site Preparation Cranes 2 6.00 226 0.29 Site Preparation Excavators 2 6.00 162 0.38 Site Preparation Off-Highway Trucks 5 6.00 400 0.38 Site Preparation Other Construction Equipment 2 6.00 171 0.42 Site Preparation Rubber Tired Dozers 3 8.00 255 0.40 Site Preparation Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 4 8.00 97 0.37 Building Construction Cranes 2 7.00 226 0.29 Building Construction Excavators 2 6.00 162 0.38 Building Construction Forklifts 3 8.00 89 0.20 Building Construction Generator Sets 1 8.00 84 0.74 Building Construction Off-Highway Trucks 5 6.00 400 0.38 Building Construction Other Construction Equipment 2 6.00 171 0.42 Building Construction Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes 3 7.00 97 0.37 Building Construction Welders 2 8.00 46 0.45 Trips and VMT Phase Name Offroad Equipment Count Worker Trip Number Vendor Trip Number Hauling Trip Number Worker Trip Length Vendor Trip Length Hauling Trip Length Worker Vehicle Class Vendor Vehicle Class Hauling Vehicle Class Site Preparation 18 45.00 20.00 6,300.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT Building Construction 20 100.00 40.00 7,350.00 16.80 6.60 20.00 LD_Mix HDT_Mix HHDT 3.1 Mitigation Measures Construction Use Cleaner Engines for Construction Equipment Water Exposed Area Reduce Vehicle Speed on Unpaved Roads 3.2 Site Preparation - 2018 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 4.1179 0.0000 4.1179 2.2401 0.0000 2.2401 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 1.2169 13.1626 8.7576 0.0149 0.6077 0.6077 0.5591 0.5591 0.0000 1,364.222 2 1,364.222 2 0.4247 0.0000 1,373.140 9 Total 1.2169 13.1626 8.7576 0.0149 4.1179 0.6077 4.7256 2.2401 0.5591 2.7992 0.0000 1,364.222 2 1,364.222 2 0.4247 0.0000 1,373.140 9 3.2 Site Preparation - 2018 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0359 0.3826 0.4416 1.3600e003 0.0482 6.4200e003 0.0547 0.0128 5.9100e003 0.0187 0.0000 120.6689 120.6689 8.8000e004 0.0000 120.6873 Vendor 0.0266 0.1926 0.3498 5.7000e004 0.0154 3.2100e003 0.0186 4.4200e003 2.9500e003 7.3700e003 0.0000 49.7111 49.7111 4.1000e004 0.0000 49.7197 Worker 0.0196 0.0332 0.3160 8.8000e004 0.0733 5.1000e004 0.0738 0.0195 4.7000e004 0.0199 0.0000 60.1913 60.1913 2.8900e003 0.0000 60.2519 Total 0.0821 0.6085 1.1073 2.8100e003 0.1369 0.0101 0.1471 0.0367 9.3300e003 0.0460 0.0000 230.5712 230.5712 4.1800e003 0.0000 230.6589 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.8531 0.0000 1.8531 1.0081 0.0000 1.0081 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.3654 7.2038 8.7904 0.0149 0.3136 0.3136 0.3136 0.3136 0.0000 1,364.220 6 1,364.220 6 0.4247 0.0000 1,373.139 3 Total 0.3654 7.2038 8.7904 0.0149 1.8531 0.3136 2.1666 1.0081 0.3136 1.3216 0.0000 1,364.220 6 1,364.220 6 0.4247 0.0000 1,373.139 3 3.2 Site Preparation - 2018 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0359 0.3826 0.4416 1.3600e003 0.0482 6.4200e003 0.0547 0.0128 5.9100e003 0.0187 0.0000 120.6689 120.6689 8.8000e004 0.0000 120.6873 Vendor 0.0266 0.1926 0.3498 5.7000e004 0.0154 3.2100e003 0.0186 4.4200e003 2.9500e003 7.3700e003 0.0000 49.7111 49.7111 4.1000e004 0.0000 49.7197 Worker 0.0196 0.0332 0.3160 8.8000e004 0.0733 5.1000e004 0.0738 0.0195 4.7000e004 0.0199 0.0000 60.1913 60.1913 2.8900e003 0.0000 60.2519 Total 0.0821 0.6085 1.1073 2.8100e003 0.1369 0.0101 0.1471 0.0367 9.3300e003 0.0460 0.0000 230.5712 230.5712 4.1800e003 0.0000 230.6589 3.2 Site Preparation - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 4.1179 0.0000 4.1179 2.2401 0.0000 2.2401 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.8076 8.5253 6.0435 0.0107 0.3894 0.3894 0.3582 0.3582 0.0000 963.0625 963.0625 0.3047 0.0000 969.4613 Total 0.8076 8.5253 6.0435 0.0107 4.1179 0.3894 4.5073 2.2401 0.3582 2.5984 0.0000 963.0625 963.0625 0.3047 0.0000 969.4613 3.2 Site Preparation - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0236 0.2502 0.2981 9.8000e004 0.0460 4.5200e003 0.0505 0.0120 4.1600e003 0.0161 0.0000 85.0753 85.0753 6.2000e004 0.0000 85.0883 Vendor 0.0168 0.1253 0.2320 4.0000e004 0.0111 2.1100e003 0.0132 3.1700e003 1.9400e003 5.1100e003 0.0000 35.0455 35.0455 2.8000e004 0.0000 35.0515 Worker 0.0126 0.0216 0.2046 6.3000e004 0.0526 3.6000e004 0.0529 0.0140 3.3000e004 0.0143 0.0000 41.6332 41.6332 1.9300e003 0.0000 41.6736 Total 0.0530 0.3971 0.7347 2.0100e003 0.1097 6.9900e003 0.1167 0.0291 6.4300e003 0.0355 0.0000 161.7540 161.7540 2.8300e003 0.0000 161.8135 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Fugitive Dust 1.8531 0.0000 1.8531 1.0081 0.0000 1.0081 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Off-Road 0.2622 5.1691 6.3076 0.0107 0.2250 0.2250 0.2250 0.2250 0.0000 963.0614 963.0614 0.3047 0.0000 969.4601 Total 0.2622 5.1691 6.3076 0.0107 1.8531 0.2250 2.0781 1.0081 0.2250 1.2331 0.0000 963.0614 963.0614 0.3047 0.0000 969.4601 3.2 Site Preparation - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0236 0.2502 0.2981 9.8000e004 0.0460 4.5200e003 0.0505 0.0120 4.1600e003 0.0161 0.0000 85.0753 85.0753 6.2000e004 0.0000 85.0883 Vendor 0.0168 0.1253 0.2320 4.0000e004 0.0111 2.1100e003 0.0132 3.1700e003 1.9400e003 5.1100e003 0.0000 35.0455 35.0455 2.8000e004 0.0000 35.0515 Worker 0.0126 0.0216 0.2046 6.3000e004 0.0526 3.6000e004 0.0529 0.0140 3.3000e004 0.0143 0.0000 41.6332 41.6332 1.9300e003 0.0000 41.6736 Total 0.0530 0.3971 0.7347 2.0100e003 0.1097 6.9900e003 0.1167 0.0291 6.4300e003 0.0355 0.0000 161.7540 161.7540 2.8300e003 0.0000 161.8135 3.3 Building Construction - 2018 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 1.0164 9.9090 6.3492 0.0132 0.4848 0.4848 0.4511 0.4511 0.0000 1,188.649 1 1,188.649 1 0.3464 0.0000 1,195.924 4 Total 1.0164 9.9090 6.3492 0.0132 0.4848 0.4848 0.4511 0.4511 0.0000 1,188.649 1 1,188.649 1 0.3464 0.0000 1,195.924 4 3.3 Building Construction - 2018 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0359 0.3826 0.4416 1.3600e003 0.0550 6.4200e003 0.0614 0.0144 5.9100e003 0.0203 0.0000 120.6689 120.6689 8.8000e004 0.0000 120.6873 Vendor 0.0533 0.3852 0.6995 1.1300e003 0.0308 6.4200e003 0.0373 8.8300e003 5.9000e003 0.0147 0.0000 99.4222 99.4222 8.2000e004 0.0000 99.4394 Worker 0.0435 0.0738 0.7022 1.9500e003 0.1628 1.1300e003 0.1640 0.0433 1.0400e003 0.0443 0.0000 133.7583 133.7583 6.4200e003 0.0000 133.8931 Total 0.1327 0.8417 1.8433 4.4400e003 0.2487 0.0140 0.2626 0.0665 0.0129 0.0794 0.0000 353.8494 353.8494 8.1200e003 0.0000 354.0198 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.3312 6.5134 8.0088 0.0132 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 0.0000 1,188.647 7 1,188.647 7 0.3464 0.0000 1,195.922 9 Total 0.3312 6.5134 8.0088 0.0132 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 0.3108 0.0000 1,188.647 7 1,188.647 7 0.3464 0.0000 1,195.922 9 3.3 Building Construction - 2018 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0359 0.3826 0.4416 1.3600e003 0.0550 6.4200e003 0.0614 0.0144 5.9100e003 0.0203 0.0000 120.6689 120.6689 8.8000e004 0.0000 120.6873 Vendor 0.0533 0.3852 0.6995 1.1300e003 0.0308 6.4200e003 0.0373 8.8300e003 5.9000e003 0.0147 0.0000 99.4222 99.4222 8.2000e004 0.0000 99.4394 Worker 0.0435 0.0738 0.7022 1.9500e003 0.1628 1.1300e003 0.1640 0.0433 1.0400e003 0.0443 0.0000 133.7583 133.7583 6.4200e003 0.0000 133.8931 Total 0.1327 0.8417 1.8433 4.4400e003 0.2487 0.0140 0.2626 0.0665 0.0129 0.0794 0.0000 353.8494 353.8494 8.1200e003 0.0000 354.0198 3.3 Building Construction - 2019 Unmitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.9206 8.8245 6.1818 0.0133 0.4235 0.4235 0.3941 0.3941 0.0000 1,175.745 3 1,175.745 3 0.3458 0.0000 1,183.007 1 Total 0.9206 8.8245 6.1818 0.0133 0.4235 0.4235 0.3941 0.3941 0.0000 1,175.745 3 1,175.745 3 0.3458 0.0000 1,183.007 1 3.3 Building Construction - 2019 Unmitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0330 0.3500 0.4170 1.3700e003 0.0550 6.3200e003 0.0613 0.0144 5.8100e003 0.0202 0.0000 119.0149 119.0149 8.7000e004 0.0000 119.0331 Vendor 0.0470 0.3506 0.6492 1.1300e003 0.0310 5.9100e003 0.0369 8.8700e003 5.4400e003 0.0143 0.0000 98.0529 98.0529 8.0000e004 0.0000 98.0696 Worker 0.0390 0.0671 0.6359 1.9500e003 0.1635 1.1100e003 0.1646 0.0434 1.0300e003 0.0445 0.0000 129.4270 129.4270 5.9900e003 0.0000 129.5527 Total 0.1191 0.7677 1.7021 4.4500e003 0.2494 0.0133 0.2628 0.0667 0.0123 0.0790 0.0000 346.4949 346.4949 7.6600e003 0.0000 346.6555 Mitigated Construction On-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Off-Road 0.3325 6.5383 8.0394 0.0133 0.3120 0.3120 0.3120 0.3120 0.0000 1,175.743 9 1,175.743 9 0.3458 0.0000 1,183.005 7 Total 0.3325 6.5383 8.0394 0.0133 0.3120 0.3120 0.3120 0.3120 0.0000 1,175.743 9 1,175.743 9 0.3458 0.0000 1,183.005 7 3.3 Building Construction - 2019 Mitigated Construction Off-Site ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Hauling 0.0330 0.3500 0.4170 1.3700e003 0.0550 6.3200e003 0.0613 0.0144 5.8100e003 0.0202 0.0000 119.0149 119.0149 8.7000e004 0.0000 119.0331 Vendor 0.0470 0.3506 0.6492 1.1300e003 0.0310 5.9100e003 0.0369 8.8700e003 5.4400e003 0.0143 0.0000 98.0529 98.0529 8.0000e004 0.0000 98.0696 Worker 0.0390 0.0671 0.6359 1.9500e003 0.1635 1.1100e003 0.1646 0.0434 1.0300e003 0.0445 0.0000 129.4270 129.4270 5.9900e003 0.0000 129.5527 Total 0.1191 0.7677 1.7021 4.4500e003 0.2494 0.0133 0.2628 0.0667 0.0123 0.0790 0.0000 346.4949 346.4949 7.6600e003 0.0000 346.6555 4.0 Operational Detail - Mobile 4.1 Mitigation Measures Mobile ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Mitigated 0.0293 0.1068 0.3688 1.0400e003 0.0588 2.0100e003 0.0608 0.0158 1.8600e003 0.0177 0.0000 75.3237 75.3237 2.0500e003 0.0000 75.3667 Unmitigated 0.0293 0.1068 0.3688 1.0400e003 0.0588 2.0100e003 0.0608 0.0158 1.8600e003 0.0177 0.0000 75.3237 75.3237 2.0500e003 0.0000 75.3667 4.2 Trip Summary Information Average Daily Trip Rate Unmitigated Mitigated Land Use Weekday Saturday Sunday Annual VMT Annual VMT General Heavy Industry 40.00 40.00 40.00 154,539 154,539 Total 40.00 40.00 40.00 154,539 154,539 4.3 Trip Type Information Miles Trip % Trip Purpose % Land Use H-W or C-W H-S or C-C H-O or C-NW H-W or C-W H-S or C-C H-O or C-NW Primary Diverted Pass-by General Heavy Industry 14.70 6.60 6.60 59.00 28.00 13.00 92 5 3 LDA LDT1 LDT2 MDV LHD1 LHD2 MHD HHD OBUS UBUS MCY SBUS MH 0.409403 0.062545 0.156224 0.176363 0.050982 0.007863 0.019891 0.103627 0.001777 0.001579 0.006540 0.000887 0.002320 5.0 Energy Detail 4.4 Fleet Mix Historical Energy Use: N 5.1 Mitigation Measures Energy ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Electricity Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Electricity Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 NaturalGas Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 NaturalGas Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.2 Energy by Land Use - NaturalGas Unmitigated NaturalGa s Use ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kBTU/yr tons/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.2 Energy by Land Use - NaturalGas Mitigated NaturalGa s Use ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kBTU/yr tons/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.3 Energy by Land Use - Electricity Unmitigated Electricity Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kWh/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 5.3 Energy by Land Use - Electricity Mitigated Electricity Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use kWh/yr MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 6.0 Area Detail 6.1 Mitigation Measures Area ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category tons/yr MT/yr Mitigated 2.9305 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 Unmitigated 2.9305 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 6.2 Area by SubCategory Unmitigated ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e SubCategory tons/yr MT/yr Architectural Coating 2.7810 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Consumer Products 0.1460 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Landscaping 3.4500e003 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 Total 2.9305 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 Mitigated ROG NOx CO SO2 Fugitive PM10 Exhaust PM10 PM10 Total Fugitive PM2.5 Exhaust PM2.5 PM2.5 Total Bio- CO2 NBio- CO2 Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e SubCategory tons/yr MT/yr Architectural Coating 2.7810 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Consumer Products 0.1460 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Landscaping 3.4500e003 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 Total 2.9305 3.4000e004 0.0369 0.0000 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 1.3000e004 0.0000 0.0715 0.0715 1.9000e004 0.0000 0.0755 7.0 Water Detail 7.1 Mitigation Measures Water Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Category MT/yr Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 7.2 Water by Land Use Unmitigated Indoor/Out door Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use Mgal MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 / 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 7.2 Water by Land Use Mitigated Indoor/Out door Use Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use Mgal MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 / 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 8.0 Waste Detail 8.1 Mitigation Measures Waste Category/Year Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e MT/yr Mitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Unmitigated 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 8.2 Waste by Land Use Unmitigated Waste Disposed Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use tons MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Mitigated Waste Disposed Total CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e Land Use tons MT/yr General Heavy Industry 0 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Total 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 9.0 Operational Offroad Equipment Type Number Hours/Day Days/Year Horse Power Load Factor Fuel Type 10.0 Vegetation Appendix J Consultant Disclosure Statements NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Tom Murphy, Vice President, Aspen Enviromental Group 11/17/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Heather Blair, Senior Associate, Aspen Enviromental Group 11/17/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Jennifer Lancaster, Biologist, Aspen Enviromental Group 6/30/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Moselle DiPane, Staff Environment Scientist, Aspen Enviromental Group 10/23/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Matthew Trask Senior Associate, Aspen Enviromental Group 4/30/14NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Elizabeth A. Bagwell, Phd, RPA, Aspen Enviromental Group 6/29/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by James Brewster Birdsall, Senior Associate, Aspen Enviromental Group 10/27/2015NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Anne Wallace, Wildlife Biologist, ECOBridges Enviromental 6/29/15.NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by John Holson, PM, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10-28-2015NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Robert Jackson, CEO, Pacific Legacy, 6/29/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Lisa Hold Supervisor, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10/27/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Elena Lynn Reese, Historic ARchaeologist, Pacifi Legacy, Inc. 10/30/2015NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Rhea Sanchez ARchaeological Technician, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10/28/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Hannah Ballard Senior Archaeologist, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10/27/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Shanna Streich, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10/27/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Amy Kovak, Project Supervior, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10/29/15NEPA DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR PREPARATION OF THE San Luis Transmission Project Draft Environmental Impact Statement DOE/EIS-0496 Certified by Starla Lane, Supervior, Pacific Legacy, Inc., 10/28/15Appendix K Cost Analysis Cost !nalysis This cost analysis was prepared by the Bureau of Reclamation, with input from Duke American Transmission Company (DATC), who has a pending transmission service request in the SLTP corridor. It is intended to disclose the rationale behind the economic need for the San Luis Transmission Project and the economic feasibility of implementing the No Action/No Project Alternative. As stated in EIS/EIR Section 1.2 (Purpose and Need), an existing transmission service agreement with PG&E to deliver CVP-produced hydroelectric generation from Western’s Tracy Substation to serve Reclamation’s share of the San Luis Unit facilities near Santa Nella and Los anos expires on March 31, 2016. To replace this transmission service contract, the objectives of the project, as stated in EIS/EIR Section 1.3 (Project Objectives) include obtaining durable, cost-certain and cost-effective transmission to meet the energy delivery needs of Reclamation and the Authority for at least 50 years. This would ensure compliance with the statutory direction set forth in the authorization of the SLU (San Luis Unit, Central Valley Project, Act of June 3, 1960, Public Law 86-488, 74 Stat. 156) which provides in part that no transmission facilities associated with the SLU can be constructed if a contract can be obtained at lesser cost over a 50-year period. As no replacement contract to the expiring contract is available, cost and benefit comparisons to determine the least cost, most durable and stable transmission options have been prepared by Reclamation. The options analyzed are described as follows: • No Action/No Project Alternative. Under this Alternative, Western would arrange for transmission service for the San Luis Unit from CAISO through the use of existing transmission infrastructure. The cost of this Alternative is based on the CAISO tariff and forecasts of its costs over the term of evaluation. • Operational Voltage Option – 230-kV Transmission Line. This operational voltage option would entail constructing a 230-KV transmission line with between 400 MW and 600 MW capacity between the Tracy Substation and the SLU facilities to include substation improvements and a 70-kV transmission line from the San Luis Substation to the O’Neill Substation. It would be included in the Balancing Authority of Northern California (BANC) which is necessary to achieve the long-term stable, durable and cost-effective transmission objectives of the project. The EIS/EIR evaluates the impacts of building a 230-kV line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations to serve the federal pumping load at Dos Amigos pumping plant. • Proposed Project. The Proposed Project would be co-funded by the Authority (400 megawatt (MW) capacity) and DATC (1200 MW capacity). The !uthority’s portion would meet the purpose and need and project objectives explained above. D!T ’s portion would be included in the CAISO balancing authority, funded by DATC, and its investment recovered by the CAISO through its transmission rates and payments to DATC based on rates of return which the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission determines to be just, reasonable and not unduly discriminatory. The options listed above are evaluated using the federal share of the San Luis Unit pumping loads over the period of fiscal year 1997 to fiscal year 2014 (Reclamation Historical Database): Table K-1 Weighted Low MWh Average MWh High MWH Dos Amigos pumping load (230-kV): 37,971 130,238 180,064 San Luis pumping load (230-kV): 116,482 228,618 352,025 O’Neill pumping load (70-kV): 35,891 73,134 102,591 San Luis generation (230-kV): 53,557 130,872 195,287 O’Neill generation (70-kV): 34 4,933 9,440 K.1 No !ction/No Project !lternative – C!ISO Tariff Section 26 of the current CAISO tariff (dated June 12, 2015; CAISO, 2015a) relates to Transmission Rates and Charges which describes their process for calculating and assessing rates for those entities utilizing the CAISO transmission system. In general, a Transmission Access Charge (TAC) is assessed to loads being served in the CAISO Balancing Authority (BA) or generation exports for the purpose of recovering transmission revenue requirements. There is a High Voltage (HV) rate for facilities rated 200-kV and above and a Low Voltage (LV) rate based on regional areas for facilities below 200-kV. For the loads to be served by the SLTP, both a HV and LV T! would be assessed the federal load at the O’Neill Pumpgenerating station as it is connected to the CAISO Grid at 70-kV, whereas the remaining loads would be charged only the HVTAC. All loads would also be charged transaction fees provided for in the CAISO tariff on each megawatt hour (MWh) delivered, such as ancillary service charges, Grid Management charge, resource adequacy charge, etc. Figure 1 shows the HV and LV TAC at various tariff revisions since their inception in 2001 based on information at the CAISO website and High Voltage rates archive (CAISO, 2015b). As shown in Figure 1, the HV TAC was $1.30/MWh and the LV TAC was $1.72/MWh in 2001.1 There have been over 75 changes (increases and decreases) since that time. The August 2015 HV and LV TAC are now $9.7986 and $6.6096 per MWh, respectively. Combined, their increase is about 444% greater than in 2001. The HV TAC has increased at an average annual compounding rate of over 14% for the past 15 years. During the same period of time, PG&E’s LV T! increased at an average annual compounding rate greater than 10%. Resource Adequacy (RA) is a CAISO requirement where generation capacity is committed to CAISO to ensure that their load demand can be met at all times. The cost for providing RA for the San Luis, Dos !migos, and O’Neill pumping loads is estimated to be $2 per MWh. For entities that operate generation facilities or load, there are a collection of other CAISO costs that are allocated to the load, such as scheduling coordinator, settlements, imbalance, grid management, which are estimated to be about $6/MWh. Related to serving the SLU Federal loads, both the HV and LV TAC are used to determine the transmission cost of using the CAISO transmission system. The HV TAC is assessed using the San Luis and Dos Amigos pumping loads and the HV plus LV T! are assessed using the O’Neill pumping load; the RA and other CAISO costs are also added. Table K-2 provides the federal share of generation and pumping of the San Luis Unit facilities. 1 All monetary amounts are in 2015 U.S. dollars Table K-2 MWh TAC + RA + Other Oct 2015 Cost Average Dos Amigos and San Luis load Average O’Neill load Total annual cost for using CAISO transmission 358,856 73,130 $17.7986 $24.4082 $6,387,134 $1,784,971 $8,172,135 Although historically, there have been periods where the CAISO HV and LV TAC have decreased, the trend is generally upward. The most significant events that drive the CAISO TAC are the transmission revenue requirements associated with the transmission systems. The revenue requirement increases whenever new transmission infrastructure is constructed in the CAISO BA to serve increasing load growth or maintain reliability and integrity of the transmission system. With the increasing need to provide transmission system expansion in the next few years, CAISO actively leads a transmission planning process that evaluates grid reliability requirements and projects. Each year, CAISO issues a transmission plan Figure 1, titled "TAC Rates," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. 20 18 16 14 12 $ / MWh 10 8 6 4 2 0 TAC Rates 1/1/01 1/1/02 1/1/03 1/1/04 1/1/05 1/1/06 1/1/07 1/1/08 1/1/09 1/1/10 1/1/11 1/1/12 1/1/13 1/1/14 1/1/15 LV TRR ($/MWH) HV TRR ($/MWH) Combined ($/MWH) Figure 1. TAC Rates Figure 2, titled "Forecast CAISO HV TAC," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. $0 $10 $20 $30 $40 $50 $60 $70 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060 2065 2070 $ / MWh Forecast CAISO TAC Cost / MWh ($) CAISO w/o SLTP (Base Forecast) Figure 2. Forecast CAISO HV TAC which includes a listing of future projects. Once these projects are completed, the CAISO transmission revenue requirement will also increase accordingly when approval by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is obtained. For the No Action/No Project Alternative, increases in the HV TAC were forecasted. This forecast was based on the cost of approved projects in the CAISO 2014-2015 Transmission Plan and their calculated impact on the existing TACs, with an inflation-based increase for the later part of the evaluation period (Base Forecast). The forecast HV TAC costs are shown in Figure 2. K.2 Operational Voltage Option – 230-kV Transmission Line The October 2015 cost estimate to construct a 230-KV transmission line from Tracy Substation to San Luis Substation, a 70-KV transmission line from San Luis Substation to O’Neill Substation, and a 230-KV transmission line from San Luis to Dos Amigos to include all associated high-voltage equipment necessary for the interconnections and including contingency is shown below. In addition, to evaluate the cost over a 50-year service life, the following values were used: . Tracy-San Luis Section (400 MW) $175,000,000 . Tracy-San Luis Section (600 MW) $220,000,000 . San Luis-Dos Amigos Section (400 MW) $33,000,000 . Cost of Capital 5% . Inflation Rate 2% . Initial O&M (annual) $530,000 . Years of Debt Amortization: 50 . Years of Project Life 50 . Third Party Revenues (annual) $1,000,000 Reclamation used the above values to estimate benefits of each option analyzed versus the costs of each option. The results are shown in a benefit to cost ratio (expressed as benefits over cost) or B/C. If benefits exceed cost, then the B/C ratio would be greater than 1 (one). If benefits are less than the costs, the B/C ratio would be less than 1 (one). The higher the B/C ratio the better the investment. The B/C ratio calculations based on the values described above are as follows for the Base TAC Forecast: . Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos (400 MW) 1.10 . Tracy-San Luis (400 MW) 2.06 . Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos (600 MW) 0.91 . Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos (share of 500-KV) 2.38 Superimposing the present worth analysis on the forecast TAC is shown in Figures 3 through 5. Figure 3, titled "Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos (400 MW) New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. $0 $10 $20 $30 $40 $50 $60 $70 2011 2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046 2051 2056 2061 2066 2071 $ / MWh Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos 230-KV (400 MW) New Transmission Cost vs TAC CVP w/SLTP CAISO w/o SLTP (Base Forecast) Figure 3. Tracy–San Luis–Dos Amigos (400 MW) New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC Figure 4, titled "Tracy-San Luis 230-kV (400 MW) Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. $0 $10 $20 $30 $40 $50 $60 $70 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060 2065 2070 $ / MWh Tracy-San Luis 230-KV (400 MW) Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs TAC CVP w/SLTP CAISO w/o SLTP (Base Forecast) Figure 4. Tracy–San Luis 230-kV (400 MW) Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC Figure 5, titled "Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos 230-kV (600 MW) New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. $0 $10 $20 $30 $40 $50 $60 $70 2011 2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046 2051 2056 2061 2066 2071 $ / MWh Tracy-San Luis-Dos Amigos 230-KV (600 MW) New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs TAC CVP w/SLTP CAISO w/o SLTP (Base Forecast) Figure 5. Tracy–San Luis-Dos Amigos 230-kV (600 MW) New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC K.3 Proposed Project Figure 6, titled "400 MW Share of 500-kV New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. $0 $10 $20 $30 $40 $50 $60 $70 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060 2065 2070 $ / MWh 400 MW Share of 500-KV New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs TAC CVP w/SLTP CAISO w/o SLTP (Base Forecast) Figure 6. 400 MW Share of 500-kV New Transmission Cost / MWh ($) vs. TAC The cost for a 500-kV transmission line from Tracy to the Los Banos area with 230-kV interconnections to San Luis and Dos Amigos and associated substation facilities is approximately $396,000,000.2 It is anticipated that 400 MW of the 1600 MW capacity of the 500-kV transmission line would be allocated directly to serve the Reclamation San Luis and Dos Amigos pumping loads. This equates to $99,000,000. Based on the assumptions in Section K.2 for a $99 million project, the Benefit/Cost ratio for Tracy-San Luis (400 MW share of 500-kV Project) is 2.38. Estimated using July 2014 USD and escalated to 2015 USD. References CAISO 2015a. http://www.caiso.com/Documents/ConformedTariff_Jun12_2015.pdf. Accessed October 2015. CAISO 2015b. https://www.caiso.com/market//Pages/Settlements/SettlementsArchive/Default.aspx Accessed October 2015.  Appendix L Draft EIS/EIR Comments and Responses  Draft EIS/EIR Comments and Responses This appendix presents the comments received by Western and the Authority on the Draft EIS/EIR, the lead agencies’ responses to each of the comments, and reproductions of the comment correspondence with brackets and comment identification numbers. L.1 Summary of Comments Received on the Draft EIS/EIR To facilitate review of the comments received and the lead agencies’ responses to them, each comment correspondence (i.e., letter, email, comment card, or meeting transcript) was assigned a letter corresponding to the following categories of commenters: A. Public Agencies B. Organizations C. Individuals D. Public Meetings Each comment correspondence was numbered chronologically within each category according to the date the comment correspondence was received; this designation is referred to as the “comment set.” Each individual comment within each comment set was then identified with a bracket and assigned a consecutive number (e.g., A1-1, A1-2). L.1.1 Written Comments For each written comment correspondence received on the Draft EIS/EIR (i.e., letter, email, or comment card), Table L-1 lists the designated comment set; the agency, organization, or individuals name; and the date received by Western and the Authority. Complete reproductions of the comment correspondence with brackets and comment numbers are provided in Section L.3 (Comments Received on the Draft EIS/EIR). Table L-1. Draft EIS/EIR Written Comment Correspondence Information Comment Set Comment Date Commenter A – Public Agencies A1 7/21/15 Contra Costa Water District A2 8/5/15 Central Valley Flood Protection Board A3 8/7/15 Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board A4 8/12/15 State of California Department of Water Resources A5 8/17/15 Stanislaus County Department of Environmental Resources A6 8/26/15 Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee A7 8/28/15 San Joaquin County A8 8/31/15 U.S. Department of the Interior A9 8/31/15 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency A10 8/31/15 California Department of Water Resources A11 8/31/15 California State Parks – Central Valley District A12 8/31/15 Santa Clara Valley Water District A13 8/31/15 Transmission Agency of Northern California A14 8/31/15 Contra Costa Water District Table L-1. Draft EIS/EIR Written Comment Correspondence Information Comment Set Comment Date Commenter A15 9/3/15 San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District A16 9/30/15 National Park Service B – Organizations B1 2/23/15 HORUS Renewables Corp + San Luis Renewables LLC B2 7/29/15 Planetary Ventures B3 8/27/15 Wright Solar Park LLC B4 8/31/15 San Joaquin Council of Governments B5 9/3/15 Northern California Power Agency C – Individuals C1 8/10/15 Laure Sheppard & Beth Tackaberry C2 8/11/15 Beth Tackaberry C3 8/11/15 Jackson Family C4 1/15/15 Dolores Kuhn (1) C5 1/15/15 Dolores Kuhn (2) D – Public Hearings D1 8/11/15 Public Hearing – Los Banos L.1.2 Verbal Comments Public meetings on the Draft EIS/EIR were held in Tracy on August 10, 2015 and Los Banos on August 11, 2015 to help affected communities understand the Project, the Draft EIS/EIR, and how to participate in the agencies’ decision-making processes, including commenting on the Draft EIS/EIR. At each of these public meetings, a court reporter was present to transcribe all verbal comments. A complete public meeting transcript of the Los Banos meeting, with brackets and comment numbers, is provided in Section L.3 (Comments Received on the Draft EIS/EIR). No verbal comments were provided at the Tracy meeting; therefore, the meeting transcript is not provided but can be obtained by request from Western. L.2 Responses to Comments Received on the Draft EIS/EIR Western and the Authority, in accordance with NEPA and CEQA guidelines, have reviewed each of the comment received on the Draft EIS/EIR and have prepared responses. NEPA requires all substantive comments, whether environmental or procedural in nature, to be addressed and attached to the Final EIS (40 CFR 1503.4(b)). The focus of the responses to comments received on the Draft EIS/EIR is the disposition of significant environmental issues that are raised in the comments, as specified by CEQA Guidelines Section 15088(c). Detailed responses are not provided to comments on the merits of the Proposed Project. When responding to comments, lead agencies need only respond to significant environmental issues and do not need to provide all information requested by reviewers, as long as a good faith effort at full disclosure is made in the Draft EIS/EIR (CEQA Guidelines Sections 15088(c) and (d), 15204(a)). As warranted, the Draft EIS/EIR was revised in response to comments received. Where the Draft EIS/EIR has been revised, the text has been marked in strikethrough for deletions and underline for additions. The Draft EIS/EIR, as revised in this document, comments received during the public comment period, and written responses collectively comprises the Final EIS/EIR. Responses to Comment Set A1 – Contra Costa Water District A1-1 The commenter provided a description of the Corral Hollow conservation easement and presented its understanding of the conservation easement’s location relative to the Proposed Project. Western appreciates the information and confirms that the Proposed Project would cross the conservation easement. A1-2 At the request of the commenter, Western met with the Contra Costa Water District on July 28, 2015 to discuss the Proposed Project and potential impacts within CCWD’s property. Responses to Comment Set A2 – Central Valley Flood Protection Board A2-1 The commenter’s statement about the Board’s jurisdiction, and its authority to enforce the California Code of Regulations (CCR) regarding plans of flood control, is acknowledged. Floodplain areas affected by the Project are identified in Section 3.16 of the EIS/EIR, and potential impacts associated with floodplains are discussed in Section 4.16 of the EIS/EIR. Western will enforce and follow applicable federal laws and regulations regarding flood control, including the requirements for floodplain and wetland environmental review as specified in the Code of Federal Regulations Chapter X, Part 1022, which, among other things, requires the further examination of water quality effects of the Project, including during flood events. Western will work with the Central Valley Flood Protection Board to ensure the requirements of applicable state law and Board-issued permits are met. A2-2 The commenter’s statement on the activities that require a Board permit is acknowledged. Please see response to comment A2-1. A2-3 The commenter’s directions for access to the Board’s forms and applicable regulations is acknowledged and appreciated. A2-4 The comment regarding mitigation measures to avoid decreasing floodway channel capacity is acknowledged. The Project’s potential impacts related to flooding are discussed in Section 4.16 (Impacts WR-5 and WR-6) of the EIS/EIR. The Project would not be constructed in or have any direct impacts to floodways. A2-5 The commenter’s statement about the potential for hydraulic impacts from encroachment within a floodplain is acknowledged. The project’s potential impacts related to floodplains are discussed in Section 4.16 (Impacts WR-5 and WR-6) of the EIS/EIR. Structures would be placed outside of stream channels and floodplains where possible, and transmission towers would be located and engineered so as not to block or substantially alter the natural drainage pattern and would be able to withstand a 100-year flood. All construction within a designated 100 year floodplain will be undertaken in consultation with the USACE. No floodwater will be blocked by the Proposed Project, nor would floodwater be diverted outside of an existing floodplain. Responses to Comment Set A3 – Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board A3-1 The commenter’s statement regarding implementation of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) is acknowledged. As noted in Section 4.16.2 of the EIS/EIR, runoff from construction and maintenance of the SLTP will be controlled and meet RWQCB stormwater requirements and the conditions of a construction stormwater discharge permit. A stormwater pollution prevention plan will be prepared and implemented. A3-2 The commenter’s statement on the requirements of Phase I and Phase II MS4 permits is acknowledged. The Proposed Project will have no effect on any municipal stormwater system, as it would not pass over any street or other feature that has stormwater drains. Additionally, the EIS/EIR concluded that, with implementation of the Environmental Protection Measures (BMPs) listed in Section 4.16.2, impacts to water-quality related to changes in stormwater flows caused by construction or operation of the Project would be negligible. A3-3 The commenter’s statement on the discharges from industrial sites in the region is acknowledged. As noted in the EIS/EIR (Section 4.16.3), all required dewatering and discharge permits will be obtained prior to commencement of construction activities in order to ensure protection of water quality within the Project area. A3-4 The commenter’s statement about the requirements of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act is acknowledged. Refer to response to comment A9-15 regarding compliance with Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and coordination with the RWQCB and CDFW. A3-5 The commenter’s statement on the discharges from industrial sites in the region is acknowledged. As noted in the EIS/EIR (Section 4.16.3), all required permits will be obtained prior to commencement of construction activities in order to ensure protection of water quality within the Project area. A3-6 The commenter’s statement on the requirement for a Waste Discharge Permit in the event that Western and the Authority determine that only non-jurisdictional waters of the state are affected by the Project is acknowledged. As noted in the EIS/EIR (Section 4.16.3), all required permits will be obtained prior to commencement of construction activities in order to ensure protection of water quality within the Project area. A3-7 The Proposed Project may cross portions of irrigated fields, such as those near the Tracy Substation or near Oak Flat Road, but Western would lease the lands under a long-term easement; therefore, ownership of those lands will not change and the present landowners will continue to be responsible for compliance with the requirements of the Irrigated Lands Regulatory Program. A3-8 The commenter’s statement on the discharges from industrial sites in the region is acknowledged. As noted in the EIS/EIR (Section 4.16.3), all required dewatering and discharge permits will be obtained prior to commencement of construction activities, including coverage under an applicable NPDES permit, in order to ensure protection of water quality within the Project area. Responses to Comment Set A4 – State of California Department of Water Resources A4-1 The commenter requested an extension of the Draft EIS/EIR comment period. Subsequently, DWR submitted its comments by the end of the comment period and withdrew its request for an extension. A4-2 Western, Reclamation, and the Authority acknowledge that DWR has a contract obligation for operations of the Joint Use Facilities including the San Luis and Dos Amigos substations. DWR’s consultation and concurrence related to interconnection design, protection, operations, maintenance, communications, and NERC/WECC compliance responsibilities of SLTP facilities will be necessary and such discussions are underway. A4-3 Based on the need for its concurrence related to interconnection design, protection, operations, maintenance, and communications responsibilities of SLTP facilities, DWR is considered a Responsible Agency under CEQA and has been consulted as such throughout the environmental review process. Section 1.4.4 (California Department of Water Resources) has been added to the Final EIS/EIR to identify DWR as a Responsible Agency and describe its role in implementing the Proposed Project. A4-4 See response to comment A4-2. A4-5 DWR submitted its comments on the Draft EIS/EIR by the end of the public comment period and withdrew its request for an extension. Responses to Comment Set A5 – Stanislaus County Department of Environmental Resources A5-1 The commenter described the Preferred Alternative as the corridor east of the existing lines. The commenter’s description is correct, as shown in Final EIS/EIR Figure 2-8. A5-2 The commenter’s preference for a corridor on the west side of the existing transmission lines is noted. In the Central Segment, which traverses Stanislaus County, the agency preferred corridor is on the east side of the existing transmission lines. The rationale for this preference is described in Section 2.4.4 of the Final EIR (Agency Preferred Alternative). Determining the Agency Preferred Alternative requires that Western balance many factors with the Project’s purpose and need. It is the alternative which Western believes would fulfill its statutory mission and responsibilities, giving consideration to economic, environmental, technical and other factors. Although the agency preferred corridor would be closer to residences and have sight increases in the associated visual and temporary noise impacts, it would have less impact on biological resources in comparison to the corridor on the west side of the existing transmission lines. In particular, it would impact fewer special-status plant species. Additionally, it would require fewer crossings of the existing high voltage transmission lines, which would increase reliability by providing more space between circuits. Responses to Comment Set A6 – Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee A6-1 The commenter states that the County’s recent progress in the redevelopment of the Crows Landing Naval Airfield is not reflected in the Draft EIS/EIR. Section 3.14.1.1 of the Draft EIS/EIR described the existing conditions at the airfield, and acknowledged that the County produced an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan for the facility in June 2013. The Crow’s Landing Airport and Industrial Business Park was also considered as a reasonably foreseeable future project in the list of projects for cumulative impact analysis (refer to Table 4.17-1 of the EIS/EIR). Section 3.14.1.1 has been updated in the Final EIS/EIR to include the recent information provided by the County. A6-2 The County’s recent improvements at the Crows Landing airfield, and the production of a draft Airport Layout Plan are acknowledged. Refer to response to comment A6-1 regarding the updates to the description of the Crow’s Landing Airport and Industrial Business Park in the EIS/EIR. The analysis of potential impacts to aircraft operations from the Proposed Project in Section 4.16 of the Draft EIS/EIR assumed that the Crows Landing airport will be re-opened for general aviation use. No other changes to the EIS/EIR are warranted. A6-3 The commenter requests exact locations and heights for Project structures so that the County can perform a detailed airspace analysis for the Crows Landing Airport. As noted in the list of Environmental Protection Measures applicable to Traffic and Transportation (refer to EIS/EIR Section 4.14.2), Western would comply with applicable FAA rules regarding notification of a potential obstruction to aircraft, and marking of structures. Depending on the exact location and height of the transmission towers constructed, and the classification of the reopened Crows Landing Airport (i.e., precision instrument, non-precision instrument or visual flight rules only), Western may need to notify the FAA of the potential obstruction. The FAA notification process also includes identifying and notifying all affected airports. The FAA would then conduct an Obstruction Evaluation/Airport Airspace Analysis (OE/AAA) to determine whether the towers would constitute an “obstruction” and/or a “hazard” to aircraft operating in the local airspace. Structures declared as obstructions are not necessarily hazards, and may require only marking with highly visible devices. For transmission towers located 3 miles or more from an airport runway, as is the case for the Crow’s Landing Airport, the likely requirements related to aircraft operations would be to install proper marking, and notify the FAA to ensure that the location and height of the structure is noted on aeronautical charts and other publications. A6-4 The commenter states that the future Crows Landing Airport must be considered in the impact analysis in the Traffic and Transportation section of the EIS/EIR. As noted above in response to comment A6-1, the future Crows Landing Airport and all other airports in the region, including the Tracy Airport and strips used by crop dusters, were included in the impact analysis. A6-5 The commenter requests that the Traffic and Transportation section of the EIS/EIR be amended to specify that Western will work with the County to prepare a detailed airspace analysis during subsequent Project design phases, after the location and height of support structures are known. The commenter states that “airspace impacts can occur up to 20,000 feet from the runway,” but provides no citation for this statement. Because the Proposed Project will be located adjacent to existing transmission towers, and because Western will comply with all FAA noticing and marking requirements, Western has concluded that construction and operation of the Proposed Project will not cause changes in air traffic patterns, including alterations of flight plans and operations (Impact TRAFFIC-6), such as those that may occur in the future at the Crows Landing Airport. The EIS/EIR concludes that potential impacts to air traffic patterns are less than significant (see also response to comment A6-6), and no further revisions to the EIS/EIR are warranted. Nevertheless, Western will coordinate with Stanislaus County to ensure impacts at the Crows Landing Airport are less than significant as described in the EIS/EIR. A6-6 The commenter requests inclusion of a mitigation measure in the EIS/EIR under Impact TRAFFIC-7 that requires Western to work with the County to prepare a detailed airspace analysis once the location and height of the SLTP transmission towers are known. Refer to response to comment A6-5 regarding impacts to air traffic patterns. The CEQA significance determination under Impact TRAFFIC-7 was changed from “no impact” to “less than significant” in the Final EIS/EIR to acknowledge the negligible potential for conflict with the Crows Landing Airport plans. No mitigation measures are warranted; however, Western will coordinate with Stanislaus County to ensure that conflicts with the Crows Landing Airport are less than significant as described in the EIS/EIR. A6-7 The commenter notes that several biological mitigation measures require compensatory mitigation, and warns against the creation of new wildlife (specifically avian) attractants within 10,000 feet of airports that support turbine operations and within 5 miles of approach departure surfaces to avoid wildlife hazards to aviation. Mitigation Measures BIO-17 and BIO-21 have been revised to specify that the location of any conservation easement or habitat restoration proposed for the burrowing owl and Swainson’s hawk shall be located outside of an established Airport Influence Area. A6-8 The commenter cites a County Zoning Ordinance requiring utilities to submit transmission line routes to the County Planning Commission for review and recommendation prior to acquiring ROW for the line. The list of relevant regulations, plans and standards relevant to Land Use in Section 3.8.1.2 of the EIS/EIR was revised to include this requirement. Western is a Federal agency and therefore is not subject to the jurisdiction of a local agency. Although the County has no authority over the Proposed Project, Western will coordinate with the County to ensure its concerns are addressed, to the extent feasible. A6-9 The commenter notes that the Crows Landing Airport was considered in the Cumulative Impact Analysis in Section 4.17 of the EIS/EIR, and states that “this impact should be revised to indicate that potential impacts to airspace could occur and the mitigation measures that will be used to avoid and minimize such impacts.” As noted above in response to comments A6-5 and A6-6, because Western will implement its Environmental Protection Measures, which include compliance with FAA regulations on noticing and marking potential obstructions, there is no evidence of any potential impacts to airspace. No revisions to the EIS/EIR are warranted. However, Western will coordinate with Stanislaus County to ensure impacts at the Crows Landing Airport are less than significant as described in the EIS/EIR. A6-10 The commenter presents the scoping comment letter submitted by Stanislaus County in January 2014 as an attachment to its Draft EIS/EIR comment letter. Western received the County’s scoping letter; it is listed and summarized in Appendix B (Scoping Report) of the Final EIS/EIR. The EIR preparers considered all scoping comments and integrated them into the EIS/EIR, as appropriate. A6-11 The commenter presents the Notice of Preparation of a Draft EIR for the Proposed Crows Landing Industrial Business Park Project as an attachment to its Draft EIS/EIR comment letter. This attachment was reviewed for information on the subject project (refer to responses to comments A6-1 through 9). Responses to Comment Set A7 – San Joaquin County A7-1 The commenter states that it has reviewed the Draft EIS/EIR and has no comments. The commenter will be included on the mailing list to receive any additional project documents. Responses to Comment Set A8 – U.S. Department of the Interior A8-1 The commenter states that it has reviewed the Draft EIS/EIR and has no comments. Responses to Comment Set A9 – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency A9-1 The commenter cites the Authority under which it reviewed the draft EIS/EIR and states that it provided scoping comments in January 2014. Western received the EPA’s scoping letter; it is listed and summarized in Appendix B (Scoping Report) of the Final EIS/EIR. The EIR preparers considered all scoping comments and integrated them into the EIS/EIR, as appropriate. A9-2 The commenter correctly summarizes the need for the project and its objectives, as stated in the EIS/EIR. The commenter also states general concerns regarding air quality and aquatic resources and the need to comply with Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and EPA’s General Conformity regulations. Refer to responses to comments A9-5 through 12 regarding air quality issues and regulations. Refer to responses to comments A9-13 through 18 regarding aquatic resource issues and regulations. A9-3 As required by federal statute, Reclamation operates and maintains the Central Valley Project (CVP) in California which is generally composed of water storage and conveyance facilities and hydroelectric generation. The CVP facilities typically generate 4,800,000,000 kilowatt-hours of clean, renewable, and carbon-free energy every year. This CVP-produced energy is provided to serve project pumping at cost-based rates. CVP energy production cost is typically in the $21 to $38/MWh range depending on annual hydrology. Total energy used for pumping CVP water is approximately 1,200,000 kilowatt-hours per year. Thus, no additional energy is needed to serve CVP project pumping needs. And as CVP generation substantially exceeds CVP pumping demands, alternate energy sources are not needed and their delivered cost would substantially exceed the cost of delivered CVP generation. Congress does not provide appropriations to purchase energy nor the authority to utilize other non-appropriated funds to purchase energy for use by Reclamation. However, Reclamation has been actively pursuing solar photovoltaic energy development on land comprising the San Luis Unit facilities to meet Department of Interior policy directives, which could benefit from the SLTP. Uses of this solar generation are being considered by Western and Reclamation and could include “behind the meter” options, energy exchange options, or banking arrangements, all designed to reduce energy and transmission costs for all parties. Additional clarification of the costs associated with the Proposed Project and alternatives has been included in the Final EIS/EIR in Appendix K (Cost Analysis). A9-4 EPA’s rating of all alternatives in the Draft EIS/EIR as Environmental Concerns – Insufficient Information (EC-2) is noted. Responses to EPA’s detailed comments (A9-5 through A9-33) provide additional information, as appropriate. A9-5 As noted by the commenter, the EIS/EIR includes a preliminary estimate of construction emissions. The summary in EIS/EIR Table 4.3-2 shows the General Conformity de minimis thresholds that apply in the SJVAPCD. The fraction of construction activity that would occur within the BAAQMD’s jurisdiction would not be likely to exceed the less stringent de minimis thresholds within the BAAQMD. The Final EIS/EIR includes additional information and details in Appendix I to show the portions of emissions in the BAAQMD and in the SJVAPCD and to show the estimated construction emissions after implementing mitigation. Federal agencies may include measures as part of the federal action to reduce emissions from the proposed action so that emissions fall below de minimis levels. In MM AQ-1, Western commits to requiring contractors to implement cost-effective controls that may result in emissions being below de minimis levels. Western commits to coordinating with the SJVAPCD to identify appropriate emission reductions to be implemented to satisfy the General Conformity rule. Based on the current construction plans for the Agency Preferred Alternative, up to 60 tons of NOx emissions reductions may be necessary to satisfy General Conformity requirements, and this amount is set forth in MM AQ-1 of the Final EIS/EIR. The Final EIS/EIR clarifies that Western and the SJVAPCD may execute a Voluntary Emission Reduction Agreement to achieve the necessary level of off-site NOx reductions contemporaneous with the final schedule of construction. MM AQ-1 requires contractors to have an up-to-date fleet, that is properly operated in accordance with a construction activity management schedule, and that incorporates the best available technology and controls. The controls implemented by Western and contractors, together with off-site mitigation demonstrate that the Proposed Project will satisfy General Conformity requirements. For more detail, Appendix M of the Final EIS/EIR includes an Air Quality General Conformity Evaluation and Draft Conformity Determination. A9-6 The Final EIS/EIR revises MM AQ-1 as recommended by EPA to clarify the requirements for contractors to have an up-to-date fleet, that is properly operated in accordance with a construction activity management schedule, and that incorporates the best available technology and controls. A9-7 The commenter suggests additional commitments that may feasibly achieve reductions in fugitive dust emissions. The Proposed Project will be required to comply with stringent dust control requirements within SJVAPCD Regulation VIII. However, this comment from EPA and comments from SJVAPCD recommend additional mitigation that has been considered here. The Final EIS/EIR revises MM AQ-1 as recommended by EPA to identify the additional dust control actions to be implemented by contractors. A9-8 The commenter suggests additional commitments that may feasibly achieve reductions in mobile source emissions. MM AQ-1 is revised in the Final EIS/EIR as recommended by EPA to identify the additional mobile source controls to be implemented by contractors. MM AQ-1 is also revised to clarify that the construction activity management strategy should include other cost-effective commitments, as identified in the comment for on-highway vehicles, non-road vehicles and equipment, and advanced technology demonstration and deployment. The commenter suggests that the construction equipment, or non-road vehicles and equipment, should meet or exceed the EPA Tier 4 exhaust standards. As suggested by the comment, the mitigation requires contractors to use cost-effective fleets, a portion of which would meet or exceed Tier 4 standards. Western expects contractors to use a mix of “Tier 4 Interim” equipment because this standard generally applies to model year 2012 to 2014, and “Tier 4 Final” equipment that is model year 2014 and newer. The Final EIS/EIR includes additional information in Appendix I to show the estimated emissions with mitigation based on a partial fleet of Tier 4 equipment. The equipment most likely to meet Tier 4 standards include loaders/backhoes, excavators, dozers, off-highway trucks, generator sets, and forklifts. In sum, MM AQ-1 with revisions will require contractors to have an up-to-date fleet, that is properly operated in accordance with a construction activity management schedule, and that incorporates the best available technology and controls. A9-9 The administrative controls suggested by the commenter would be implemented through the Environmental Protection Measures regarding air quality, as well as those for traffic and transportation, and through implementation of MM AQ-1 and MM TRAFFIC-1. A9-10 The EIS/EIR shows the current attainment designations in Table 3.3-2 for the San Joaquin Valley and Table 3.3-3 for the San Francisco Bay Area; no updates are necessary. A9-11 The Final EIS/EIR (Appendix I) includes clarifications to show additional detail on the preliminary estimate of construction emissions, and this includes an estimate of the additional controls required in MM AQ-1. A9-12 All Environmental Protection Measures and mitigation measures will be made enforceable through the federal Record of Decision, the Authority’s decision documents, and the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (EIS/EIR Chapter 6). A9-13 The commenter describes the purpose of the federal Clean Water Act (CWA) and actions requiring a permit from the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). The commenter also describes the EPA’s role in the permitting process. The commenter expresses concern about the potential adverse impacts to aquatic resources that could result from the Proposed Project, and summarizes the estimates of impacts presented in the Draft EIS/EIR. Western will avoid impacts to jurisdictional features to the extent feasible (e.g., by spanning creeks, waters, or wetlands and minimizing road crossings at such features). A formal jurisdictional delineation of the Project area is currently being prepared, and will be submitted to the USACE for verification upon completion. A9-14 The commenter notes that the corridor alternatives identified as “environmentally preferred” in the Draft EIS/EIR would have the most impact to jurisdictional resources, and that a complete planning-level assessment of aquatic resources would help further differentiate between alternatives and refine potential acreage impacts. The commenter also requests a jurisdictional delineation be conducted to aid in the design of the transmission line in order to demonstrate that the alignment is the Least Environmentally Damaging Practicable Alternative (LEDPA). As described under Impact BIO-2 of the EIS/EIR, because the exact locations of Project features are not yet known, disturbance estimates were developed by calculating the proportion of the total acres in each segment corridor that would be subject to temporary and permanent disturbance, and applying that proportion to the amount of each habitat type in the corridor. Because the Environmentally Preferred Alternative corridor contains more mapped ephemeral creeks, freshwater marshes, vernal pools, and jurisdictional resources than other alternative corridors, this method produced a larger amount of estimated impacts. However, during final engineering of the project Western will avoid impacts at jurisdictional features to the extent feasible (e.g., by spanning creeks, waters, or wetlands and minimizing road crossings at such features). In addition, Mitigation Measures BIO-29 and BIO-30 require a variety of minimization and avoidance measures to be implemented near vernal pool, seasonal wetlands, and other sensitive wetland habitats during construction and O&M. Mitigation Measure BIO-32 requires compensatory mitigation for impacts to wetlands and waters. As described in response to comment A9-13, a formal jurisdictional delineation is in preparation and will include the level of detail requested by the commenter. The jurisdictional delineation will be submitted to the Corps for verification upon completion. A9-15 The commenter requests that the Lead Agencies discuss, in the Final EIS/EIR, the process to be used to demonstrate compliance with the CWA Section 404 (b)(1) Guidelines. Section 3.4.1.1 has been updated in the Final EIS/EIR to state that a jurisdictional delineation is being prepared to support permitting from the USACE, RWQCB, and CDFW in compliance with the CWA and other applicable regulations. In addition, implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-29, BIO-30, and BIO-32 would effectively avoid, minimize, and compensate for impacts to wetlands and waters of the U.S. and state. A9-16 The commenter requests a planning-level assessment for potential impacts to waters of the US (WUS) in the Final EIS/EIR, and to modify the environmentally preferred alternative selected for each segment to ensure the selected alignments would represent the LEDPA. The requested planning level assessment of impacts to WUS was included in the Draft EIS/EIR; see Table 4.4-1, page 4-52, and Appendix C of the Draft EIS/EIR. Until final engineering is complete, acreages of impacts to WUS cannot be reliably estimated because many potential impacts can be avoided through micro-siting and design features. The jurisdictional delineation in preparation will quantify WUS in the Project area, including alternative segments. The determination of the LEDPA considers the entire spectrum of environmental resources analyzed in the EIS/EIR, and is not limited to consideration of jurisdictional resources. Although the preferred corridors may contain more mapped jurisdictional resources than alternative corridors for several segments, the preferred corridors would result in a decreased impact to a variety of other environmental resources, both biological and other issue areas. Because most jurisdictional resources can be avoided, the presence of such features does not necessarily indicate that a larger acreage would actually be impacted by the preferred corridor vs. an alternative segment. A9-17 The commenter requests that the Final EIS/EIR contain additional measures to minimize impacts to aquatic resources, such as reducing the width of access roads, constructing bridges over WUS, and increasing buffer widths to minimize indirect effects to aquatic resources. Mitigation Measures BIO-29 and BIO-30 require a variety of minimization and avoidance measures to be implemented near vernal pool, seasonal wetlands, and other sensitive wetland habitats during construction and O&M. Mitigation Measure BIO-32 requires compensatory mitigation for impacts to wetlands and waters. Table 2-5 identifies Western’s Environmental Protection Measures, which include additional measures to reduce and avoid impacts to aquatic resources including buffers from aquatic resources, minimum feasible area required for any in-stream work, and bridges at new stream crossings wherever feasible. No additional measures are required. A9-18 The commenter clarifies federal jurisdiction over wetlands, including hydrologically isolated wetlands, per the Clean Water Rule that went into effect on August 28, 2015. However, on October 9, 2015, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit stayed the Clean Water Rule nationwide pending further action of the court. The EPA and USACE have resumed use of prior regulations defining the term “Waters of the U.S.,” which includes case-by-case consideration in determining specific resources protected by the Clean Water Act (CWA). Section 3.4.1.1 of the Final EIS/EIR has been revised to clarify federal regulation of wetlands, including whose that may be determined to be jurisdictional under the CWA. A9-19 Federal statutes related to the CVP require costs that have been allocated to specific project purposes, such as power and water supply, to be fully reimbursed from those power and water customers. Essentially, all San Luis Unit costs were assigned to the water supply purpose and are, therefore, to be reimbursed by Reclamation’s water contractors. As described in Section 2.3 of the EIS/EIR, the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., relying on CAISO tariff rates for use of the existing PG&E transmission line), raises the annual cost to be recovered from CVP water contractors to approximately as high as $9,400,000 per year and based on previous data, that rate would increase over time as the CAISO tariff rates increase (refer to Appendix K). This $9,400,000 annually is reimbursed by CVP water contractors. The same water contractors would be allocated the construction cost of the transmission line and related facilities. These construction costs would remain constant and certain for the 30-year financing term then drop to zero after the repayment period is over. Annual operations and maintenance cost would be reimbursed by water contractors over the entire life of the SLTP. Additional clarification of the costs and benefits associated with the alternative has been included in the Final EIS/EIR (refer to Appendix K). A9-20 The estimated range of annual payments from Reclamation water service contractors has been included in the Final EIS/EIR (refer to Section 1.2 and Appendix K). A9-21 The estimated range of costs that would be reimbursed by Reclamation water service contractors for use of the existing PG&E transmission line under CAISO tariffs has been included in the Final EIS/EIR (refer to Section 1.2 and Appendix K). A9-22 The estimated power requirement to operate the San Luis Unit has been included in the Final EIS/EIR (refer to Section 1.2 and Appendix K). The SLTP proponents do not have access to PG&E transmission line ratings, capacity availability, nor PG&E’s anticipated future use of their transmission line capacity. A9-23 A comparison of estimated costs of using the PG&E transmission system and paying CAISO transmission access charges in accordance with their tariff versus constructing the SLTP has been added the Final EIS/EIR (refer to Appendix K). During the 5-year period between expiration of the existing contract and the proposed completion of the SLTP, CVP-produced generation will be conveyed from Tracy Substation (or perhaps Cottonwood Substation interconnection) to the San Luis facilities using PG&E transmission lines and incurring the cost of the CAISO tariff. The cost of the energy transmitted to the San Luis facilities is the CVP energy production cost which varies from $21/MWh to $38/MWh depending on the annual hydrology. CVP water contractors will repay all construction costs of the SLTP (refer to response to comment A9-19). A9-24 Refer to response to comment A9-3 regarding use of renewable energy generation and energy storage. A9-25 The commenter’s summary of select California regulatory schemes regarding energy storage is acknowledged. A9-26 Refer to response to comment A9-3 regarding use of renewable energy generation and energy storage. A9-27 Local sources of power if available, in the quantity and duration needed, would be more expensive than the CVP energy that Congress has authorized to serve Reclamation pump load. New solar generation can cost in the range of $60/MWh, whereas CVP use energy costs, on average, approximately $30/MWh. The CAISO transmission delivery cost added to both the CVP energy cost and a renewable energy alternative cost does not change the large energy price difference. However, options are being explored to evaluate if locally generated renewable energy could be utilized “behind the meter” to provide needed energy for pumping federal water (i.e., avoiding the use of the CAISO transmission system). This would narrow, but not eliminate, the significant energy price differential. Thus, this would not eliminate the SLTP as described in purpose and need. However, the energy exchange being evaluated as described in response to comment A9-3 may be a feasible way to reduce costs until and if the SLTP is built and after construction is complete and could to help reimburse SLTP costs if the new SLTP line is used to deliver solar generation. A9-28 As described in Section 1.1 of the EIS/EIR (Project Overview), the SLTP would connect from Tracy Substation to San Luis Substation to Dos Amigos Substation as well as to O’Neill Substation to convey CVP generation to federal pumping loads at those substations. A9-29 Refer response to comment A9-3 regarding use of renewable energy generation. A9-30 The commenter notes that the EIS/EIR identifies the CEQ December 2014 revised draft guidance on consideration of GHG and climate change in NEPA. The comment suggests that consideration should be given to whether project impacts may be exacerbated by climate change. The Final EIS/EIR (Section 3.3.1.1) includes additional disclosure of climate change indicators that may exacerbate project impacts. A9-31 The comment requests additional discussion of climate change and foreseeable impacts relevant to the project based on the U.S. Global Change Research Program. The Final EIS/EIR (Section 3.3.1.1) includes additional information regarding the indicators of climate change and the vulnerabilities of the electricity transmission system, under the discussion of Impacts AQ-7 and AQ-8 (Section 4.3.3). A9-32 The commenter requests comparing the action alternatives with regard to vulnerability to the effects of climate change over the service life of the facilities. Refer to responses to comments A9-30 and A9-31 regarding the vulnerabilities of transmission systems. All action alternatives would be similarly vulnerable. A9-33 The commenter requests consideration of whether changes in the project design would be practicable to make the facilities more resilient to climate change. Transmission lines are designed to standards that take into account extremes in temperature and wind. These extremes include any likely effects of climate change during the life of the project. No changes to the Proposed Project are necessary. Responses to Comment Set A10 – California Department of Water Resources A10-1 Refer to response to comment A4-3 regarding DWR’s role as a Cooperating Agency under CEQA in the SLTP. A10-2 Western retains authority for strategic decision-making related to transmission of federal power to serve federal loads. As stated in response to comment A4-2, close coordination between Reclamation, Western, and DWR is required since many aspects of the SLTP involve Joint Use Facilities which DWR is contractually obligated to operate, maintain, and replace as needed. In addition, while DWR is the scheduling coordinator for transactions (currently including Federal load/generation scheduling) involving the use of the PG&E transmission system within the CAISO Balancing Authority (BA) and covered by the CAISO tariff, this arrangement can be replaced with federally owned transmission at the discretion of Western and Reclamation. Such a decision will be coordinated with DWR to ensure its input is addressed, but no approval authority over such long-term federal resource decisions has or could be delegated to DWR. It is Reclamation’s intent to ensure there is no direct or indirect additional costs or burdens imposed on DWR as a result of the SLTP. It is anticipated that the San Luis and Dos Amigos facilities will remain in the CAISO Balancing Authority (BA). It is anticipated that the SLTP interconnection would be a fourth intertie between the Western Sub-BA (within the Balancing Authority of Northern California (BANC)) and CAISO. Ongoing discussions between DWR, Reclamation, and Western will conclude with a coordination agreement that specifically addresses these issues. This coordination agreement is expected to be completed and executed prior to a final decision on the SLTP. A10-3 The role of DWR in the operation and maintenance of the San Luis Joint Use Facilities has been clarified in Section 1.2 (Purpose and Need) of the Final EIS/EIR. A10-4 Refer to response to comment A10-3 regarding the role of DWR in the operation and maintenance of the San Luis Joint Use Facilities. A10-5 The recent agreement executed in December 2014 by PG&E and DWR covers the transmission interconnection service for DWR at State Water Project facilities to include only the San Luis/ Gianelli and Dos Amigos State loads. Transmission service from PG&E/CAISO for serving Federal generation/load at San Luis, O’Neill, and Dos Amigos will be required after the existing transmission service contract (No. 14-06-200-2207A (2207A)) between PG&E and the Federal government expires on March 31, 2016. There is no replacement interconnection agreement between Western and PG&E for serving the Federal pumping load at San Luis/Gianelli and Federal pumping load at O’Neill. In addition, the Large Generator Interconnection Agreement between Reclamation/Western and PG&E terminates on March 31, 2016. As of April 1, 2016, the Federal load at San Luis/Dos Amigo, the Federal generation at Gianelli, and the Federal generation/load at O’Neill will utilize the PG&E interconnection as explained in the No Action/ No Project Alternative (Section 2.3 of the EIS/EIR) and will incur respective Transmission Access Charges. Western is currently in negotiations with PG&E for successor agreements to the expiring contract 2207A (which involves approximately 100 meters including O’Neill, San Luis, and Dos Amigos). A10-6 The existence of a Scheduling Coordinator Agreement between Western and DWR is acknowledged. If changes to this agreement are needed, they will be negotiated with DWR. A10-7 It is not anticipated that any changes to legacy agreements between DWR and Reclamation will be necessary. A10-8 Refer to response to comment A4-2 regarding DWR’s operation and maintenance role. A10-9 Reclamation will conduct the appropriate coordination with DWR pursuant to existing agreements. Western will obtain encroachment permits as required. A10-10 The roles of Reclamation, Western, and DWR related to the Joint Use Facilities has been clarified in Section 1.2 (Purpose and Need) of the Final EIS/EIR. A10-11 Refer to response to comment A4-3 regarding DWR’s role as a Responsible Agency. A10-12 It is the intent of Western and the Authority that the SLTP would have no adverse impact on the State operation, scheduling, or existing cost responsibilities of the Joint Use Facilities, and no reasonably foreseeable impacts have been identified. If an impact on State operations occurs, then Reclamation, Western, and the Authority would work with DWR to coordinate resolution. A10-13 Refer to response to comment A10-12 regarding costs related to Joint Use Facilities. A10-14 The process of scheduling energy across interconnected Balancing Agencies is commonplace in the electric utility industry. It is anticipated that the SLTP interconnection at 230-kV would be on the 230-kV bus at San Luis substation and would be treated as a fourth interchange between the Western Sub-BA (within the Balancing Authority of Northern California (BANC)) and CAISO. Interchanges are treated differently than a source/sink transaction. Very little change to the current scheduling of Federal and state load at Gianelli is needed and existing processes covered in existing agreements between DWR, Western, and Reclamation should remain the same. The SLTP proponents will work closely with DWR to provide the assurance that this is the case. Part of the SLTP includes a 230-kV interconnection into Dos Amigos Substation. This also would likely be treated as an interchange between CAISO and Western/ BANC. A10-15 Refer to response to comment A10-12 regarding cost impacts to DWR. A10-16 Western, Reclamation, Authority, and DWR will be the design coordination team for determining all the aspects of the SLTP on or near the Joint Use Facilities, to include the substation/switchyard interconnection design/details, protection coordination, and communication needs. A10-17 Refer to response to comment A4-2 regarding NERC/WECC compliance. A10-18 Despite Western’s best efforts, right of entry was not granted throughout the entire project area for surveys. As such, EIS/EIR preparers used best available information and methods to acquire setting information for these areas. The level of analysis contained in the Draft EIR/EIS is fully adequate to comply with both CEQA and NEPA. As a Responsible Agency for this project, DWR has engaged with Western and the Authority to ensure this Final EIS/EIR meets its informational needs. A10-19 Section 1.2 (Purpose and Need) in the Final EIS/EIR has been revised to clarify that certain SLU facilities pump up to 1.25 million acre-feet of federal water on an annual basis. A10-20 The range of estimated costs and benefits of the proposed SLTP has been included in Section 1.2 and Appendix K of the Final EIS/EIR. A10-21 Refer to response to comment A4-2 coordination with DWR. A10-22 The commenter states that any activity that occurs within the ROW of the State-only portion of the State Water Project would require obtaining an encroachment permit from DWR. Section 3.8.1.2 of the Final EIS/EIR was revised to include this requirement in the list of Regulations, Plans and Standards applicable to the Proposed Project. Western and Reclamation would conduct the appropriate coordination with DWR pursuant to existing agreements and would also conduct appropriate coordination with all applicable stakeholders pursuant to existing agreements. A10-23 Refer to response to comment A4-2 regarding DWR’s operation and maintenance role. Responses to Comment Set A11 – California State Parks - Central Valley District A11-1 The commenter describes certain sections of the SLRSRA Resource Management Plan/General Plan applicable to visual resources. This document was reviewed in preparation of the Draft EIS/EIR, a summary of the applicable provisions has been added to the Final EIS/EIR in Section 3.15.1.2. The commenter also disagreed with the conclusion in the Draft EIS/EIR that the Proposed Project would not result in significant and unavoidable impacts to visual resources. Although the impact conclusion did not change, Section 4.15 of the Final EIS/EIR was revised to further explain why impacts would be less than significant. Final selection of Project structure locations will involve consultation with affected land management agencies, including the California Department of Parks and Recreation, as required by Mitigation Measure REC-1 (Coordinate with local agencies to identify tower locations). A11-2 The commenter states that use of up to 50 acres of the existing Jasper Sears OHV Use Area for the proposed Los Banos West Substation would render use of the OHV Use Area impractical and requests that Western provide compensatory mitigation. If the OHV Use Area is needed for SLTP facilities, it is the intent of Western, the Authority, and Reclamation to work very closely with State Parks to develop equivalent replacement facilities. Implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-1 (Coordinate with local agencies to identify tower locations) and REC-2 (Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area) require close coordination with State Parks to site SLTP facilities to minimize impacts to recreationists and ensure continued access to the OHV Use Area. A11-3 The commenter expressed concern about lighting from the new Los Banos West Substation reaching campers at nearby campgrounds, and requested that lighting be designed to avoid this potential impact. If built, the new Los Banos West Substation would be located at least 0.6 mile from the nearest campground, which is the Meideros Campground on the south shore of O’Neill Forebay. The substation would not be visible from the Basalt Campground near San Luis Reservoir, and would be more than 3 miles away from the next closest campground, the group campground near North Beam, and 4 miles away from the San Luis Campground. The only permanent lighting at the substation would be a single 100-watt yellow, downward-aiming light at the access gate. All other lighting within the substation will only be used temporarily for maintenance of security purposes. While this single light bulb may be visible from the Meideros Campground, it will have low visibility compared to the lights from the buildings and streets of the nearby Villages at Laguna San Luis, and the vehicles on State Routes 33 and 152, and would not constitute an impact under Impact VIS-4. A11-4 The commenter states that Western should consult with State Parks to ensure emergency vehicles can access park areas during construction of the Proposed Project. Per Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-1, Western will prepare and submit a traffic plan to all agencies with jurisdiction over all public roads that will be affected by Project construction activities, including to State Parks for affected public roads within the San Luis State Recreation Area. The plan will include an emergency access plan, prepared in consultation with local emergency service providers, which will specify how emergency vehicles will access construction zones and adjacent areas. A11-5 The commenter notes that “Other construction related impacts should be mitigated to prevent problems related [to] traffic and noise.” Impacts to Traffic and Transportation are discussed in Section 4.14 of the EIS/EIR, and Noise impacts are discussed in Section 4.9 of the EIS/EIR. A11-6 The commenter states that a reduction in access to the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area (SLRSRA) would cause direct impact to revenues for State Parks and requests that these impacts be mitigated. As described in Section 4.12 of the Draft EIS/EIR, it would be unlikely that access to the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area (SLRSRA) would be permanently lost or a decrease in accessibility would occur for an extended period of time as a result of the Proposed Project. In addition, Mitigation Measure REC-1 requires Western to coordinate final tower locations with CDPR to minimize conflicts (such as permanent access restrictions) to recreation areas. Therefore, a substantial loss of revenue for State Parks as a result of decreased accessibility is not expected. However, construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation could result in a long-term decrease or a permanent loss of access to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area within the SLRSRA and could therefore result in a loss of revenue for State Parks. Implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-2 would minimize impacts to accessibility and the associated potential loss of revenue to State Parks. A discussion of the potential for direct long-term impacts to revenues for State Parks as a result of decreased accessibility to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area has been added under Impact SE-6 in Section 4.13 of the Final EIS/EIR. A11-7 The commenter’s concern regarding the proposed Project’s long-term and cumulative impacts on recreational resources at the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area (SLRSA) is acknowledged. The commenter also expresses an intent to work cooperatively with Western and Reclamation to arriving at a mutually acceptable outcome. Impacts to recreational resources within the SLRSA are identified in Section 4.12 (Recreation) and 4.17 (Cumulative Affects Analysis). Refer to response to comment A11-6 regarding potential impacts to State Park revenue. Western and the Authority will continue to coordinate with State Parks throughout the planning and design processes. Responses to Comment Set A12 – Santa Clara Valley Water District A12-1 The commenter expresses support for efforts to secure durable, reliable, and affordable power transmission services for the SLU facilities of the CVP, and notes that it is reviewing the proposed funding and repayment mechanisms for the SLTP to ensure that project costs are equitably distributed in proportion with project benefits. The comment concerns the merits of the Proposed Project, not the EIS/EIR, and will be considered by Western and the Authority. Responses to Comment Set A13 – Transmission Agency of Northern California A13-1 The commenter identifies itself as the owner of property under consideration for the proposed Tracy East Substation. Western will coordinate with the Transmission Agency of Northern California on project-related activities affecting the subject property. Responses to Comment Set A14 – Contra Costa Water District A14-1 The commenter describes the Corral Hollow property that was purchased as mitigation for the Los Vaqueros Reservoir Expansion Project in 2012 and is in the process of being placed into a conservation easement. The proposed project alignment would cross this property. Western acknowledges coordination with the commenter, as described on the comment. A14-2 The commenter requests that the property be subject to the minimum amount of disturbance necessary both during construction and O&M, and provides specific measures to minimize disturbance. The suggested measures have been incorporated into Mitigation Measure BIO-33 under Impact BIO-6 (Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, state, or federal habitat conservation plan); this measure provides impact minimization measures for existing and pending conservation easements. A14-3 The commenter requests that the Corral Hollow property be added to Table 3.4-3 and subsequent discussions of conservation easements. The requested revisions have been made to the Final EIS/EIR. Sections 3.8 and 4.8 of the Final EIS/EIR were revised to expand upon the analysis of effects on lands covered by conservation easements, including the addition of a new mitigation measures BIO-33 (Minimization measures for conservation easements) and LU-1 (Minimize impacts on conservation easements and/ or amend conservation easements). A14-4 The commenter expresses appreciation for Western’s commitment to avoid and minimize impacts to agriculture, including grazing. The commenter states the importance of minimizing impacts to grazing during operation and maintenance and requests that this be stated in the document. As stated in Section 4.2 (Agriculture), during operation, the presence of transmission lines is generally compatible with agricultural use (e.g., agriculture operations could continue within the easement and around the towers) and would not substantially impair the use of agriculture land. In addition, Mitigation Measure BIO-33 has been added to the Final EIS/EIR which requires measures to minimize impacts within existing conservation easements and coordination with easement holders to ensure Project activities adhere to the requirements of individual conservation easement deeds and approved management plans, as described in the EIS/EIR. Responses to Comment Set A15 – San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District A15-1 The controls implemented by Western and contractors, together with off-site mitigation in MM AQ-1, including revisions with this Final EIS/EIR, demonstrate that the Proposed Project will comply with General Conformity in the San Joaquin Valley air basin. The Final EIS/EIR clarifies that Western and the SJVAPCD may execute a Voluntary Emission Reduction Agreement to achieve the necessary level of off-site reductions contemporaneous with the final schedule of construction. Appendix M of the Final EIS/EIR includes an Air Quality General Conformity Evaluation and Draft Conformity Determination. Refer to response to comment A9-5 for more detail. A15-2 As noted by the commenter, the EIS/EIR includes a preliminary estimate of construction emissions. The summary in EIS/EIR Table 4.3-2, and detail in Appendix I, show the potential emissions prior to implementing the full range of feasible practices listed in MM AQ-1. The Final EIS/EIR includes additional information in Appendix I to show the estimated emissions with mitigation. The summary tables cover the results of modeling using the CalEEMod software, which is an SJVAPCD-Approved Model, according to the Guidance for Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts (GAMAQI, p. 56). Detailed CalEEMod output reports are also provided in Appendix I of the Final EIS/EIR. MM AQ-1 includes a requirement that Western will finance and verify implementation of emission reductions so that no net increase occurs for NOx and PM10. The quantity of reductions is based on the preliminary estimate of emissions. The preliminary estimate does not reflect additional reductions that would be achieved by other portions of the mitigation, such as implementation of a construction activity management strategy. Examples of factors that have not yet been taken into consideration include avoiding road dust emissions by shifting on-road activity to helicopter hauling; and shifting construction schedules to avoid overlapping that was assumed to occur in the preliminary estimates. Section 4.3 of the Final EIS/EIR has been revised to clarify that Western proposes to establish an agreement with the SJVAPCD, such as a Voluntary Emission Reduction Agreement, to achieve the necessary level of off-site reductions contemporaneous with the final schedule of construction. The agreement would establish Western’s commitment to provide payment to the SJVAPCD of a mitigation fee to be used for air quality benefit programs to reduce NOx for General Conformity and for CEQA purposes and, also, to reduce PM10 for CEQA purposes. A15-3 The Proposed Project will be required to comply with stringent dust control requirements within SJVAPCD Regulation VIII. However, comments from EPA and this comment from SJVAPCD recommend additional mitigation that has been considered and is included with the Final EIS/EIR and revisions to MM AQ-1. Refer to response to EPA comment A9-7 for more detail. A15-4 The discussion of Impact AQ-3 focuses on construction emissions because the Project would have no emissions during operation, and only minor emissions during maintenance activities (Draft EIS/EIR, p. 4-11). Construction would occur over the 95 miles of new transmission lines, and as noted in the EIS/EIR, installing structures within the right-of-way would involve 1 to 2 weeks of activity at each location. At each of the two new 500-kV substations, where longer durations of construction activity would occur, emission calculations and details added in Appendix I of the Final EIS/EIR show that no criteria pollutant would be emitted at a level exceeding the 100 lb/day threshold noted by the comment. As a result Ambient Air Quality Analysis (AAQA) would not be applicable. A15-5 The EIS/EIR discussion of Impact AQ-4 illustrates the primary health risks to nearby sensitive receptors would be driven by diesel particulate matter (DPM) emissions during construction. The level of DPM emissions distributed over the 95 miles of new transmission lines during the full duration of construction would be about 2.6 tons, or less than 1.3 tons during each of the two years. As noted in the EIS/EIR, installing structures within the easements would involve 1 to 2 weeks of activity at each location. This means that exposure durations would be limited 1 to 2 weeks along the transmission line corridor, and thus unlikely to pose a notable health risk. Sources of DPM would be in use over longer durations for construction at the proposed substation sites. At each of the two new 500-kV substations, where longer durations of activity and emissions would occur, emission calculations in Appendix I show that DPM emissions due to construction of the substations would occur at a combined rate of about 0.7 tons per year to construct both substations, or less than 4 lb/day at each of the two substation sites. These substations would cover up to 50 acres each, and sensitive receptors are separated from the substation sites by approximately 600 feet or more (Draft EIS/EIR, p. 4-80). The potential cancer risk over a 70-year lifetime for sensitive receptors at this distance was estimated through air dispersion modeling with the following parameters: . DPM emission rate for construction at each new 500-kV substation: 0.35 tons per year, spanning two years. . Area or volume source configuration for mobile sources within each substation: 50 acres (202,400 m2). . Emission rate per area source: 0.35 tons per year per 50 acres (0.5 x 10-7 grams/sec per m2). . Release height, typically: 6 feet (1.8 m). . Receptor flagpole height, typically: 6 feet (1.8 m). . Modeled results provide maximum annual average DPM concentration of 0.8 .g/m3 near the substation fence-line and less than 0.5 .g/m3 for any receptor separated from the fence-line by 600 feet or more. . Inhalation of DPM at less than 0.5 .g/m3 during two years over a 70-year lifetime (2/70), to arrive at a lifetime exposure of: 0.014 .g/m3 average. . Applying the Unit Risk Factor for DPM inhalation of 300 x 10-6 excess cancer cases per .g/m3 (Source: OEHHA) results in a potential cancer risk of no more than 4.2 x 10-6 excess cancer cases for the proposed substations. The resulting annual average DPM concentrations at the nearest sensitive receptors would not be above the level of significant cancer risk, as identified in Impact AQ-4. The potential cancer risk associated with diesel exhaust particulate matter for the receptors experiencing maximum exposure would be well within the SJVAPCD’s threshold of significance of 10 x 10-6 excess cancer cases. As a result, the proposed level of DPM emissions from within the substation sites and along the transmission line corridor would not require a detailed Health Risk Assessment (HRA). A15-6 The Environmental Protection Measures in EIS/EIR Section 4.3.2 show that all project participants will comply with applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. Additionally, the Final EIS/EIR revises MM AQ-1 as recommended by EPA to clarify that contractors should adhere to California’s anti-idling requirements. Refer also to response to comment A9-8. A15-7 The comment states that SJVAPCD Rule 9510 Indirect Source Review (ISR) would apply to the Proposed Project. A letter dated November 3, 2015 from the SJVAPCD (ISR Determination Project No.: C20150276) indicates that Rule 9510 requirements apply to the proposed SLTP. Revisions included with the Final EIS/EIR in Section 4.3 and the following information in this response illustrate that the Proposed Project emissions would be fully mitigated and no further Rule 9510 ISR requirements would apply. The SJVAPCD Staff Report that presented Rule 9510 to the air district Governing Board, dated December 15, 2005, states the scope of the ISR program most clearly with the following: “Indirect sources are land uses that attract or generate motor vehicle trips.” The proposed SLTP would not attract or generate motor vehicle trips, except for during construction and maintenance. Rule 9510 applies to new development projects that are the subjects of land development decisions by cities and counties within the San Joaquin Valley, if the land use would equal or exceed specific size limits or “applicability thresholds” that are tailored for the squarefootage of residential, commercial, industrial, and office spaces. The SJVAPCD Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ, 10/29/2012) clarifies that Rule 9510 aims to manage the indirect emissions attributed to land development and population growth in the San Joaquin Valley, and the SJVAPCD Guidance for Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts (GAMAQI, p. 7) defines Development Project as: “Refers generally to a land use development project such as a residential project, a commercial project, an industrial project, or a transportation project.” While the proposed SLTP and associated facilities would add new electric transmission facilities to the San Joaquin Valley, the proposed transmission facilities would not be a development project that generates any substantial level of population growth or indirect source emissions. As stated in EIS/EIR Section 1.3 (Project Objectives), one objective of the Project is to obtain “. . . efficient transmission delivery of CVP power from federal power generation sites to the major pumping stations of the SLU to reliably deliver water to Reclamation and the Authority’s member agencies (federal water service contractors).” The interconnected power facilities, and associated water delivery network, extends well beyond the boundaries of the San Joaquin Valley. The benefits of the Project would accrue to customers throughout California and the western U.S. As a result, a major function of the Proposed Project is to interconnect “Energy Production Plants”, which are exempt from the ISR (Rule 9510, Section 4.4.3.7). Construction-phase emissions would not be caused by indirect sources because they would be directly attributable to the activity of building the Proposed Project, as detailed in EIS/EIR Section 4.3. As stated above, aside from construction and maintenance, the proposed SLTP would not attract or generate motor vehicle trips. Because the Project would have no emissions during operation, and only minor emissions during maintenance activities (Draft EIS/EIR, p. 4-11), the construction emissions are the primary topic of the EIS/EIR analysis including the controls in MM AQ-1. The Final EIS/EIR includes revisions to MM AQ-1 to clarify how enforceable emission reductions would be achieved. With this mitigation, the project would be exempt from Rule 9510 ISR requirements (Rule 9510, Section 4.3) because sufficient emission reductions would occur to achieve no net increase of NOx and PM10. The emission reduction agreement, which will include monitoring and reporting, that is required under MM AQ-1 will ensure that construction-phase emissions are fully mitigated. No additional mitigation is necessary. Responses to Comment Set A16 – National Park Service A16-1 The commenter’s summary of the Proposed Project is accurate. A16-2 The commenter notes that the Butterfield Overland National Historic Trail is within the southernmost segment of the Area of Potential Effect for the proposed undertaking and requests that a discussion of this resource be added to Section 3.5.1.1 (Affected Environment, Resources Present). The requested revisions have been made to the Final EIS/EIR. A16-3 The commenter suggests that the discussion of El Camino Real in Section 3.5 might be clarified if the text mentioned that this road is not the same as the El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail or El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail. As the Proposed Project is located entirely within California and these National Historic Trails are located in Texas and New Mexico respectively, confusion is unlikely. No revisions have been made to the EIS/EIR. Responses to Comment Set B1 – HORUS Renewables Corp and San Luis Renewables LLC B1-1 The commenter’s support of the SLTP is acknowledged and appreciated. Western will work closely with Reclamation and the commenter to minimize impacts to the commenter’s renewable projects to the extent feasible. B1-2 The alternatives described by the commenter are consistent with those presented in the EIS/EIR. B1-3 The Proposed Project corridors around the eastern side of the O’Neill Forebay are components of the Agency Preferred Alternative as presented in the Final EIS/EIR. Western would co-locate the SLTP with the existing PG&E lines to the extent practicable to minimize impacts to solar facilities. B1-4 The alternative corridors around the western side of the O’Neill Forebay are not components of the Agency Preferred Alternative as presented in the Final EIS/EIR. Western would appreciate the opportunity to coordinate project siting in this area with the commenter during the detailed design phase of the Project. Responses to Comment Set B2 – Planetary Ventures B2-1 The commenter states that it has reviewed the Draft EIS/EIR and has no comments. B2-2 The commenter’s address has been updated on the mailing list as requested. Responses to Comment Set B3 – Wright Solar Park LLC B3-1 The commenter provides a description and status of the Wright Solar Park. The Notice of Preparation (NOP) and Notice of Intent to prepare an EIS/EIR for the proposed SLTP were filed in November 2013. At this time, the NOP for the Wright Solar Park had been distributed (dated October 2013). It is noted that the South Segment of the Proposed Project and the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative would cross the Wright Solar Park property. B3-2 As stated by the commenter, the Proposed Project and San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative corridor would require acquisition of portions of the Wright Solar Park property. Western would enter into cost negotiations with affected landowners and pay fair market value for any easements. As shown in Final EIS/EIR Figure 2-8, the Billy Wright Road Alternative is the Agency Preferred Alternative in the South Segment, which would not affect the Wright Solar Park. B3-3 One of the objectives of the SLTP, as stated in Section 1.3 (Project Objectives) of the EIS/EIR, is to obtain durable, long-term, cost certain transmission to deliver CVP generation to Reclamation’s pump loads at Gianelli, O’Neill, and Dos Amigos. Implementation of the No Action/No Project Alternative would increase pumping costs to Federal water contractors by approximately $5.3 to $8.7 million per year as a result of the existing Transmission Access Charges (TAC) in the current CAISO tariff. TACs have changed 75 times since first implemented by CAISO in 2001. The High Voltage TAC has increased from about $1.29 in 2001 to about $9.80 as of August 2015 or an increase of 759% over the approximately 16-year period. Because the TAC price variability to-date has proven to be neither durable nor cost certain over time, the No Action Alternative fails to satisfy the basic project objectives. Refer to Appendix K (Cost Analysis) of the EIS/EIR for additional details. The Agency Preferred Alternative as described in Section 2.4.6 of the Final EIS/EIR would achieve most project objectives. B3-4 The EIS/EIR has been revised in Section 1.2 (Purpose and Need) and Appendix K (Cost Analysis) to include further explanations of the project cost, assumptions, and financial analysis related to the Project alternatives. B3-5 The commenter asserts that because Wright Solar Park did not grant right of entry for the Proposed Project or its alternatives to be studied in detail, the level of analysis provided in the Draft EIS/EIR is inadequate to fully describe the Proposed Project’s impacts. Because right of entry to Wright Solar Park properties was not granted, EIS/EIR preparers used best available methods to acquire setting information for these areas. As described in Section 3.4.1.1, these methods included surveying from the property edge using binoculars to identify habitat types and landforms present (where possible), review of aerial photography and topographic maps, review of biological studies in the region, and local expertise and familiarity with the habitats and species that occur regionally. Therefore, a comprehensive, multipronged approach was used to develop the project’s baseline biological setting from which to analyze impacts from Project implementation. The level of analysis presented in the Draft EIS/EIR is fully adequate to comply with both CEQA and NEPA. Please see Appendix C of the Draft EIS/EIR for a detailed description of biological data collection methods. B3-6 The commenter claims that installing the proposed transmission line could cause removal of or a reduction in output from a portion of the solar project. Although the commenter suggests that this could result in a reduction of electricity made available to California customers from renewable resources, all load serving entities in California are subject to the Renewable Portfolio Standard. The project would not cause any change the availability of electricity from renewable energy sources. Any incremental changes in electricity output from one particular facility must be equally replaced by the same amount of electricity production from a different renewable energy facility to meet the overall statewide goal. B3-7 The commenter expresses concern regarding the potential displacement of the Wright Solar Park Project from the SLTP. As stated in Section 4.13 of the EIS/EIR, typically project components (e.g., towers) can be sited to avoid complete displacement of existing homes and businesses and existing land uses within easements are able to continue. However, in the event that displacement does occur, MM SE-1 (Acquire Land Rights) would minimize this impact to a less than significant level. In addition, The Billy Wright Road Alternative presented in the EIS/EIR provides an alternative route that would avoid conflict with the Wright Solar Park project area. As described in the Final EIS/EIR (Section 2.4.6, Agency Preferred Alternative), Western included the Billy Wright Road Alternative segment as part of the Agency Preferred Alternative, in part to avoid conflicts with the Wright Solar Park. B3-8 Refer to response to comment B3-2. Responses to Comment Set B4 – San Joaquin Council of Governments B4-1 The commenter provides general background regarding the San Joaquin County Multi-Species Habitat Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJMSCP) administered by the San Joaquin Council of Governments (SJCOG). The commenter also states that the SLTP would have impacts to existing conservation easements held by SJCOG. The Final EIS/EIR presents an expanded analysis of impacts within conservation easements under Impact BIO-6 (Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, state, or federal habitat conservation plan). B4-2 The commenter notes that Mitigation Measure BIO-2 states that “Western will comply with conditions of any affected existing conservation easement, and will avoid and minimize impacts within conservation easements to the extent feasible.” The commenter states that the conservation easements held by SJCOG prohibit ground disturbance of any kind within the easement area, and that if a project disturbs a conservation easement held by SJCOG, it would result in a violation of the terms of the easement and would result in a significant and unavoidable impact. Impacts within existing and pending conservation easements are analyzed under Impact BIO-6 (Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, state, or federal habitat conservation plan). Additional text has been added to that analysis for the Final EIS/EIR, and Mitigation Measure BIO-33 has been added. This measure provides minimization measures to address potential conflicts with existing and pending conservation easements. Where a conservation easement prohibits new ground disturbance, Mitigation Measure BIO-33 requires Western to span covered areas to the extent feasible, routing around easement boundaries, or other methods developed through consultation with the easement holder. Therefore, with implementation of MM BIO-33, impacts to conservation easements would be reduced to less than significant. B4-3 The commenter notes that Mitigation Measure BIO-28 states in part, “Impacts within conservation easements may require compensatory mitigation at higher ratios than impacts outside of easements, and mitigation will be consistent with the requirements of the easement.” The commenter states that the conservation easements held by SJCOG prohibit ground disturbance of any kind within the easement area, and that if a project disturbs a conservation easement held by SJCOG, it would result in a violation of the terms of the easement and would result in a significant and unavoidable impact. Refer to response to comment B4-2 regarding the addition of Mitigation Measure BIO-33 to reduce impacts within conservation easements to less than significant. B4-4 The commenter notes that Mitigation Measure BIO-31 states in part, “Impacts within conservation easements may require compensatory mitigation at higher ratios than impacts outside of easements, and mitigation will be consistent with the requirements of the easement.” The commenter states that the conservation easements held by SJCOG prohibit ground disturbance of any kind within the easement area, and that if a project disturbs a conservation easement held by SJCOG, it would result in a violation of the terms of the easement and would result in a significant and unavoidable impact. Refer to response to comment B4-2 regarding the addition of Mitigation Measure BIO-33 to reduce impacts within conservation easements to less than significant. B4-5 The commenter summarizes the analysis presented in the Draft EIS/EIR under Impact BIO-6 (Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, state, or federal habitat conservation plan) and notes that SJCOG’s Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve is identified, but SJCOG’s Cubiburu Preserve and USFWS South Preserve are not. Table 3.4-3 and the discussion under impact BIO-6 have been updated in the Final EIS/EIR to include the Cubiburu Preserve and the USFWS South Preserve. The commenter summarizes the conclusion under Impact BIO-6, which is that the Proposed Project would not conflict with the provisions of any existing conservation easements, and states that the conservation easements held by SJCOG prohibit ground disturbance of any kind within the easement area, and that if a project disturbs a conservation easement held by SJCOG, it would result in a violation of the terms of the easement and would result in a significant and unavoidable impact. Refer to response to comment B4-2 regarding revisions to the analysis under Impact BIO-6, including the addition of Mitigation Measure BIO-33 to reduce impacts within conservation easements to less than significant. B4-6 The commenter quotes from Section 4.17.4 of the Draft EIS/EIR, which states that the Proposed Project’s incremental contribution to adverse cumulative impacts to conservation easements would not be considerable. The commenter states that the conservation easements held by SJCOG prohibit ground disturbance of any kind within the easement area, and that if a project disturbs a conservation easement held by SJCOG, it would result in a violation of the terms of the easement and would result in a significant and unavoidable impact. Refer to response to comment B4-2 regarding the addition of Mitigation Measure BIO-33 to reduce impacts within conservation easements to less than significant. In addition, Section 4.17.4 of the Final EIS/EIR has been revised to refer to the additional mitigation requirements of MM BIO-33. B4-7 The commenter states that, as the agency charged with administering the SJMSCP and the conservation easements held pursuant to that plan, the SJCOG should be consulted prior to Project approval to avoid impacts to existing conservation easements. As stated under Impact BIO-6 of the EIS/EIR, Western would coordinate with the San Joaquin Council of Governments [SJCOG] for impacts to special-status species covered under the SJMSCP. Mitigation Measure BIO-33 also requires Western to coordinate with the SJCOG regarding conservation easements in the vicinity of the Proposed Project. Responses to Comment Set B5 – Northern California Power Agency B5-1 Western, Reclamation, and the Authority concur with the comment that a portion of CVP generation, commonly referred to as Project Use Energy, is provided to pump water at Gianelli and O’Neill pumping plants; however, as currently authorized, the commercial power purpose is not allocated any of the San Luis Unit cost for reimbursement. Essentially all costs associated with the San Luis Unit, including those related to construction of SLTP, are assigned to the water supply purpose for reimbursement. Responses to Comment Set C1 – Laure Sheppard & Beth Tackaberry C1-1 The commenter asks how the transmission lines will co-exist with farming and animals and how often the lines will be maintained. As stated in Section 4.2 (Agriculture), the presence of transmission lines is generally compatible with agricultural use (e.g., agriculture operations could continue within the easement and around the towers) and would not substantially impair the use of agriculture land. The frequency of operation and maintenance is presented in Appendix D of this Final EIS/EIR (see Section D.4.2 (Projected O&M Frequency)). C1-2 The commenter asks whether power from the proposed transmission lines could be “pulled for personal use.” Interconnection with the proposed transmission lines would require a formal request through Western’s Open Access Transmission Service Tariff and construction of adequate infrastructure to distribute the voltage, which is much too high for personal (i.e., residential) use. C1-3 The commenter’s concern about the relationship between electric transmission lines and cancer is acknowledged. The present state of knowledge of the health effects of EMF exposure is discussed in Section 3.11.1.1 of the EIS/EIR, and the potential risks to human health caused by exposure to electromagnetic fields of the Proposed Project are included in the discussion of Impact H&S-4 in Section 4.11.3 of the EIS/EIR. The existing transmission lines have no documented adverse public health and safety effects from EMF exposure. Circuits placed parallel to each other tend to cancel electric and magnetic fields, thus reducing the measured fields under the lines and at the edge of the easement. The electric and magnetic fields at the edge of the easement are anticipated to be well below the recommended guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation and the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienist. C1-4 The commenter requested that the proposed transmission line be located between existing transmission corridors. The space between the existing transmission structures on the commenter’s property is just over 100 feet. This potential alternative is not technically feasible because there is not sufficient room for a 125- to 250-foot-wide easement for the proposed transmission line. Responses to Comment Set C2 – Beth Tackaberry C2-1 As stated in Table 2-2 of the Final EIS/EIR, construction of the SLTP is expected to start in Summer 2018 and be operational by 2021. C2-2 Refer to response to comment C1-4 regarding the feasibility of locating the proposed transmission line between existing transmission corridors. Responses to Comment Set C3 – Jackson Family C3-1 The commenter’s opposition to having the project on her property and her ranking of the alternatives will be considered by Western and the Authority. Responses to Comment Set C4 – Dolores Kuhn 1 C4-1 The commenter notes the potential for cumulative impacts to agriculture resources. Cumulative impacts to agriculture resources are analyzed in Section 4.17.3 (Cumulative Effects Analysis) of the EIS/EIR. Cumulative impacts could result from the permanent conversion of Important Farmlands or the preclusion of agricultural activities. However, as the presence of transmission lines is generally compatible with agriculture use and agriculture operations could continue within the proposed SLTP easements, impacts would be minimal. C4-2 The commenter, whose residence and ranch is on Mountain House Road near the Tracy Substation, asked whether the multiple transmission lines located on three sides of the residence would cumulatively increase exposure to EMF. The present state of knowledge of the health effects of EMF exposure is discussed in Section 3.11.1.1 of the EIS/EIR, and the potential risks to human health caused by exposure to electromagnetic fields of the Proposed Project are included in the discussion of Impact H&S-4 in Section 4.11.3 of the EIS/EIR. Until engineering of the Proposed Project is completed, the exact location of the Proposed Project in relation to the commenter’s property will not be known, and therefore EMF exposure on the commenter’s property cannot presently be calculated. However, the Proposed Project would likely include construction of the new Tracy East Substation, located to the northeast of the intersection of Mountain House Road and Kelso Road, and the new transmission line would likely exit the new substation heading south or southeast, and therefore be located farther away from the commenter’s property than the existing transmission and distribution lines located on three sides of the commenter’s residence. Though the exact change in exposure at the commenter’s residence is unknown, circuits placed parallel to each other tend to cancel electric and magnetic fields, thus reducing the measured fields under the lines and at the edge of the easement. The electric and magnetic fields at the edge of the easement of the new transmission line are anticipated to be well below the recommended guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation and the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienist. Therefore, it is highly unlikely that EMF exposure at the commenter’s residence will increase substantially following construction of the Proposed Project. C4-3 The commenter states that development of the Proposed Project will degrade the quality of the environment and infers that there will be cumulative effects due to the perceived abundance of existing electrical infrastructure. The analysis of impacts to visual resources from the Proposed Project is presented in Section 4.15 of EIS/EIR; cumulative impacts to visual resources are presented in Section 4.17.15 of the EIS/EIR. Western concluded that although construction of the Proposed Project will contribute to cumulative effects of development in the area, the incremental change in visual contrast and quality will be small and will not meet the threshold for determining that the Project will result in significant direct, indirect, or cumulative impacts to visual resources. C4-4 The commenter’s statement about the EMF guidelines established by the California Department of Education is acknowledged, as is their expressed fear for themselves and their livestock. Refer to response to comment C4-1 regarding EMF. Similar to exposure for humans, there is no conclusive evidence that transmission line EMF exposure for grazing livestock presents an increased health risk, even for animals that routinely graze within the transmission line easement. The commenter also requests information on the effects of earthquakes on transmission lines. Potential impacts from the Proposed Project caused by earthquakes and other geologic phenomena are discussed in Section 4.7.3 of the EIS/EIR. Geological hazards will be confirmed during final design of each structure location as part of the geotechnical investigation required under Mitigation Measure GEO-1. Project design recommendations will include measures to stabilize and protect Project structures from geologic hazards. Geologically unstable sites will be avoided or stabilized prior to construction. Additionally, expansive soils will be avoided or stabilized prior to tower installation. C4-5 The commenter notes that Mountain House Road is a historic road and expresses concern that the project will have “unfavorable” visual impacts. While this road has been in existence for many years, the extensive research conducted for this document provided no indication that this road was eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or for the California Register of Historic Resources. Therefore, an analysis of impacts to the road as a historic resource is not required. Impacts to visual resources in the Central Segment of the project, which is near Mountain House, are analyzed in Section 4.15.3.2 of the EIS/EIR. The Proposed Project would cross Mountain House Road at Vasco Road, adjacent to the Tracy Substation. Addition of the Project in this area will have a small incremental effect to existing scenic quality due to the presence of the substation, pumping plant and dozens of existing transmission towers; it will not meet any thresholds for determining that the Project will result in significant direct, indirect, or cumulative impacts to visual resources. C4-6 The commenter expresses concern regarding cumulative impacts related to agriculture, EMF, noise, and visual resources, of several existing transmission lines as well as the proposed transmission line on their property. Cumulative impacts are analyzed in Section 4.17 (Cumulative Effects Analysis) of the EIS/EIR. The commenter asserts that farming methods (i.e., crop dusting) have to be altered to accommodate the transmission lines. Section 4.16 (Agriculture) identifies the potential for minor impacts to agriculture operations, including crop dusting, as a result of the permanent presence of transmission infrastructure. However, construction and operation of the Proposed Project would not result in the permanent preclusion of future agriculture use as continued agriculture practices are generally compatible with the presence of transmission lines. C4-7 The commenter’s statement regarding the difficulty in maintaining their livelihood and lifestyle because of the development of energy-related projects on and near their property, as well as their concern about increased cancer risk due to an increase in EMF exposure, are acknowledged. Refer to responses to comments C4-2 and C4-4 regarding transmission line hazards. The U.S. EPA has concluded that after more than two decades of research to determine whether elevated EMF is related to an increased risk of cancers, such as childhood leukemia, the general scientific consensus is that, thus far, the evidence available is weak and is not sufficient to establish a definitive cause-effect relationship (for example, see http://www3.epa.gov/radtown/electric-magnetic-fields.html). C4-8 The commenter expresses concern regarding the decrease of property value and agriculture use due to the presence of transmission lines. See Section 4.13 (Socioeconomics) and response to comment C5-5 for information regarding the impacts of transmission lines on property value. As stated in Section 4.2 (Agriculture), the presence of transmission lines is generally compatible with agriculture use (e.g., agriculture operations could continue within the easement and around the towers) and would not substantially impair the use of agriculture land. C4-9 The commenter requests that Western acquire her entire property for the Proposed Project. Western will only acquire what is needed for the purpose of the transmission line easements. C4-10 The commenter presents a study the health effects of EMF exposure that, in the commenter’s opinion, confirms their concern about the health effects from existing power lines. The study cited examined the records of 854 cancer patients on the island of Tasmania and found a lower incidence of cancer per capita for those who lived at least 300 meters away from a transmission line compared to those who lived less than 50 meters away from a transmission line. The commenter’s residence is at least 150 meters away from any transmission line, and approximately 35 meters away from the distribution line that supplies power to the residence and ranch buildings. Because exposure decreases with distance from the source, available information indicates that electric appliances and the wiring in the walls and electric panels are more responsible for EMF exposure inside the average residence than from nearby transmission or distribution lines. Responses to Comment Set C5 – Dolores Kuhn 2 C5-1 The commenter expresses concern regarding cumulative impacts of several existing transmission lines, other utility infrastructure, and the proposed transmission line on their property. Refer to responses to comments C4-1 and C4-6. C5-2 Refer to response to comment C4-4 regarding EMF exposure from transmission lines. C5-3 The comment states that noise levels will increase and that residences experience audible noise from the existing transmission lines, especially during wet weather. This impact is disclosed and identified as less than significant in the EIS/EIR under Impact NOISE-2 (Result in a substantial permanent increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project). C5-4 The commenter expresses concern regarding impacts to Mountain House Road. Refer to response to comment C4-5. C5-5 The commenter expresses concern regarding the decrease of property value by the presence of transmission lines. See Section 4.13 of the EIS/EIR, Impact SE-5 (Substantial decrease in property values), for a detailed discussion regarding impacts to property value. Impacts of transmission lines on property value could include factors such as a perceived health and safety risks posed by the lines (see the discussion of EMF in Section 4.11 of the EIS/EIR), the visibility of the line from the subject property, and the potential for increased traffic, noise, and dust to occur during construction and operation activities. However, there are no definitive answers about the degree to which the presence of a transmission line may affect property value. Responses to Comment Set D1 – Public Hearing, Los Banos D1-1 Refer to response to comment A4-2 regarding DWR’s role in operations of the Joint Use Facilities. D1-2 Refer to response to comment A4-3 regarding DWR’s role as a Responsible Agency under CEQA. D1-3 The commenter’s opposition to the proposed project and alternatives will be considered by Western and the Authority. It is not possible to upgrade or modify the existing transmission towers as they are not owned by Western or if they are Western-owned, cannot accommodate two additional circuits. D1-4 The commenter’s expressed understanding of the project need is noted. D1-5 Refer to response to comment D1-4 regarding the ability to modify or upgrade existing transmission towers as an alternative to building new transmission support structures. D1-6 Refer to response to comment C1-4 regarding the feasibility of locating the proposed transmission line between existing transmission corridors. Western also seeks to minimize crossings of the existing high voltage transmission lines, which would increase reliability by providing more space between circuits. D1-7 Refer to response to comment C1-4 regarding the feasibility of locating the proposed transmission line between existing transmission corridors. Western also seeks to minimize crossings of the existing high voltage transmission lines, which would increase reliability by providing more space between circuits.  This page intentionally blank.  L.3 Comments Received on the Draft EIS/EIR This section presents complete reproductions of each written comment correspondence received on the Draft EIS/EIR (i.e., letter, email, and comment card) with brackets and comment numbers.    This page intentionally blank.  Comment Set A1 Contra Costa Water District  A1-2  A1-1  Comment Letter A1Comment Set A2 Central Valley Flood Protection Board  A2-2  A2-1  Comment Letter A2, page 1Comment Set A2, cont. Central Valley Flood Protection Board  A2-5  A2-4  A2-3  A2-2 cont.  Comment Letter A2, page 2Comment Set A3 Central Valley Regional WQCB  A3-1  Comment Letter A3, page 1Comment Set A3, cont. Central Valley Regional WQCB  A3-4  A3-3  A3-2  Comment Letter A3, page 2Comment Set A3, cont. Central Valley Regional WQCB  A3-7  A3-6  A3-5  Comment Letter A3, page 3Comment Set A3, cont. Central Valley Regional WQCB  A3-8  A3-7 cont.  Comment Letter A3, page 4Comment Set A4 State of California Department of Water Resources  A4-5  A4-4  A4-3  A4-2  A4-1  Comment Letter A4, page 1Comment Set A4, cont. State of California Department of Water Resources  Comment Letter A4, page 2Comment Set A5 Stanislaus County Department of Environmental Resources  A5-2  A5-1  Comment Letter A5Comment Set A6 Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-2  A6-1  Comment Letter A6, page 1Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-3  A6-2 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 2Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-5  A6-4  A6-3 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 3Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee A6-6  A6-8  A6-7  A6-5 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 4Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-9  A6-8 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 5Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-10  Comment Letter A6, page 6Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-10 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 7Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-10 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 8Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-10 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 9Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-10 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 10Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee A6-11  Comment Letter A6, page 11Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 12Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 13Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 14Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 15Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 16Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 17Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 18Comment Set A6, cont. Stanislaus County Environmental Review Committee  A6-11 cont.  Comment Letter A6, page 19Comment Set A7 San Joaquin County  A7-1  Comment Letter A7Comment Set A8 U.S. Department of the Interior  A8-1  Comment Letter A8Comment Set A9 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-4  A9-3  A9-2  A9-1 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 1Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-4 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 2Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  Comment Letter A9, page 3Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-6  A9-5  Comment Letter A9, page 4Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-8  A9-7  A9-6 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 5Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-13  A9-12  A9-11  A9-10  A9-9  A9-8 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 6Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-18  A9-17  A9-16  A9-15  A9-14  A9-13 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 7Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-24  A9-23  A9-22  A9-21  A9-20  A9-19  Comment Letter A9, page 8Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-30  A9-29  A9-28  A9-27  A9-26  A9-25  A9-24 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 9Comment Set A9, cont. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  A9-33  A9-32  A9-31  A9-30 cont.  Comment Letter A9, page 10Comment Set A10 California Department of Water Resources  A10-2  A10-1  Comment Letter A10, page 1Comment Set A10, cont. California Department of Water Resources  A10-3  A10-2 cont.  Comment Letter A10, page 2Comment Set A10, cont. California Department of Water Resources  A10-4  A10-9  A10-8  A10-7  A10-6  A10-5  Comment Letter A10, page 3Comment Set A10, cont. California Department of Water Resources  A10-16  A10-15  A10-14  A10-13  A10-12  A10-11  A10-10  Comment Letter A10, page 4Comment Set A10, cont. California Department of Water Resources  A10-19  A10-20  A10-18  A10-17  A10-16 cont.  Comment Letter A10, page 5Comment Set A10, cont. California Department of Water Resources  A10-23  A10-22  A10-21  A10-20 cont.  Comment Letter A10, page 6Comment Set A10, cont. California Department of Water Resources  Comment Letter A10, page 7Comment Set A11 California State Parks - Central Valley District  A11-1  Comment Letter A11, page 1Comment Set A11, cont. California State Parks - Central Valley District  A11-7  A11-6  A11-5  A11-4  A11-3  A11-2  A11-1 cont.  Comment Letter A11, page 2Comment Set A12 Santa Clara Valley Water District +-+ A12-1  Comment Letter A12, page 1Comment Set A13 Transmission Agency of Northern California  A13-1  Comment Letter A13, page 1Comment Set A13, cont. Transmission Agency of Northern California  A13-1 cont.  Comment Letter A13, page 2Comment Set A14 Contra Costa Water District  A14-1 cont.  A14-2  A14-3  A14-4  Comment Letter A14, page 1Comment Set A14, cont. Contra Costa Water District  Comment Letter A14, page 2Comment Set A15 San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District  A15-1  Comment Letter A15, page 1Comment Set A15, cont. San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District A15-2  A15-3  Comment Letter A15, page 2Comment Set A15, cont. San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District  A15-5  A15-4  A15-3 cont.  Comment Letter A15, page 3Comment Set A15, cont. San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District  A15-6  A15-5 cont.  Comment Letter A15, page 4Comment Set A15, cont. San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District  A15-7  Comment Letter A15, page 5Comment Set A16 National Park Service  A16-3 A16-2 A16-1 Comment Letter A16Comment Set B1 HORUS Renewables Corp + San Luis Renewables LLC  B1-3  B1-2  B1-1  Comment Letter B1, page 1Comment Set B1, cont. HORUS Renewables Corp + San Luis Renewables LLC  B1-4  B1-3 cont.  Comment Letter B1, page 2Comment Set B2 Planetary Ventures  B2-2  B2-1  Comment Letter B2Comment Set B3 Wright Solar Park LLC  B3-1  Comment Letter B3, page 1Comment Set B3, cont. Wright Solar Park LLC  B3-5  B3-4  B3-3  B3-2  B3-1 cont.  Comment Letter B3, page 2Comment Set B3, cont. Wright Solar Park LLC  B3-8  B3-7  B3-6  Comment Letter B3, page 3Comment Set B3, cont. Wright Solar Park LLC  Comment Letter B3, page 4Comment Set B4 San Joaquin Council of Governments  B4-2  B4-1  Comment Letter B4, page 1Comment Set B4, cont. San Joaquin Council of Governments  B4-4  B4-3  B4-2 cont.  Comment Letter B4, page 2Comment Set B4, cont. San Joaquin Council of Governments  B4-6  B4-5  B4-4 cont.  Comment Letter B4, page 3Comment Set B4, cont. San Joaquin Council of Governments  B4-7  B4-6 cont.  Comment Letter B4, page 4Comment Set B5 Northern California Power Agency  B5-1  Comment Letter B5 Comment Set C1 Laura Sheppard and Beth Tackaberry  C1-4  C1-3  C1-2  C1-1  Comment Letter C1Comment Set C2 Beth Tackaberry  C2-2  C2-1  Comment Letter C2Comment Set C3 Jackson Family  C3-1  Comment Letter C3Comment Set C4 Dolores Kuhn 1 C4-1  C4-5  C4-4  C4-3  C4-2  Comment Letter C4, page 1Comment Set C4, cont. Dolores Kuhn 1 C4-8  C4-10  C4-9  C4-7  C4-6  Comment Letter C4, page 2Comment Set C5 Dolores Kuhn 2 C5-1  C5-5  C5-4 Bracket for Response C5-2Bracket for Response C5-3Bracket for Response C5-4C5-3  C5-2  Comment Letter C5 Comment Set D1 Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 1Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 2Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 3Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 4Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 5Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 6Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 7Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 8Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 9Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 10Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 11Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 12Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 13Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 14Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 15Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 16Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 17Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  D1-1  D1-2  Comment Letter D1, page 18Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos D1-3  D1-2 cont.  Comment Letter D1, page 19Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  D1-5  D1-4  D1-3 cont.  Comment Letter D1, page 20Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  D1-6  D1-5 cont.  Comment Letter D1, page 21Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos D1-7  D1-6 cont.  Comment Letter D1, page 22Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  D1-7 cont.  Comment Letter D1, page 23Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 24Comment Set D1, cont. Public Hearing – Los Banos  Comment Letter D1, page 25 Appendix M Draft Conformity Determination Draft Conformity Determination for the San Luis Transmission Project The Western Area Power Administration (Western) and the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority) are accepting comments on this Draft Conformity Determination during the next 30 days. Written comments can be provided by mail, email, or fax at the addresses listed below by April 25, 2016. Mail: Mr. Donald Lash, NEPA Document Manager Western Area Power Administration, Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630 Email: SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov Fax: (916) 353-4772 1. Introduction and Summary Section 176(c)(1) of the federal Clean Air Act (CAA) requires any agency within the Federal Government that engages in, supports, or in any way provides financial support for, licenses, or permits, or approves any activity, to demonstrate that the action conforms to the applicable State Implementation Plan (SIP) for achieving and maintaining the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for criteria pollutants before the action is otherwise approved (General Conformity rule). Western, a power marketing administration within the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), and the Authority, a California joint powers agency, prepared a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the proposed San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP). Western is the federal lead agency under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and the Authority is the State lead agency under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is a Cooperating Agency. The California Department of Water Resources is a Responsible Agency. The SLTP, if approved, would cause emissions of ozone precursors from sources that would be located in portions of California that do not attain the NAAQS for ozone. Because Western proposes to construct, operate, and maintain the SLTP, the action will be subject to the requirements of the federal Clean Air Act General Conformity rule for all nonattainment and maintenance areas affected by the direct and indirect emissions from the SLTP. This evaluation of General Conformity was performed for the affected nonattainment and maintenance areas in the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin (SJVAB) and the San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin. Criteria pollutant emissions generated in each area from activities associated with SLTP construction and operation were estimated and compared to the General Conformity de minimis thresholds to assess whether a conformity determination is required. The Draft EIS/EIR released by Western in July 2015 indicated that project-related emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) could exceed the General Conformity rule threshold rate applicable in the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin. Other criteria pollutant emissions would not occur at levels exceeding the threshold rates in either the SJVAB or the San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin. Because construction emissions of NOx would exceed the General Conformity threshold in years 2018 and 2019 in the SJVAB, the SLTP requires a General Conformity evaluation, and Western must make a conformity determination for NOx emitted during construction. This evaluation finds that the total of direct and indirect emissions from the SLTP will conform to the approved SIP because the ozone precursor emissions of NOx, which are subject to the conformity requirements, will be fully offset by reducing emissions of the same pollutant in the same nonattainment area. To achieve this, Western will fully offset its construction-phase NOx emissions through an enforceable measure that effects emissions reductions equal to or greater than the total of direct and indirect emissions from the action so that there is no net increase in NOx emissions.1 2. General Conformity Requirements The General Conformity rule is codified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 93 (40 CFR 93), Subpart , “Determining onformity of General Federal !ctions to State or Federal Implementation Plans.” The General onformity rule applies to all federal actions, except transportation-related programs and projects, which are subject to a separate rule promulgated by the U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT). As defined in the CAA, Title I, Section 176(c)(1), conformity means to uphold air quality goals for the purpose of eliminating or reducing the severity and number of violations of the NAAQS and achieving expeditious attainment of the NAAQS. Accordingly, a proposed action or activity achieves conformity if the associated pollutant emissions would not: • Cause or contribute to new violations of any NAAQS in any area; • Increase the frequency or severity of any existing violation of any NAAQS in any area; or • Delay timely attainment of any NAAQS or interim emission reductions or other milestones in any area. The General Conformity rule and associated guidance from the U.S. EPA (2010) and U.S. DOE (2000) establish the terms and procedures to be used in determining conformity. To summarize, in making a conformity determination, the federal agency must: • Follow certain reporting [§93.155] and public notice [§93.156] requirements and must consider the comments from any interested parties; • Demonstrate that one or more criteria for determining conformity are satisfied [§93.158]; • Follow specified procedures in preparing the analysis [§93.159]; and • Identify the measures necessary to mitigate impacts and the implementation schedule [§§93.160 and 93.163]. The federal General Conformity rule is also incorporated into local regulations. For instance, in 1994, the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District (SJVAPCD) adopted the federal General Conformity regulations within its Rule 9110, General Conformity. Although the federal General Conformity rule was updated by U.S. EPA in 2010, the SJVAPCD Rule 9110 includes the provisions that were established by U.S. EPA in 1994. Although it is outdated, the version of SJVAPCD Rule 9110 that was adopted by the SJVAPCD on October 20, 1994 was included in the SIP (April 23, 1999; 64 FR 19916). This General Conformity evaluation follows the federal requirements and procedures established in the version of the General Conformity rule (40 CFR 93 Subpart B) most recently revised by U.S. EPA on April 5, 2010 (75 FR 17254) and effective July 6, 2010. As specified by 40 CFR 93.158(a)(5)(iii). 2.1 Criteria for Determining Conformity The regulations allow several different ways of determining conformity [§93.158], including through comparisons with the emission budgets in the SIP, creating emissions offsets, or air quality modeling. Conformity can be demonstrated for a project if: • The emissions are specifically identified and accounted for in the SIP; • The State agency responsible for the SIP determines that the total emissions from the action, along with all other emissions in the area, will not exceed the SIP emission budget; • The State makes a written commitment to revise the SIP to include the emissions from the action; • The Metropolitan Planning Organization for the area determines that the emissions are included in the transportation plan or transportation improvement plan; • The emissions are fully offset by the reduction of emissions in the same nonattainment or maintenance area, or nearby area of equal or higher classification if the emissions impact the nonattainment or maintenance area; or • Air quality modeling demonstrates that the emissions will not cause or contribute to new violations of the standards or increase the frequency or severity of any existing violations of the standards. 2.2 Procedures for Conformity !nalyses The regulations specify the procedures to be used in each analysis of conformity [§93.159]. The evaluation must be: • Based on the latest planning assumptions; • Based on the latest and most accurate emission estimation techniques available; and • Based on the total of direct and indirect emissions from the action and must reflect emission scenarios that are expected to occur during: the attainment year specified in the SIP; the last year for which emissions are projected in the maintenance plan; or the year during which the total of direct and indirect emissions from the action is expected to be the greatest on an annual basis. 2.3 Reporting and Public Participation The regulations require Western to follow certain reporting [§93.155] and public notice [§93.156] requirements. The draft conformity determination must be available for 30 days of public comment, and Western must consider the comments on the draft conformity determination that are made by any interested party. The comments and responses to all the comments received on the draft conformity determination must be available upon request within 30 days of release of the final conformity determination. 3. Project Description Western proposes to construct, own, operate, and maintain approximately 95 miles of new transmission lines within easements ranging from 125 to 250 feet wide through Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties along the foothills of the Diablo Range in the western San Joaquin Valley. Western also would upgrade or expand its existing substations, make the necessary arrangements to upgrade or expand existing high-voltage substations, or construct new substations to accommodate the interconnections of these new transmission lines. The Final EIS/EIR Chapter 2 (Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives) provides additional detail and defines an Agency Preferred Alternative. The conformity determination is only required for the federal agency-approved alternative. This Draft Conformity Determination for the SLTP is based on the Agency Preferred Alternative, which comprises the Proposed Project in the North, Central and San Luis Segments and the Billy Wright Road Alternative in the South Segment. 4. Project Emissions The greatest annual rates of emissions caused by the SLTP would be during construction, which would occur during 2018, 2019, and 2020, based on the current construction plan described in Final EIS/EIR Section 2.1.3 (assumptions are presented in Final EIS/EIR Appendix I, Air Quality Emission Calculations). All project-related emissions are quantified based on the best available forecast of activities. This analysis uses the California Emissions Estimator Model (CalEEMod; version 2013.2.2) software developed by the California Air Pollution Control Officers Association (CAPCOA). This is the most recent version of the CalEEMod software, and it relies on mobile source emission factors from the Air Resources Board (ARB) OFFROAD inventory and EMFAC2011 models. Where project-specific parameters are not yet defined, default and typical settings from CalEEMod are used. Default emission factors used in this analysis appear in the alEEMod User’s Guide Appendix D (July 2013). The Final EIS/EIR (Appendix I) includes detailed air quality emission calculations and the CalEEMod output reports. 4.1 Construction Emissions The geophysical location of construction emissions and all alternatives would occur in the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin, and only a limited portion of the emissions related to construction of the new Tracy East Substation would occur in the jurisdiction of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD), adjacent to the SJVAPCD boundary. Construction emissions would not exceed the General Conformity rule thresholds that apply in the BAAQMD or be likely to contribute to violations of air quality standards in the BAAQMD. Based on the preliminary estimate of total construction emissions shown in the Final EIS/EIR and in the following Table M-1 (Estimated Construction-Phase Emissions), construction emissions could exceed the NOx threshold for General Conformity in the SJVAB. Table M-1. Estimated Construction-Phase Emissions (tons per year) Proposed Project Totals (by Calendar Year) NOx VOC Off-Road Equipment 23.5 1.2 On-Road Vehicles 2.6 0.4 Year 1 (2018) 26.1 1.6 Off-Road Equipment 23.5 1.2 On-Road Vehicles 2.5 0.4 Year 2 (2019) 26.0 1.5 Off-Road Equipment 3.5 0.2 On-Road Vehicles 0.4 0.1 Aircraft 2.7 3.3 Year 3 (2020) 6.6 3.5 Proposed Project Totals (all years) 58.8 6.6 PM10 4.8 25.1 29.9 5.6 33.6 39.1 0.9 8.8 0.1 9.7 78.8 PM2.5 3.0 2.6 5.6 3.3 3.5 6.8 0.5 0.9 0.1 1.5 14.0 CO 28.7 5.0 33.7 28.5 5.0 33.6 4.1 0.7 4.1 9.0 76.2 Table M-1. Estimated Construction-Phase Emissions (tons per year) Proposed Project Totals (by Calendar Year) NOx VOC PM10 PM2.5 CO Billy Wright Road Alternative (additional to Proposed Project) 1.0 0.2 2.3 0.3 1.3 Agency Preferred Alternative Totals (all years) 59.7 6.8 81.1 14.3 77.5 General Conformity Threshold for San Joaquin Valley Air Basin 10 10 100 100 — Does Proposed Project or Agency Preferred Alternative Potentially Exceed Conformity Threshold? Yes No No No — Source: Final EIS/EIR Appendix I. Note: .—. means no threshold applies. Constructing all segments of the SLTP simultaneously, while unlikely, could result in an exceedance of the General Conformity rule applicability threshold for NOx in the region. Details supporting the air quality emission calculations are presented in the Final EIS/EIR (Appendix I). 4.2 Operation Emissions During operation, the SLTP would involve routine inspection and maintenance requirements that would not notably increase emissions. The negligible normal operating emissions would comply with SJVAPCD rules and regulations. Therefore, it has been determined that the normal operating emissions do not trigger further general conformity analysis. Details supporting the air quality emission calculations are presented in the Final EIS/EIR (Appendix I). 5. Status of !pplicable State Implementation Plans The federal Clean Air Act requires each ozone nonattainment area to develop an emission inventory as the basis of a SIP that demonstrates how the area will attain the standards by specified dates or maintain attainment. This discussion discusses recent ozone plans and the relevant NOx inventories. Each applicable SIP includes a planning forecast horizon year and emissions inventory for the forecast attainment year. Historically, ozone planning requirements focused on attaining the federal 1-hour ozone standard that was revoked in 2005, and these plans remain partially in place. Current and upcoming planning efforts focus on attaining an 8-hour ozone standard that is more human health protective than the 1-hour ozone standard. 2004 1-hour Ozone Plan and 2014 Attainment Demonstration Request In the SJVAPCD jurisdiction, U.S. EPA approved the 2004 Extreme Ozone Attainment Demonstration Plan for 1-hour ozone on March 8, 2010. However, U.S. EPA later withdrew the approval on November 9, 2012. Although the 2004 Extreme Ozone Attainment Plan is based on the federal 1-hour ozone standard that was revoked in 2005, many remaining 1-hour ozone plan requirements continue to apply to the SJVAB, and these must be addressed in revisions necessary for the 8-hour ozone plan. On May 6, 2014, the SJVAPCD submitted a formal request that the U.S. EPA determine that the SJVAB has attained the federal 1-hour ozone standard. This attainment designation request has not yet been acted upon, and U.S. EPA indicates that the previous classification of the SJVAB as an extreme nonattainment area under the 1-hour ozone standard and planning requirements for the 1-hour ozone standard continue to apply (U.S. EPA, 2015). 2007 8-hour Ozone Plan and Upcoming 2016 8-hr Ozone Plan The SJV!P D’s Governing oard adopted the 2007 8-hour Ozone Plan and its amendments in 2007 and 2008, and 2011 to demonstrate attainment of the 1997 ozone standard. This SIP was approved by ARB and U.S. EPA on March 1, 2012. The approval of requirements for transportation control strategies was subsequently withdrawn by U.S. EPA on November 9, 2012 (U.S. EPA, 2015). The U.S. EPA has not established area designations for the 2015 8-hour ozone standard. The plan to address the 2008 ozone standard is under development now and due to be submitted by SJVAPCD to U.S. EPA in July 2016. The most-recent planning forecasts for ozone precursor emissions inventories will be presented within the SJV!P D’s upcoming 2016 Ozone Plan. However, these inventories are not likely to be approved by U.S. EPA before Western makes a decision on the SLTP. Other Attainment Plans Other attainment demonstration or maintenance plans for pollutants in the SJVAPCD include the following plans previously adopted by the SJV!P D’s Governing oard or ARB: • 2015 Plan for the 1997 PM2.5 Standard • 2012 PM2.5 Plan • 2007 PM10 Maintenance Plan • 2008 PM2.5 Plan • 1996 Carbon Monoxide Redesignation Request and Maintenance Plan for Ten Federal Planning Areas Along with being an ozone precursor, NOx is a PM2.5 precursor and, accordingly, the recent PM2.5 planning inventories include NOx. In Appendix B of the 2015 Plan for the 1997 PM2.5 Standard, the SJVAPCD adopted NOx inventories for each calendar year including 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020. The 2015 Plan for the 1997 PM2.5 Standard appears to provide the most recent NOx inventory adopted by SJVAPCD as of the time of this General Conformity evaluation. 6. Conformity !nalysis The Draft EIS/EIR released by Western (July 2015) and Section 4 (Project Emissions) of this Draft Conformity Determination, indicate that construction-related emissions of NOx could exceed the General Conformity rule threshold rate applicable in the SJVAB. Accordingly, the SLTP requires a General Conformity evaluation for NOx. 6.1 Comparison of Emissions The SJVAPCD NOx inventory contains emission budgets for off-road equipment used in construction projects in the SJVAB. These emissions are not designated to specific projects and some are associated with projected regional growth. The emissions caused by the proposed SLTP are not specifically identified in the SIP. Additionally, the proposed SLTP emissions will not be specifically identified in the upcoming (2016) ozone plan because the SJVAPCD developed the inventory before Western commenced the General Conformity evaluation. The portions of the NOx inventory that are allocated to off-road equipment, on-road vehicles, and aircraft throughout the SJVAB are shown in Table M-2 (SJVAB NOx Planning Inventory). Table M-2. SJVAB NOx Planning Inventory (annual average, tons per day) Mobile Source Category 2017 2018 2019 2020 Off-road Equipment Subcategory 18.1 16.9 16.1 15.9 On-Road Motor Vehicles Subcategory 118.9 110.2 104.4 96.8 Aircraft Subcategory 2.5 2.5 4.6 4.6 San Joaquin Valley Air Basin NOx Planning Inventory 139.5 129.6 125.1 117.3 (subcategories above) Agency Preferred Alternative Total NOx --- 0.114 tons per day (average during construction) (average tons per day, over 525 days) Agency Preferred Alternative (portion of subcategories above) --- 0.09% 0.09% 0.10% Source: SJVAPCD 2015 Plan for the 1997 PM2.5 Standard (Table B-2). Emissions from SLTP construction would be limited to approximately 0.1 percent of the inventory of relevant regionally budgeted source categories. However, the proposed construction emissions are not specifically accounted for in the planning inventory. Because SLTP emissions are not “specifically identified and accounted for in the SIP,” Western cannot use this method as a way of determining conformity [§93.158(a)(1)]. Because the SLTP construction emissions are not specifically identified or accounted for in the SIP budgets, and the budgets may not be revised in a manner to accommodate the SLTP, Western proposes to fully offset the construction-phase NOx emissions in order to demonstrate conformity [§93.158(a)(5)(iii)]. 6.2 Offsetting Emissions To fully offset the construction NOx emissions, Western must implement an enforceable measure that effects emissions reductions equal to or greater than the total of direct and indirect emissions from the action so that there is no net increase in NOx emissions [§93.158(a)(5)(iii)]. The emission offsets to be used for the purpose of a conformity determination [§93.158] must be: emissions reductions which are quantifiable, consistent with the applicable SIP attainment and reasonable further progress demonstrations, surplus to reductions required by, and credited to, other applicable SIP provisions, enforceable at both the State and Federal levels, and permanent within the timeframe specified by the program. [§93.152] Options for mitigating in the form of emission offsets include: • Surrendering traditional Emission Reduction Credits (ERCs); • Implementing an agreement or other legally binding instrument to fund an SJVAPCD-administered emission reduction incentive program; and • Creating surplus emission reductions through other incentive programs, such as a heavy-duty engine program like the Carl Moyer program or the Goods Movement emission reduction program. Traditional ERCs could be held or retired to demonstrate conformity [§93.158(a)(5)(i)(A)], but this would require Western to obtain ERCs that are otherwise highly valuable for offsetting new stationary sources. Western does not propose to acquire traditional ERCs or identify a source for potentially creating ERCs because the nature and timeframe of the proposed emissions would be limited to construction activities, rather than from stationary sources. Traditional ERCs in the SJVAPCD are better suited for use in the New Source Review program for stationary sources. Western is not proposing to mitigate with ERCs. For mitigating the types of emissions sources normally associated with construction activities such as those of the proposed SLTP, the SJVAPCD has well-established incentive grant programs. Western proposes to finance and verify off-site reductions through an SJVAPCD-administered incentive program. Mitigation will be in a quantity sufficient to fully offset construction NOx emissions, and the timing of reductions will be contemporaneous with SLTP construction activities [§93.163]. 6.3 Description of NOx Reductions Western consulted with SJVAPCD staff regarding Western’s proposal to finance and verify off-site reductions through an SJVAPCD-administered incentive program. SJVAPCD staff confirmed the feasibility of achieving the offsets in a letter to Western dated February 3, 2016. The following are examples of how the SJV!P D could use Western’s funds achieve surplus NOx reductions in SJVAB to mitigate SLTP emissions: • Grants to businesses and municipalities to replace old trucks with new low-emission trucks; • Grants to businesses and municipalities to electrify or replace existing diesel-powered off-road equipment; • Grants to residents to replace fireplaces and non-certified wood burning stoves with clean-burning EPA certified units; • Grants to residents through the District’s Tune-In-Tune-Up program to repair older high-polluting vehicles; • Grants to residents to purchase cleaner vehicles; or • Grants to school districts to replace older and high-polluting school buses. 6.4 Conformity Mitigation The conformity mitigation for the proposed SLTP will achieve verifiable off-site emission reductions in sufficient quantities so that there is no net increase in NOx during construction. Creating 60 tons of offsite NOx reductions is a key requirement of implementing Mitigation Measure AQ-1, as defined in the Final EIS/EIR. The Final EIS/EIR Mitigation Measure AQ-1 will ensure that the conformity mitigation is measurable and enforceable, through the following key steps: • Prior to commencing construction, Western will finance and verify implementation of additional offsite emission reduction programs to offset SLTP construction emissions. • Western commits to enter into an agreement or other legally binding instrument with the SJVAPCD to implement 60 tons of NOx emission reductions, as necessary for the Agency Preferred Alternative. • The SJVAPCD may administer the emission reduction projects on the behalf of Western. • Western may require the SJVAPCD to prepare a report demonstrating that the emission reduction projects have achieved 60 tons of successful and actual NOx reductions to demonstrate General Conformity. The Final EIS/EIR and this Draft Conformity Determination assume that Mitigation Measure AQ-1 will be implemented. The mitigation describes Western’s intent to enter into an agreement to fund off-site emission reduction projects. Because completing the offsets will require action by the SJVAPCD and its Governing Board, Western will need a commitment from SJV!P D to implement Western’s proposed mitigation, and this commitment may be in the form of a formal agreement or other legally binding instrument. Preliminarily, Western expects the agreement to include: • Western’s commitment to finance and verify 60 tons of NOx emissions reductions for General Conformity and for CEQA purposes, as necessary for implementation of the Agency Preferred Alternative. • Separate from General Conformity, the agreement will also express Western’s commitment to achieve 82 tons of PM10 emissions reductions for CEQA purposes, as necessary for implementation of the Agency Preferred Alternative. • A commitment by SJVAPCD to accept payment by Western of the mitigation fee to be used for air quality benefit programs to reduce NOx and PM10 for General Conformity and for CEQA purposes, preferably in the Northern Region of the SJVAPCD, which is San Joaquin County, Stanislaus County, and Merced County. • A commitment by SJVAPCD to demonstrate that the emission reduction projects achieve reductions that are real, surplus, quantifiable and enforceable [as emissions offsets are defined in §93.152] for the duration of SLTP construction, and a commitment by SJVAPCD to provide the demonstration to Western in a report. • Western’s commitment to pay the air quality mitigation fee to the SJV!P D no later than five months prior to commencing construction. • The actual amount of the mitigation fee for General Conformity and for CEQA purposes is yet to be determined. The amounts may be similar those specified in SJVAPCD Rule 9510 (Indirect Source Review): $9,350 per ton of NOx reductions; $9,011 per ton of PM10. The sum may include a 5 percent administration fee to cover the SJV!P D’s cost of administering the benefit programs. Accordingly, the fee for SLTP emission reductions would be approximately $1,300,000, and the 5 percent administration fee would be approximately $65,000; the total sum required of Western would be approximately $1,365,000. 6.5 Implementation Schedule The Record of Decision would contain stipulations to assure that the SLTP and the implementation of the emission reductions would meet conformity requirements for the SJVAB. Construction could not begin until Western and SJVAPCD execute an agreement to implement and verify the emission reductions, and the reductions would occur after Western pays the mitigation fee. Guidelines for implementing General Conformity in the NEPA process (U.S. DOE, 2000) show that Western’s Record of Decision (ROD) must briefly describe the conformity determination. The ROD will: • Include the commitments to implement the mitigation measures and offsets needed to achieve conformity; and • Reference the preparation of a NEPA mitigation action plan to implement the conformity mitigation and the offset commitments. The ROD may be issued before Western makes a Final Conformity Determination for SLTP, but activities causing emissions may not commence without enforceable mitigation. In the event that Western has not made a Final Conformity Determination at the time of issuing the ROD for SLTP, the decision could not be implemented (i.e., construction could not begin) until after the Final Conformity Determination and responses to public comments on this Draft Conformity Determination are issued (U.S. DOE, 2000). The commitment to achieve verifiable off-site emission reductions must be in place before emissions from the action start. Western may make implementation of its decision contingent upon establishing a commitment by SJVAPCD to implement the conformity mitigation or upon executing an agreement to fulfill the mitigation,2 after which the Final Conformity Determination could be made. As the federal lead agency under NEPA, Western is required to enforce compliance with all mitigation measures contained in the ROD. 7. Finding of Conformity This Draft Conformity Determination finds that the ozone precursor emissions of NOx that are subject to the conformity requirements will be fully offset by reducing emissions of the same pollutant in the same nonattainment area. To achieve this, Western will fully offset its construction-phase NOx emissions through an enforceable measure that effects emissions reductions equal to or greater than the total of direct and indirect emissions from the action so that there is no net increase in NOx emissions. Prior to determining that the action is in conformity, Western must obtain a written commitment from SJVAPCD to implement off-site emission reduction projects on the behalf of Western, and the SJVAPCD must commit to demonstrating that the emission reduction projects have achieved 60 tons of successful and actual NOx reductions, for implementation of the Agency Preferred Alternative. Upon obtaining these commitments, Western may make a positive conformity determination for the SLTP. Responses to all comments received on this Draft Conformity Determination will be presented in the Final Conformity Determination. 8. References CalEEMod (California Emissions Estimator Model). 2013 CalEEMod User’s Guide. Appendix A and Appendix D. Version 2013.2.2. July 2013. U.S. DOE. 2000. Clean Air Act General Conformity Requirements and the National Environmental Policy Act Process. U.S. EPA. 2010. General Conformity Training Module. Available at: http://www3.epa.gov/airquality/ genconform/training/files/General_Conformity_Training_Manual.pdf. U.S. EPA. 2015. Status of SIP Requirements. Available at: http://www3.epa.gov/airquality/urbanair/ sipstatus/reports/ca_areabypoll.html. 40 CFR 93.160(b) and (f); and U.S. EPA General Conformity Training Module, Section 3.5.4. (Schedule for demonstration measures). [http://www3.epa.gov/airquality/genconform/training/03_mod_3_Sec_3-5.html] FINAL Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact ReportSan Luis Transmission ProjectDOE/EIS-0496SCH#2013112059Western Area Power AdministrationSan Luis & Delta-Mendota Water AuthorityMarch 2016FINAL Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report San Luis Transmission Project DOE/EIS-0496 SCH#2013112059 March 2016 Western Area Power Administration San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority Cover Sheet Type of Statement: Final Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report for the San Luis Transmission Project Lead Federal Agency: Western Area Power Administration Lead State Agency: San Luis & Delta Mendota Water Authority Cooperating Agency: U.S. Bureau of Reclamation Responsible Agency: California Department of Water Resources Location: Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California EIS Number: DOE/EIS-0496 California State Clearinghouse Number: 2013112059  Contacts:  Mr. Donald Lash Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region 114 Parkshore Drive Folsom, CA 95630 Fax: (916) 353-4772 Email: SLTPEIS-EIR@wapa.gov Ms. Carol M. Borgstrom U.S. Department of Energy Office of NEPA Policy and Compliance (GC-54) 1000 Independence Avenue SW Washington, DC 20585 Telephone: (202) 586-4600 or (800) 472-2756 Websites: www.wapa.gov/sn/environment/SanLuisTransmissionProject.asp www.sltpeis-eir.com Abstract: Western Area Power Administration (Western) and the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority) prepared an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the proposed San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP) in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) entered into a contract with Pacific Gas & Electric Company (PG&E) in 1965 for power transmission and distribution service between Western’s Tracy Substation and Reclamation’s San Luis Unit (SLU) facilities. The existing transmission contract with PG&E expires in March 2016, and PG&E has stated that it will not be renewed. Without the contract or a federal transmission line to serve the primary SLU facilities, the federal government will have to take transmission service under the California Independent System Operator Tariff, which would substantially increase Reclamation’s transmission costs, which are paid by its water service contractors, including members of the Authority. Reclamation submitted a transmission service request to Western to consider various transmission service arrangements, including the construction of new federal transmission lines for Reclamation’s continued delivery of federal water after the PG&E contract expires. In October 2013, an eligible Western transmission customer submitted a transmission service request to Western for transmission service within the same corridor as requested by Reclamation. Western is evaluating both requests jointly in order to determine if it can satisfy Reclamation’s need and the eligible customer’s request with a single project. Therefore, Western proposes to construct, operate, and maintain the San Luis Transmission Project, which comprises 95 miles of new transmission lines within easements ranging from 125 to 250 feet wide along the foothills of the Diablo Range in the western San Joaquin Valley, California. Additional components of the SLTP would include two new 500-kV substations, substation improvements, communication facilities, improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads to facilitate construction activities. Contents Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................................................................................. ES-1 ES.1 Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................................................................... ES-1 ES.2 Overview of the Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................... ES-1 ES.3 Purpose and Need and Project Objectives .................................................................................................................................... ES-2 ES.4 Summary of Public Involvement Activities .................................................................................................................................... ES-4 ES.5 Design and Engineering Issues ................................................................................................................................................................ ES-5 ES.56 Impacts of the Proposed Project ........................................................................................................................................................... ES-6 ES.67 Alternatives to the Proposed Project ................................................................................................................................................ ES-7 ES.78 Summary of Draft EIS/EIR Conclusions: Environmentally Preferred Alternative ........................................... ES-7 ES.89 Impact Summary Tables ............................................................................................................................................................................ ES-10 Chapter 1 – Introduction ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1-1 1.1 Project Overview .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1-1 1.2 Purpose and Need ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 1-1 1.3 Project Objectives................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1-4 1.4 Agency Background ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1-4  1.4.1 Western Area Power Administration .............................................................................................................................. 1-4  1.4.2 San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority ............................................................................................................. 1-5  1.4.3 Bureau of Reclamation ............................................................................................................................................................... 1-5  1.4.4 California Department of Water Resources .............................................................................................................. 1-6 1.5 Public Participation............................................................................................................................................................................................. 1-6  1.5.1 Scoping .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1-6  1.5.2 Public Review of the Draft EIS/EIR .................................................................................................................................... 1-7  1.5.3 Other Public Participation Efforts ...................................................................................................................................... 1-7 1.6 Revisions to the Draft EIS/EIR .................................................................................................................................................................... 1-7 Chapter 2 – Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives........................................................................ 2-1 2.1 Proposed Project .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2-1  2.1.1 Overview ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2-1  2.1.2 Project Components ..................................................................................................................................................................... 2-4  2.1.3 Construction ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2-5  2.1.4 Operation and Maintenance............................................................................................................................................... 2-13  2.1.5 Decommissioning ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2-14  2.1.6 Environmental Protection Measures and Construction Standards ..................................................... 2-14 2.2 Alternatives Development ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2-18  2.2.1 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 2-18  2.2.2 Alternatives Considered and Eliminated ................................................................................................................... 2-24 2.3 No Action/No Project Alternative ....................................................................................................................................................... 2-24 2.4 Comparison of Alternatives ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2-26  2.4.1 Regulatory Requirements for Alternatives Comparison .............................................................................. 2-26  2.4.2 Alternatives Comparison Methods ................................................................................................................................ 2-27  2.4.3 Comparison Among Corridor Action Alternatives ............................................................................................. 2-28  2.4.4 Environmentally Preferred Corridor Alternative vs. No Action/No Project Alternative  2.4.5 Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative  2.4.4 Agency Preferred Alternative ............................................................................................................................................. 2-35 Chapter 3 – Affected Environment ............................................................................................................................................................ 3-1 3.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 3-1  3.1.1 Resources Considered and Eliminated .......................................................................................................................... 3-1 3.2 Agriculture ................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 3-2  3.2.1 Proposed Project ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3-2  3.2.2 Corridor Alternatives .................................................................................................................................................................... 3-9 3.3 Air Quality and Climate Change ............................................................................................................................................................ 3-11  3.3.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-11  3.3.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-16 3.4 Biological Resources ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-17  3.4.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-17  3.4.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-39 3.5 Cultural Resources ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-42  3.5.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-53  3.5.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-59 3.6 Environmental Justice ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-62  3.6.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-62  3.6.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-66 3.7 Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources ........................................................................................................................................... 3-68  3.7.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-68  3.7.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-77 3.8 Land Use ................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-79  3.8.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-79  3.8.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-82 3.9 Noise and Vibration ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3-84  3.9.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-84  3.9.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-89 3.10 Paleontological Resources ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-91  3.10.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-91  3.10.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-92 3.11 Public Health and Safety ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3-93  3.11.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-93  3.11.2 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 3-97 3.12 Recreation ............................................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-98  3.12.1 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3-98  3.12.2 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-103 3.13 Socioeconomics ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-104  3.13.1 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3-104  3.13.2 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-106 3.14 Traffic and Transportation ...................................................................................................................................................................... 3-108  3.14.1 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3-108  3.14.2 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-116 3.15 Visual Resources ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 3-118  3.15.1 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3-118  3.15.2 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-122 3.16 Water Resources and Floodplains .................................................................................................................................................... 3-124  3.16.1 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3-124  3.16.2 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-133 Chapter 4 – Environmental Consequences ....................................................................................................................................... 4-1 4.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 4-1  4.1.1 Environmental Consequences Approach ..................................................................................................................... 4-1 4.2 Agriculture ................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 4-4  4.2.1 Thresholds of Significance ....................................................................................................................................................... 4-4  4.2.2 Environmental Protection Measures .............................................................................................................................. 4-4  4.2.3 Proposed Project ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4-4  4.2.4 Corridor Alternatives .................................................................................................................................................................... 4-6  4.2.5 No Action/No Project Alternative ...................................................................................................................................... 4-9 4.3 Air Quality and Climate Change ............................................................................................................................................................ 4-10  4.3.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-10  4.3.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-11  4.3.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-11  4.3.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-19  4.3.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-21 4.4 Biological Resources ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-22  4.4.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-22  4.4.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-22  4.4.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-25  4.4.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-58  4.4.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-61 4.5 Cultural Resources ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-62  4.5.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-62  4.5.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-62  4.5.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-63  4.5.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-68  4.5.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-70 4.6 Environmental Justice ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-71  4.6.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-71  4.6.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-71  4.6.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-71  4.6.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-72  4.6.5 No Action/No Project Alternative ................................................................................................................................... 4-72 4.7 Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources ........................................................................................................................................... 4-73  4.7.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-73  4.7.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-73  4.7.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-74  4.7.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-76  4.7.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-77 4.8 Land Use ................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-78  4.8.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-78  4.8.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-78  4.8.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-78  4.8.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-81  4.8.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-82 4.9 Noise and Vibration ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4-83  4.9.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-83  4.9.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-83  4.9.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-83  4.9.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-88  4.9.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-89 4.10 Paleontological Resources ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-90  4.10.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-90  4.10.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-90  4.10.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-90  4.10.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-93  4.10.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-93 4.11 Public Health and Safety ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4-94  4.11.1 Thresholds of Significance .................................................................................................................................................... 4-94  4.11.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................... 4-94  4.11.3 Proposed Project .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-94  4.11.4 Corridor Alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................. 4-99  4.11.5 No Action/No Project ................................................................................................................................................................ 4-99 4.12 Recreation ............................................................................................................................................................................................................ 4-100  4.12.1 Thresholds of Significance ................................................................................................................................................. 4-100  4.12.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................ 4-100  4.12.3 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-100  4.12.4 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 4-104  4.12.5 No Action/No Project ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-105 4.13 Socioeconomics ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-106  4.13.1 Thresholds of Significance ................................................................................................................................................. 4-106  4.13.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................ 4-106  4.13.3 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-106  4.13.4 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 4-109  4.13.5 No Action/No Project ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-109 4.14 Traffic and Transportation ...................................................................................................................................................................... 4-110  4.14.1 Thresholds of Significance ................................................................................................................................................. 4-110  4.14.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................ 4-110  4.14.3 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-110  4.14.4 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 4-113  4.14.5 No Action/No Project ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-113 4.15 Visual Resources ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 4-114  4.15.1 Thresholds of Significance ................................................................................................................................................. 4-114  4.15.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................ 4-114  4.15.3 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-114  4.15.4 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 4-120  4.15.5 No Action/No Project ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-124 4.16 Water Resources and Floodplains .................................................................................................................................................... 4-125  4.16.1 Thresholds of Significance ................................................................................................................................................. 4-125  4.16.2 Environmental Protection Measures ........................................................................................................................ 4-125  4.16.3 Proposed Project ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4-126  4.16.4 Corridor Alternatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 4-129  4.16.5 No Action/No Project ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-130 4.17 Cumulative Effects Analysis ................................................................................................................................................................... 4-131  4.17.1 Planning Influences in the Project Area .................................................................................................................. 4-133  4.17.2 Agriculture ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-134  4.17.3 Air Quality and Climate Change .................................................................................................................................... 4-134  4.17.4 Biological Resources ............................................................................................................................................................... 4-135  4.17.5 Cultural Resources ................................................................................................................................................................... 4-136  4.17.6 Environmental Justice ........................................................................................................................................................... 4-137  4.17.7 Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources.................................................................................................................... 4-137  4.17.8 Land Use ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-137  4.17.9 Noise .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-138  4.17.10 Paleontological Resources ................................................................................................................................................. 4-139  4.17.11 Public Health and Safety ..................................................................................................................................................... 4-139  4.17.12 Recreation ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-139  4.17.13 Socioeconomics .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4-140  4.17.14 Traffic and Transportation ................................................................................................................................................. 4-140  4.17.15 Visual Resources ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4-141  4.17.16 Water Resources and Floodplains ............................................................................................................................... 4-142 4.18 Unavoidable Adverse Impacts ............................................................................................................................................................. 4-143 4.19 Short-term Uses Versus Long-term Productivity ................................................................................................................. 4-143 4.20 Irreversible/Irretrievable Commitment of Resources ...................................................................................................... 4-144 4.21 Growth Inducement .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-144 4.22 Energy Conservation ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4-145 Chapter 5 – Consultation and Coordination .................................................................................................................................... 5-1 Chapter 6 – Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program ......................................................................................... 6-1 6.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 6-1 6.2 Mitigation Implementation and Monitoring ................................................................................................................................. 6-1 Chapter 7 – Preparers and Reviewers .................................................................................................................................................... 7-1 7.1 Contractor Disclosure Statement ........................................................................................................................................................... 7-3 Chapter 8 – Recipients of the Draft EIS/EIR...................................................................................................................................... 8-1 8.1 Agencies and Organizations ........................................................................................................................................................................ 8-1 8.2 Individuals .................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 8-3 8.3 Elected Officials ..................................................................................................................................................................................................... 8-7 Chapter 9 – References ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 9-1 Tables Table ES-1 Significant and Unmitigable Impacts of the Proposed Project ........................................................ ES-10 Table ES-2 Significant but Mitigable Impacts of the Proposed Project ................................................................ ES-11 Table 2-1 Typical Structure Dimensions .......................................................................................................................................... 2-5 Table 2-2 SLTP Proposed Construction Schedule ..................................................................................................................... 2-5 Table 2-3 Typical Ground Disturbance for Construction Activities ............................................................................ 2-9 Table 2-4 Typical Personnel and Equipment ................................................................................................................................ 2-9 Table 2-5 Environmental Protection Measures ...................................................................................................................... 2-14 Table 2-6 Alternatives by Segment ................................................................................................................................................... 2-18 Table 2-7 Alternatives Considered and Eliminated ............................................................................................................. 2-25 Table 2-8 Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: Central Segment ................................... 2-30 Table 2-9 Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (500-kV) ........... 2-30 Table 2-10 Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (70-kV) .............. 2-32 Table 2-11 Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: South Segment ....................................... 2-33 Table 2-12 Alternatives Comparison Summary ......................................................................................................................... 2-37 Table 3.2-1 Number, Land Area, Average Size, and Harvested Crops of Farms by County ........................ 3-2 Table 3.2-2 Cropland Classification Types within the Study Area ................................................................................... 3-3 Table 3.2-3 California Department of Conservation Farmland Categories .............................................................. 3-3 Table 3.2-4 Important Farmland Acreages – Proposed Project ........................................................................................ 3-4 Table 3.3-1 National and California Ambient Air Quality Standards .......................................................................... 3-12 Table 3.3-2 San Joaquin Valley Attainment Status ................................................................................................................... 3-12 Table 3.3-3 BAAQMD Attainment Status for BAAQMD ........................................................................................................ 3-13 Table 3.3-4 SJVAB Criteria Pollutant Data, 2011-2013 .......................................................................................................... 3-13 Table 3.4-1 Special-Status Plants and Critical Habitat that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area ...................................................................................................... 3-22 Table 3.4-2 Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area .......................................................... 3-26 Table 3.4-3 Conservation Easements .................................................................................................................................................. 3-37 Table 3.5-1 Resources within Proposed Project and National/California Register Status ....................... 3-55 Table 3.5-2 Resources within Project Alternatives and National/California Register Status ................. 3-60 Table 3.6-1 Study Area Minority Population Profile by Census Block Group ...................................................... 3-63 Table 3.6-2 Study Area Low-Income Population Profile by Census Block .............................................................. 3-66 Table 3.9-1 Summary of Acoustical Terms ...................................................................................................................................... 3-84 Table 3.9-2 Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Environment............................................................... 3-88 Table 3.9-3 Residential Noise Limits by County .......................................................................................................................... 3-89 Table 3.11-1 Fire Stations in the Project Area ................................................................................................................................. 3-94 Table 3.11-2 Typical 60 Hertz Magnetic Field Values from Common Electrical Devices .............................. 3-96 Table 3.12-1 Designated Use Areas Within the San Luis Reservoir SRA.................................................................. 3-100 Table 3.12-2 Developed Campgrounds Within the San Luis Reservoir SRA ......................................................... 3-101 Table 3.13-1 Population Characteristics ............................................................................................................................................ 3-105 Table 3.13-2 Housing Characteristics................................................................................................................................................... 3-105 Table 3.13-3 Employment Characteristics ....................................................................................................................................... 3-106 Table 3.14-1 Public Paved Roads Crossed by the Proposed Project........................................................................... 3-113 Table 3.15-1 Visual Quality and Sensitivity of the Proposed Project ......................................................................... 3-120 Table 3.16-1 Designated Beneficial Uses for Surface Waters in the Proposed Project Study Area ...... 3-131 Table 4.2-1 Disturbance to Important Farmlands within the Project Study Area .............................................. 4-7 Table 4.2-2 Disturbance to Important Farmlands within Project Corridors ............................................................ 4-8 Table 4.3-1 EPA and Air District Emissions Thresholds ......................................................................................................... 4-10 Table 4.3-2 Estimated Construction-Phase Emissions ........................................................................................................... 4-12 Table 4.3-3 Sensitive Receptors in the Project Area ............................................................................................................... 4-15 Table 4.3-4 Estimated Construction-Phase GHG Emissions .............................................................................................. 4-19 Table 4.3-5 Patterson Pass Road Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions..................................................... 4-19 Table 4.3-6 Butts Road Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions ............................................................................ 4-20 Table 4.3-7 West of Cemetery Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions .......................................................... 4-20 Table 4.3-8 Billy Wright Road Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions ............................................................ 4-21 Table 4.4-1 Disturbance to Vegetation and Landforms in the Proposed Project Corridor ...................... 4-50 Table 4.5-1 Resources and Survey Coverage by Project Segment ............................................................................... 4-63 Table 4.5-2 Resources and Survey Coverage by Alternative ............................................................................................ 4-68 Table 4.9-1 Typical Noise Levels for Construction Equipment ........................................................................................ 4-84 Table 4.16-1 National Hydrography Dataset Streams Crossed By Segment ........................................................ 4-127 Table 4.16-2 National Hydrography Dataset Streams Crossed by Alternative .................................................. 4-129 Table 4.17-1 Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions that Occur in the Project Area .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4-132 Table 4.17-2 Planning Influences in the Project Area............................................................................................................. 4-133 Table 5-1 EIS/EIR Information Contacts ........................................................................................................................................... 5-1 Table 6-1 Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program ................................................................................................ 6-2 Table 7-1 Agency Preparers and Reviewers ................................................................................................................................. 7-1 Table 7-2 EIS/EIR Preparers ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7-2 Figures Figure 2-1 Project Overview ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2-2 Figure 2-2 SLTP Representative 500-kV Structure Types ..................................................................................................... 2-6 Figure 2-3 SLTP Representative 230-kV Structure Types ..................................................................................................... 2-7 Figure 2-4 SLTP Representative 70-kV Structure Types ........................................................................................................ 2-8 Figure 2-5 Typical Tower Construction and Wire Conductoring Activities and Equipment ................. 2-12 Figure 2-6a Proposed Project Segments ........................................................................................................................................... 2-19 Figure 2-6b Corridor Alternatives – Central Segment ............................................................................................................ 2-20 Figure 2-6c Corridor Alternatives – San Luis Segment........................................................................................................... 2-21 Figure 2-6d 70-kV Corridor Alternatives – San Luis Segment ........................................................................................... 2-22 Figure 2-6e Corridor Alternatives – South Segment ................................................................................................................ 2-23 Figure 2-7 Environmentally Preferred Corridor Action Alternative ......................................................................... 2-36 Figure 2-8 Agency Preferred Alternative ....................................................................................................................................... 2-38 Figure 3.2-1a Important Farmlands .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-5 Figure 3.2-1b Important Farmlands .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-6 Figure 3.2-1c Important Farmlands .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-7 Figure 3.2-1d Important Farmlands .............................................................................................................................................................. 3-8 Figure 3.6-1 Minority Population Distribution ............................................................................................................................... 3-64 Figure 3.6-2 Low-Income Population Distribution ...................................................................................................................... 3-65 Figure 3.7-1a Geologic Formations ............................................................................................................................................................ 3-69 Figure 3.7-1b Geologic Formations ............................................................................................................................................................ 3-70 Figure 3.7-1c Geologic Formations ............................................................................................................................................................ 3-71 Figure 3.7-1d Geologic Formations ............................................................................................................................................................ 3-72 Figure 3.7-2a Soil Orders .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-73 Figure 3.7-2b Soil Orders .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-74 Figure 3.7-2c Soil Orders .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-75 Figure 3.7-2d Soil Orders .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3-76 Figure 3.9-1 Typical Range of Common Sounds Heard in the Environment .......................................................... 3-86 Figure 3.12-1 Recreation Study Area ........................................................................................................................................................ 3-99 Figure 3.14-1a Regional Transportation Network .......................................................................................................................... 3-109 Figure 3.14-1b Regional Transportation Network .......................................................................................................................... 3-110 Figure 3.14-1c Regional Transportation Network .......................................................................................................................... 3-111 Figure 3.14-1d Regional Transportation Network .......................................................................................................................... 3-112 Figure 3.15-1 Scenic Resources .................................................................................................................................................................. 3-121 Figure 3.16-1 Hydrologic Subbasins and Watersheds .............................................................................................................. 3-125 Figure 3.16-2a Waterbodies in the Study Area ................................................................................................................................ 3-127 Figure 3.16-2b Waterbodies in the Study Area ................................................................................................................................ 3-128 Figure 3.16-2c Waterbodies in the Study Area ................................................................................................................................ 3-129 Figure 3.16-2d Waterbodies in the Study Area ................................................................................................................................ 3-130 Figure 3.16-3 Groundwater Basins .......................................................................................................................................................... 3-132 Figure 4.15-1 KOP 1 – Butts Road Alternative Existing Conditions and Simulation ......................................... 4-121 Figure 4.15-2 KOP 2 – West of Cemetery Alternative Existing Conditions and Simulation ....................... 4-123 Appendices Appendix A Alternatives Screening Report Appendix B Scoping Report Appendix C Biological Survey Report Appendix D Operation & Maintenance Appendix E Disturbance Assumptions Appendix F Construction Standards Appendix G Paleontological Resources Report Appendix H SHPO Correspondence Appendix I Air Quality Emission Calculations Appendix J Consultant Disclosure Statements Appendix K Cost Analysis Appendix L Draft EIS/EIR Comments and Responses Appendix M Draft Conformity Determination  List of Acronyms ACE Altamont Corridor Express ACHP Advisory Council on Historic Preservation AM Amplitude modulation ASC Agricultural Services Center ASR Alternatives Screening Report BAAQMD Bay Area Air Quality Management District BGEPA Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act CAA Clean Air Act CAAQS California Ambient Air Quality Standards CAISO California Independent System Operator CAS Corrective Action Study CCWD Contra Costa Water District CDFW California Department of Fish and Wildlife CDPR California Department of Parks and Recreation CEQ Council on Environmental Quality CEQA California Environmental Quality Act CESA California Endangered Species Act CNDDB California Natural Diversity Database CNEL Community Noise Equivalent Level CNPS California Native Plant Society CO Carbon monoxide CORP California Outdoor Recreation Plan CRPR California Rare Plant Rank CVP Central Valley Project CVRWQCB Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board CWA Clean Water Act DATC Duke American Transmission Company DOC California Department of Conservation DOE U.S. Department of Energy DOE-PI U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Policy and International Affairs DOT U.S. Department of Transportation DPM Diesel particulate matter DTSC Department of Toxic Substances Control DWR Department of Water Resources ECAP East County Area Plan ECSP East County Specific Plan EDD Employment Development Department EIR Environmental Impact Report EIS Environmental Impact Statement EMF Electromagnetic Field EPA Environmental Protection Agency EPM Environmental Protection Measure FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency FESA Federal Endangered Species Act FM Frequency modulation FMMP Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program FP Foothill Pasture FPPA Farmland Protection Policy Act GA General aviation GHG Greenhouse gas HAP Hazardous Air Pollutant HCP Habitat Conservation Plan HR Hydrologic Region HRA Health Risk Assessment HWCL Hazardous Waste Control Law IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change JUF Joint Use Facility KOP Key Observation Point LOS Level of Service LPA Large Parcel Agriculture MBTA Migratory Bird Treaty Act MLD Most Likely Descendant MMRP Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program MOA Memorandum of Agreement MW Megawatt NAAQS National Ambient Air Quality Standards NAHC Native American Heritage Commission NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASS National Agricultural Statistics Service NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NFIP National Flood Insurance Program NHD National Hydrography Dataset NHPA National Historic Preservation Act NMFS National Marine Fisheries Service NOA Notice of Availability NPPA Native Plant Protection Act NRCS Natural Resources Conservation Service NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory OATT Open Access Transmission Tariff OHP Office of Historic Preservation OHV Off-highway vehicle OS Open Space OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration PA Programmatic Agreement PAID Planned Agricultural Industrial Development PFYC Potential Fossil Yield Classification PM2.5 Fine particulate matter (less than 2.5 microns in diameter) PM10 Particulate matter (less than 10 microns in diameter) PPV Peak particle velocity PRC Public Resources Code PRPA Paleontological Resources Preservation Act PSMM Power System Maintenance Manual PSOM Power Systems Operations Manual PSSM Power System Safety Manual PV Photovoltaic RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act RMP/GP Resource Management Plan and General Plan ROD Record of Decision ROW Right-of-way RPO Regional Preservation Official RTP Regional Transportation Plan RWQCB Regional Water Quality Control Board SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition SDWA Safe Drinking Water Act SHPO State Historical Preservation Officer SIP State Implementation Plan SJMSCP San Joaquin County Multi-Species Conservation and Open Space Plan SJVAB San Joaquin Valley Air Basin SJVAPCD San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District SLTP San Luis Transmission Project SLU San Luis Unit SMARA Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 SNR Sierra Nevada Region SR State Route SRA State Recreation Area SSC Species of Special Concern ST Swainson’s hawk SVP Society of Vertebrate Professionals SWP State Water Project SWRCB State Water Resources Control Board TAC Transmission Access Charge TCP Traditional Cultural Property TDS Total dissolved solids TLV Threshold Limit Value TMDL Total maximum daily load UCMP University of California Museum of Paleontology UPRR Union Pacific Railroad UR Urban Reserve USACE U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture USEPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency USFWS U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service USGS U.S. Geological Survey UTM Universal Transverse Mercator VOC Volatile organic compound Executive Summary ES.1 Introduction The Western Area Power Administration (Western), a power marketing administration within the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), and the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a California joint powers agency, have prepared this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP or Proposed Project). In conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), this EIS/EIR is intended to inform decision makers, other agencies, and the public regarding the environmental and public safety effects that could result from construction, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning of the SLTP. Western is the federal lead agency under NEPA, and the Authority is the State lead agency under CEQA. The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is a NEPA Cooperating Agency. The California Department of Water Resources (DWR) is a CEQA Responsible Agency. The Draft EIS/EIR, as revised in this document, comments received during the public comment period, and written responses collectively comprise the Final EIS/EIR. Where the Draft EIS/EIR has been revised, the text has been marked in strikethrough for deletions and underline for additions. These revisions have been made in response to comments received on the Draft EIS/EIR, as presented in Appendix L. Portions of the Draft EIS/EIR were also revised for the purposes of clarifications, typographical corrections, and other editorial adjustments. ES.2 Overview of the Proposed Project The SLTP would consist of: . a new 500-kilovolt (kV) transmission line about 65 miles in length between the new Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations; . a new 230-kV transmission line about 3 miles in length between the new Los Banos West Substation and Western’s existing San Luis Substation; . a new 230-kV transmission line about 20 miles in length between Western’s existing San Luis Substation and Western’s existing Dos Amigos Substation or a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between the new Los Banos West Substation and Western’s existing Dos Amigos Substation; . an interconnection with the existing Western 500-kV Los Banos-Gates No. 3 transmission line just south of Pacific Gas & Electric’s (PG&E) existing Los Banos Substation into the new Los Banos West Substation; and . a new 70-kV transmission line about 7 miles in length between the existing San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Western would construct, own, maintain, and operate the lines, which would be located mostly adjacent to existing transmission lines in Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties in California. Additional components of the SLTP would include new 230-kV line terminal bays at Western’s San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, as well as a new 230/70-kV transformer bank and interconnection facilities at the San Luis Substation. The SLTP would also include ancillary facilities, such as communication facilities, improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads to facilitate construction activities. Western would acquire the necessary easements and fee land for the Proposed Project. Operational Voltage Options The operational voltage needed for the Project is dependent on the participation of Duke American Transmission Company (DATC). If DATC declines to participate, one of the following operational voltage options may be selected by Western and the Authority. . 500-kV Transmission Line operated at 230-kV. This voltage option would consist of a 500-kV transmission line constructed between the Tracy and San Luis Substations. However, it would be operated at 230-kV. The proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be constructed. . 230-kV Transmission Line. This voltage option would consist of a 230-kV line constructed between the Tracy and San Luis Substations. The proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be constructed. Depending on final operational needs, one of these operational voltage options would be implemented within the scope of the alternatives analyzed in this EIS/EIR. ES.3 Purpose and Need and Project Objectives Federal Purpose and Need Reclamation entered into a contract with PG&E in 1965 for power transmission service between Western’s Tracy Substation and Reclamation’s San Luis Unit (SLU) facilities near Santa Nella, California and Los Banos, California. The contract provides for transmission and distribution service between the including the Gianelli Pump-Generating Plant, Dos Amigos Pumping Plant and the O’Neill Pump-Generating Plant for delivery of Central Valley Project (CVP) and the SLU including the Gianelli Pump-Generating Plant, Dos Amigos Pumping Plant, and the O’Neill Pump-Generating Plantwater supply to its federal water service contractors. The SLU is part of the CVP and is owned by the United States. On an annual basis, Tthese SLU facilities pump up to 1.25 million acre-feet of federal water out of the California Aqueduct and the Delta-Mendota Canal into the San Luis Reservoir for later use, including irrigation supply to about 600,000 acres of farmlands located in western Fresno, Kings, and Merced Counties. The SLU is part of the CVP and is owned by the United States. However, the SLU is a Joint Use Facility (JUF) between Reclamation and DWR. DWR operates the JUF as provided in the 1961 Agreement between the United States of America and the Department of Water Resources of the State of California for the Construction and Operation of the Joint Use Facilities of the San Luis Unit and supplemented in 1972. Pursuant to this Agreement, DWR and Reclamation share the costs of construction, operation, and maintenance related to the SLU. DWR has operation and maintenance responsibility of the JUF including the substations necessary for the proposed SLTP. As part of the original PG&E contract, the Federal Government paid PG&E $2.6 million to provide 50 years of 230-kV transmission and distribution service to deliver federal power to and from Reclamation’s Gianelli and Dos Amigos facilitiesthe SLU. The existing transmission contract with PG&E expires on March 31, 2016, and PG&E has stated it will not renew the existing contract. Without the contract or a federal transmission line to serve the primary SLU facilities, the Federal Government will have to take transmission service under the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) Tariff between Tracy Substation and the SLU facilities using the same PG&E transmission and distribution lines that have served the SLU for 50 years. Under the CAISO Tariff, the estimated cost increase to Reclamation for the first year is expected to be $8 million. Reclamation’s operating costs are paid by its water service contractors. In anticipation of PG&E’s contract expiring and the substantial increase in transmission costs associated with scheduling federal power to and from these facilities under the CAISO Tariff, Reclamation submitted a transmission service request to Western to consider various transmission service arrangements, including the construction of new federal transmission lines for Reclamation’s continued delivery of federal water after the PG&E contract expires. Western responded to Reclamation’s request for transmission service consistent with Western’s Open Access Transmission Tariff (OATT) and existing laws. Reclamation, on behalf of its water contractors, is evaluating options to pump, store, convey, and deliver federal water via the SLU at reasonable costs. The increase in costs incurred by Reclamation under the CAISO Tariff are so great that reasonable prudence requires the agencies to pursue and evaluate the proposed SLTP. In October 2013, an eligible Western transmission customer1DATC submitted a transmission service request in accordance with Western’s OATT for transmission service within the same corridor as requested by Reclamation. Western is evaluating both requests jointly in order to determine if it can satisfy Reclamation’s need and the eligible customerDATC’s request with a single project. This Project would require at least a single-circuit 500-kV transmission line between the Tracy and Los Banos areas. This EIS/EIR evaluates a 500-kV transmission line with an design voltage options to construct at 230-kV should the eligible transmission customerDATC decide not to not participate. It is anticipated that the eligible Western transmission customerDATC will decide whether to participate by spring 2016. 1 Pending its decision to participate in the Project, the identity of this customer is confidential. Details on the interconnection request are available at: http://www.oasis.oati.com/wasn/index.html (see Transmission Queue page for updates) Project Objectives The Project objectives for the SLTP are to: . Obtain durable, long-term, cost-certain, and efficient transmission delivery of CVP power to and from federal power generation sites to the major pumping stations of the SLU to reliably deliver water to Reclamation and the Authority’s member agencies (federal water service contractors); . Locate and install transmission facilities in a safe, efficient, and cost effective manner that meets Project needs while minimizing environmental impacts; . Locate facilities to minimize the potential of environmental impacts resulting from damage by external sources; . Maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and rights-of-way in order to minimize effects on previously undisturbed land and resources; and . Obtain stable and reliable transmission that meets Project needs in a cost-effective and timely manner. ES.4 Summary of Public Involvement Activities Public Notification and Scoping Process Western and the Authority held public open-house meetings to answer questions and receive comments on the scope of the environmental analysis for the SLTP. These meetings were held on January 8, 2014, in Tracy, California, and on January 9, 2014, in Santa Nella, California. The 60-day public scoping comment period began on November 22, 2013, when the Notice of Intent was published in the Federal Register and the Notice of Preparation was filed with the California State Clearinghouse. The 60-day public scoping comment period ended on January 21, 2014. Western distributed notices to 75 local agencies, 8 state agencies, 6 federal agencies, 21 organizations, and 39 elected officials. Western also sent postcards announcing the public scoping meetings and comment period to all property owners within or adjacent to the Proposed Project or alternative routes, and published advertisements on the meetings and comment period in five local newspapers. The postcards and advertisements also provided an overview map of the Project area, a brief summary of the SLTP, how to provide scoping comments, and where to find additional information on the Proposed Project. Nine agencies, four organizations, and eight individuals submitted scoping comments. Additionally, two three newsletters have been distributed to affected and interested landowners, organizations, and agencies. The first newsletter, distributed May 2014, announced the availability of the Scoping Report and the Alternatives Screening Report on the SLTP website.21 The second newsletter, distributed February 2015, announced that a new alternative corridor (the Billy Wright Road Alternative) and two new proposed substations (the Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations) would be evaluated in the Draft EIS/EIR. It also announced the availability of an updated Alternatives Screening Report on the SLTP website. The third newsletter was distributed in August 2015. It announced the availability of the Draft EIS/EIR, described how to comment on the Draft EIS/EIR, and provided the dates, times, and locations of the Draft EIS/EIR public meetings. 1 2 http://www.sltpeis-eir.com/ Agency Coordination and Native American Consultation Western and the Authority have had several meetings with various agencies to discuss the proposed SLTP and consider their comments and concerns. The agencies include the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the California Department of Parks and Recreation. In a March 3, 2014 letter, Western contacted all Native American groups on the list provided by Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC). Western received a response from the California Valley Miwok Tribe. Western will continue to keep all of the Tribal contacts informed of any changes to the SLTP and will continue to be responsive to any future requests for consultation. The SLTP does not cross tribal reservations or Native American Trust territories. Areas of Controversy / Public Scoping Issues Issues raised during the public scoping process are described in detail in the Scoping Report (available on the SLTP website), and are summarized below. . Air Quality. Recommendations for air quality-related discussions to be included in the Draft EIS/EIR. . Coordination with Local Agencies. Requests for appropriate coordination and consultation with affected local agencies. . Land Use Conflicts. Concern regarding the potential for the proposed route to conflict with existing and proposed land uses (e.g., solar projects, residential developments, PG&E transmission lines and pipelines, and the Crow’s Landing Airport). . Adequacy of Project Notices. Concern regarding the adequacy and clarity of the Project Description presented in the Notice of Intent and Notice of Preparation. . Special-Status Species. Concern regarding the potential effects of the Proposed Project on specialstatus species and supporting habitat. . Permitting. Suggestions for permits that may be required for approval and implementation of the Proposed Project. . Alternative Routes. Suggestions for alternative routes to minimize significant impacts including increasing the distance of the proposed route from adjacent residences and the avoidance of land parcels identified for proposed land use projects. . Property values. Concern regarding a decrease of property value attributable to the presence of transmission lines. . Electromagnetic Fields (EMF). Concern regarding the potential for health risks associated with EMF emitted from transmission lines. . Public Scoping Process. Concern regarding the timeframe provided for public comment and the adequacy of information provided to the public. Public Review of the Draft EIS/EIR The Notice of Availability (NOA) of the Draft EIS/EIR was published in the Federal Register, filed with the State Clearinghouse, and mailed to interested parties on July 17, 2015. The NOA included information on how to access the Draft EIS/EIR; the dates, times, and locations of the Draft EIS/EIR public meetings; and how to comment on the Draft EIS/EIR. Its distribution started a 45-day public comment period that ended on August 31, 2015. Public hearings on the Draft EIS/EIR were held in Tracy, California, on August 10, 2015 and Los Banos, California, on August 11, 2015. These consisted of an open house where Project information was shared, followed by an opportunity to record verbal comments from the public. Notice of the public meetings was published in the Tracy Press and Los Banos Enterprise newspapers. Four people provided verbal comments at the Los Banos meeting; no verbal comments were provided at the Tracy meeting. An additional 26 comment letters and emails were received during the 45-day public comment period (refer to Appendix L for a detailed list of commenters and copies of all comment correspondence). ES.5 Design and Engineering Issues The exact locations and quantities of Project components (e.g., transmission structures, access roads, conductor pulling sites, and construction staging areas) cannot be determined until final Project design and engineering. For purposes of the EIS/EIR, it has been assumed that disturbances from transmission structures could occur anywhere within the preferred corridor. Other Project components may occur anywhere within the Project study area, which extends up to one mile from the corridors. Western’s and DWR’s standard construction practices, Project-specific environmental protection measures, and mitigation measures would be applied in the design of Project components. During the planning and implementation of the Project, additional environmental review, analysis, and technical studies may be necessary and will be conducted depending on site-specific conditions including potential environmental impacts within easements, including DWR easements that are not associated with the San Luis joint use facilities. If any Project components are sited outside of the geographic area considered in this EIS/EIR, additional surveys and consultation for biological and cultural resources and/or environmental review would be conducted prior to Project implementation. Construction of the proposed Los Banos West Substation would result in the loss of up to 50 acres of the 150-acre Jasper Sears off-highway vehicle (OHV) Use Area. As stated in Section ES.6, this impact is considered significant and unavoidable. The exact size and location of the substation footprint cannot be determined until final Project design and engineering. Pursuant to the mitigation measures in this EIS/EIR (i.e., Mitigation Measures REC-1 and REC-2), Western, the Authority, and Reclamation, would coordinate closely with the California Department of Parks and Recreation (CDPR) to minimize impacts to the OHV Use Area. However, because the land is under lease to CDPR from Reclamation, actual implementation of the mitigation is not within the authority of the lead agencies (Western and the Authority). Reclamation and CDPR are in consultation to resolve this issue. Existing JUF infrastructure or modifications thereto, all transmission work, communication system maintenance, facility outages, upgrade and replacement work, regulatory coordination, and maintenance of access roads will be conducted in accordance with the Agreement between the United States of America and the Department of Water Resources of the State of California for the Construction and Operation of the Joint-Use Facilities of the San Luis Unit (dated December 30, 1961). ES.65 Impacts of the Proposed Project As required by CEQA Section 15126.2, this section presents the significant and unavoidable impacts of the Proposed Project. The Proposed Project would result in significant and unavoidable impacts (and contribute to cumulatively considerable impacts) to the following resource areas. Refer to Section ES.8 9 for a summary of all impacts of the Proposed Project. . Noise. Construction would temporarily result in more than a 5-decibel increase intermittently at sensitive receptors near the Project, which would exceed local noise standards near residences throughout the Project area. This would be a temporary, short-term impact that would occur intermittently during construction activities. . Recreation. Construction of the proposed Los Banos West Substation would result in conflicts with, physical alterations of, and decreased accessibility to the Jasper Sears off-highway vehicle (OHV) Use Area in the San Luis segment. . Land Use. Construction of the proposed Los Banos West Substation would result in conflicts with the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan/General Plan as it pertains to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area and conflicts with this established special use area in the San Luis segment. ES.76 Alternatives to the Proposed Project The determination of whether to retain an alternative for analysis in the EIS/EIR was based, in part, on the following NEPA/CEQA criteria: (a) meeting the purpose and need and most project objectives, (b) reducing significant effects of the Proposed Project, and (c) being potentially feasible in terms of possible legal, regulatory, or technical constraints. Alternatives Retained for Analysis in the EIS/EIR The EIS/EIR considers seven alternatives to the Proposed Project, including the No Action/No Project Alternative, as listed below. To facilitate a fair or equal comparison between the impacts of the alternatives and the Proposed Project, the Project area was divided at common points of the corridors into four segments (North, Central, San Luis, South). No Action/No Project North Segment There are no alternative corridors in the North Segment. Central Segment . Patterson Pass Road Alternative San Luis Segment – 500-kV . Butts Road Alternative . West of Cemetery Alternative San Luis Segment – 70-kV . West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative South Segment . San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative . Billy Wright Road Alternative Alternatives Considered and Eliminated An additional seven alternatives were considered in a screening process and eliminated from further review, as documented in the Alternatives Screening Report (available on the SLTP website). ES.87 Summary of Draft EIS/EIR Conclusions: Environmentally Preferred Alternative The Authority has identified the Environmentally Superior Alternative, as required by CEQA Guidelines 15126.6(e)2. In this EIS/EIR, it is called the Environmentally Preferred Alternative. The following section summarizes the results of the alternatives comparison for each Project segment and identifies the Environmentally Preferred Alternative. Western’s Agency Preferred Alternative is also identified in this EIS/EIR. Western’s Agency Preferred Alternative will be identified in the Final EIS/EIR following analysis of public comments on the Draft EIS/EIR and further internal review of the Draft EIS/EIR. Environmentally Preferred Alternative No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction of the San Luis Transmission Project would not occur. Western would arrange for transmission service for the SLU from the CAISO using existing electric infrastructure. As there would be no adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative environmental impacts under this alternative, it is the environmentally preferred alternative. However, Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., the CAISO Tariff) would increase by more than $8 million per year. As detailed in Section 1.2 and Appendix K, which address Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., the CAISO Tariff) over a 50-year period, the No Action/No Project Alternative is not cost effective and involves substantial cost uncertainties. Further, the No Action/No Project Alternative would not achieve the purpose and need or basic Project objectives. Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative CEQA Guidelines Section 15126.6(e)(2) requires that if the environmentally preferred alternative is the No Action/No Project Alternative, an EIR shall identify the environmentally preferred alternative among the other (i.e., action) alternatives. The corridor segments that comprise the environmentally preferred action alternative are presented below. North Segment The Proposed Project is the environmentally preferred corridor in this segment as there are no alternatives. Central Segment The Patterson Pass Road Alternative is the environmentally preferred corridor in this segment because it is 1,000 feet farther from residences than the Proposed Project. Therefore, it would have fewer noise and visual resources impacts. Agricultural impacts would also be slightly less than the Proposed Project in the Central Segment. San Luis Segment – 500-kV The Proposed Project is the environmentally preferred corridor in this segment because it is the shortest route with the least ground disturbance. Therefore, it would result in fewer impacts to air quality, geology, paleontological resources, and water resources. The Proposed Project is furthest from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and would avoid construction noise and visual impacts to this sensitive resource. Additionally, it would impact the least amount of habitat for the federally and State endangered and State fully protected blunt-nosed leopard lizard. San Luis Segment 70-kV In the San Luis Segment (70-kV), the Proposed Project is the environmentally preferred corridor. The Proposed Project and West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative are the same length, have the same length of new access roads, and have the same number of support structures. Therefore, impacts are similar and there is no preference between corridors for most issue areas. However, the Proposed Project would result in fewer impacts to habitat for federally and State-listed species including San Joaquin kit fox, California tiger salamander, and blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Additionally, the Proposed Project would be farther from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, thereby resulting in fewer land use, noise, and visual resources impacts than the West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative. South Segment In the South Segment, the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative is the environmentally preferred corridor. The Proposed Project and the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative are adjacent, are the same length, have the same length of new access roads, and have the same number of support structures. Therefore, impacts are similar and there is no preference between corridors for most issue areas. However, the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative would have slightly fewer impacts to agricultural land. It would also be farther from more residences than the Proposed Project, thereby resulting in less construction noise impacts. In summary, the Environmentally Preferred Alternative is composed of: . North Segment – Proposed Project . Central Segment – Patterson Pass Road Alternative . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – Proposed Project . South Segment – San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction of the San Luis Transmission Project would not occur. Western would arrange for transmission service for the SLU from the CAISO using existing electric infrastructure. As there would be no adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative environmental impacts under this alternative, it would be preferable to the Environmentally Preferred Corridor Alternative. However, Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., the CAISO Tariff) would increase by more than $8 million per year. Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., the CAISO Tariff) would be so expensive as to render this alternative infeasible. Further, the No Action/No Project Alternative is considered infeasible because it would not achieve the purpose and need or basic project objectives. Agency Preferred Alternative Determining the Agency Preferred Alternative requires that Western balance many factors with the Project’s purpose and need. It is the alternative that Western believes would fulfill its statutory mission and responsibilities, giving consideration to economic, environmental, technical, and other factors. As described above, the No Action/No Project Alternative is the Environmentally Preferred Alternative because it would avoid any adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative environmental impacts; however, it would not achieve the purpose and need or basic Project objectives. The Environmentally Preferred Corridor Action Alternative is composed of several segments, as listed in the preceding section, including the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative in the South Segment. After analysis of public comments and further internal review of the EIS/EIR, Western has identified the Billy Wright Road as its preferred alternative in the Southern Segment. Although it would have greater recreation impacts by crossing the Path of the Padres Trail and slightly greater soil disturbance due to its longer length, it would avoid conflicts with the Wright Solar Park. When the Notice of Preparation and Notice of Intent for this EIS/EIR were published in November 2013, which set the baseline for analysis of environmental impacts, the Wright Solar Park was still early in its entitlement phase (the Project’s NOP was issued in October 2013). Western is aware that the Project is now fully permitted and expected to begin construction in 2016. For all other segments, the Agency Preferred Alternative is the same as the Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative. In summary, the Agency Preferred Alternative is composed of: . North Segment – Proposed Project . Central Segment – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – Proposed Project . South Segment – Billy Wright Road Alternative ES.98 Impact Summary Tables Levels of significance in this EIS/EIR are defined by classification as follows: . Significant; cannot be mitigated to a level that is less than significant . Significant; can be mitigated to a level that is less than significant . Less than significant; no mitigation required Under NEPA, beneficial impacts of a proposed action are also relevant considerations in the environmental analysis. The tables on the following pages summarize all significant impacts of the Proposed Project. In addition, there are several impacts that were determined to be less than significant and would not require mitigation. Table ES-1. Significant and Unmitigable Impacts of the Proposed Project Impact Mitigation Measures (if any) Impact NOISE-1 – Result in a substantial temporary or periodic increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project NOISE-1 – Provide construction notification. NOISE-2 – Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. Impact NOISE-3 – Result in noise levels that exceed local or federal noise regulations or guidelines NOISE-1 – Provide construction notification. NOISE-2 – Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. Impact REC-1 – Conflict with established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities NOISE-1 – Provide construction notification. NOISE-2 – Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. AQ-1 – Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. REC-1 – Coordinate with local agencies to identify tower locations. REC-2 – Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Impact REC-2 – Result in changes that alter or otherwise physically affect established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities REC-2 – Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Impact REC-3 – Decrease accessibility to areas established, designated, or planned for recreation REC-2 – Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Table ES-2. Significant but Mitigable Impacts of the Proposed Project Impact Mitigation Measures Impact AQ-1 – Violate ambient federal and/or State air quality or emissions standards applicable to the study area, or increase the frequency of severity of any existing violation of State and/or federal ambient air quality standard AQ-1 – Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Impact AQ-2 – Expose sensitive receptors to detrimental pollution concentrations AQ-1 – Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Impact AQ-3 – Contribute to a collective or combined air quality effect, including existing and foreseeable other projects, that leads to violation of air quality standards, even if the individual effect of the project/activity is relatively minor compared with other sources AQ-1 – Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Impact AQ-6 – Emissions exceed conformity de minimis thresholds set by the applicable Air District AQ-1 – Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Impact BIO-1 – Adversely affect a listed endangered, threatened or proposed species or designated critical habitat, or a non-listed special-status plant or animal species either directly or through habitat loss or modification BIO-1 – Conduct surveys for special-status plants and sensitive habitats. BIO-2 – Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities. BIO-3 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to special-status plants. BIO-4 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to federally listed branchiopod habitat. BIO-5 – Avoidance and minimization measures for valley elderberry longhorn beetle. BIO-6 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to elderberry plants. BIO-7 – Avoidance and minimization measures for Alameda whipsnake. BIO-8 – Avoidance and minimization measures for blunt-nosed leopard lizard. BIO-9 – Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status reptiles. BIO-10 – Avoidance and minimization measures for giant garter snake. BIO-11 – Avoidance and minimization measures for western pond turtle. BIO-12 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to special-status reptiles. BIO-13 – Avoidance and minimization measures for California red-legged frog. BIO-14 – Avoidance and minimization measures for California tiger salamander and western spadefoot. BIO-15 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to listed amphibians. BIO-16 – Avoidance and minimization measures for burrowing owl. BIO-17 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to occupied burrowing owl habitat. BIO-18 – Avoidance and minimization measures for California fully protected birds. BIO-19 – Avoidance and minimization measures for least Bell’s vireo. BIO-20 – Avoidance and minimization measures for Swainson’s hawk. BIO-21 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat. BIO-22 – Avoidance and minimization measures for tricolored blackbird. BIO-23 – Avoidance and minimization measures for other special-status and native birds. BIO-24 – Avoidance and minimization measures for American badger. BIO-25 – Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status bats. BIO-26 – Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status kangaroo rats. BIO-27 – Avoidance and minimization measures for San Joaquin kit fox. BIO-28 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to San Joaquin kit fox. Table ES-2. Significant but Mitigable Impacts of the Proposed Project Impact Mitigation Measures Impact BIO-2 – Adversely and substantially affect native plant communities, including riparian areas or other sensitive communities BIO-1 – Conduct surveys for special-status plants and sensitive habitats. BIO-2 – Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities. BIO-29 – Avoidance and minimization measures for vernal pool and seasonal wetland habitats. BIO-30 – Avoidance and minimization measures for sensitive wetland habitats. BIO-31 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to sensitive plant communities. Impact BIO-4 – Have substantial adverse effects on wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State BIO-29 – Avoidance and minimization measures for vernal pool and seasonal wetland habitats. BIO-30 – Avoidance and minimization measures for sensitive wetland habitats. BIO-32 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to wetlands and waters. Impact BIO-6 – Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, State, or federal habitat conservation plan BIO-2 – Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities. BIO-28 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to San Joaquin kit fox. BIO-31 – Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to sensitive plant communities. BIO-33 – Minimization measures for conservation easements. Impact CUL-1 – Cause damage, degradation to, or loss of a unique archaeological resource as defined by CEQA or a resource of archaeological, tribal, or historical value that is listed, or eligible for listing, on the National Register or California Register CUL-1 – Prepare and implement Archaeological Resource Management and Treatment Plan for unique archaeological resources. Impact CUL-7 – Disturb any human remains, including those interred outside of formal cemeteries CUL-2 – Treatment of inadvertent discovery of human remains. Impact GEO-1 – Expose people or structures to potential substantial adverse effects due to slope instability, effects of earthquake (fault rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, landslide), slumps, rockfalls, or adverse soil conditions such as compressible, expansive, or corrosive soils GEO-1 – Conduct geotechnical investigations and implement Project design recommendations. Impact GEO-5 – Place a structure on unstable soils, which would result in exposure to landslide, lateral spreading, subsidence, liquefaction, or collapse GEO-1 – Conduct geotechnical investigations and implement Project design recommendations. Impact LU-4 – Conflict with State or federally established, designated, or reasonably foreseeable planned special use areas (e.g., recreation, wildlife management area, game management areas, waterfowl production areas, scientific and natural areas, wilderness areas, areas of critical environmental concern, etc.). LU-1 – Minimize impacts within conservation easements and/or amend conservation easements. Impact PALEO-1 – Result in the loss of or inaccessibility to scientifically important paleontological resources PALEO-1 – Conduct pre-construction survey. PALEO-2 – Document all finds. PALEO-3 – Conduct Worker’s Environmental Awareness Training. PALEO-4 – Conduct paleontological mitigation monitoring. PALEO-5 – Procedures for fossil preparation, curation, and reporting. Table ES-2. Significant but Mitigable Impacts of the Proposed Project Impact Mitigation Measures Impact H&S-3 – Inflict serious injuries to workers, visitors to the area, or area land users. H&S-1 – Prepare a fire plan. Impact SE-4 – Permanent displacement of existing residences or businesses SE-1 – Acquire land rights. Impact TRAFFIC-2 – Cause delays on a primary transportation corridor TRAFFIC-1 – Prepare and submit Traffic Control Plans.  Chapter 1 Introduction 1.1 Project Overview The Western Area Power Administration (Western), a power marketing administration within the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), and the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority (Authority), a California joint powers agency, have prepared this joint Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP or Proposed Project). In conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), this EIS/EIR is intended to inform decision makers, other agencies, and the public regarding the environmental and public safety effects that could result from the proposed construction, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning of the SLTP. Western is the federal lead agency under NEPA, and the Authority is the State lead agency under CEQA. The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is a NEPA Cooperating Agency. The California Department of Water Resources (DWR) is a CEQA Responsible Agency. The SLTP would consist of: . a new 500-kilovolt (kV) transmission line about 65 miles in length between the new Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations; . a new 230-kV transmission line about 3 miles in length between the new Los Banos West Substation and Western’s existing San Luis Substation; . a new 230-kV transmission line about 20 miles in length between Western’s existing San Luis Substation and Western’s existing Dos Amigos Substation or a new 230-kV transmission line about 18 miles in length between the new Los Banos West Substation and Western’s existing Dos Amigos Substation; . an interconnection with the existing Western 500-kV Los Banos-Gates No. 3 transmission line just south of Pacific Gas & Electric’s (PG&E) existing Los Banos Substation into the new Los Banos West Substation; and . a new 70-kV transmission line about 7 miles in length between the existing San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Western would construct, own, maintain, and operate the lines, which would be located mostly adjacent to existing transmission lines in Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties in California. Additional components of the SLTP would include new 230-kV line terminal bays at Western’s San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, which would be operated and maintained by DWR, as well as a new 230/70-kV transformer bank and interconnection facilities at the San Luis Substation. 1.2 Purpose and Need The United States Department of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) entered into a contract with Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) in 1965 for power transmission and distribution service between Western’s Tracy Substation and Reclamation’s San Luis Unit (SLU) facilities near Santa Nella, California and Los Banos, California including the Gianelli Pump-Generating Plant, Dos Amigos Pumping Plant, and the O’Neill Pump-Generating Plant. for delivery of Central Project Valley (CVP) water supply to its Federal water service contractors. The San Luis Unit is part of the Central Valley Project (CVP) CVP and is owned by the United States. On an annual basis, these These SLU facilities pump up to 1.25 million acre-feet of federal water out of the California Aqueduct and the Delta-Mendota Canal into the San Luis Reservoir for later use, including irrigation supply to about 600,000 acres of farmlands located in western Fresno, Kings, and Merced Counties. The SLU is a Joint Use Facility (JUF) between Reclamation and DWR. DWR operates the JUF as provided in the 1961 Agreement between the United States of America and the Department of Water Resources of the State of California for the Construction and Operation of the Joint Use Facilities of the San Luis Unit. Pursuant to this agreement, DWR and Reclamation share the costs of construction, operation, and maintenance related to the SLU. Under the agreement, DWR operates and maintains the JUF including the substations necessary for the SLTP. As part of the original PG&E contract, the Federal Government paid PG&E $2.6 million to provide 50 years of 230-kV transmission and distribution service to deliver federal power to and from the SLUReclamation’s Gianelli and Dos Amigos facilities. The existing transmission contract with PG&E expires on March 31, 2016, and PG&E has stated it will not renew the existing contract. Without the contract or a federal transmission line to serve the primary SLU facilities, the Federal Government will have to take transmission service under the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) Tariff between Western’s Tracy Substation and the SLU facilities using the same PG&E transmission and distribution lines that served the SLU for 50 years. The estimated increased cost to Reclamation in the first year by taking service under the CAISO Tariff is expected to be $8,000,000 and to steadily increase each subsequent year. Reclamation’s operating costs are paid by its water service contractors. Currently, the CAISO Tariff includes high-voltage and low-voltage Transmission Access Charges (TAC). As of March 1,August 2015, the rate for the high-voltage TAC (which provides for regional transmission service across the CAISO system) was $9.79 $10.16 per megawatt-hour (MWh) and the PG&E lowvoltage TAC (which provides for service across PG&E’s local transmission facilities) was $7.64 per MWh. There are also other supplementary CAISO Tariff charges that average approximately $6.00 per MWh. The following bullets provide a summary of Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the CAISO Tariff: . Assuming federal pumping load at Gianelli, O’Neill, and Dos Amigos range from 300,000 to 500,000 MWh per year, the high-voltage TAC cost estimate for these facilities is starts at $3,048,0002,940,000 to $5,080,000 4,900,000 per year, and will escalate thereafter. . The O’Neill facility will incur both the CAISO high-voltage and low-voltage TACs. Assuming a federal pumping load at O’Neill ranges from 60,000 to 90,000 MWh per year, the low-voltage TAC cost estimate for this facility is starts at $458,400 to $687,600 per year, and will escalate thereafter. . In addition to the high-voltage and low-voltage TAC charges listed above, Gianelli, O’Neill, and Dos Amigos will incur CAISO Tariff charges for other services such as scheduling, management, and ancillary services. The cost estimate for these services is estimated at $1,800,000 to $3,000,000 per year. The cost of providing capacity to meet CAISO Resource Adequacy requirements for the federal load in the CAISO BA is estimated to cost approximately $850,000 per year. . The total estimated range of CAISO Tariff service costs (summation of the three bullet elements above) to be incurred by the Federal Government for these SLU facilities (Gianelli, O’Neill, and Dos Amigos) upon termination of the PG&E contract will range from $5,306,4006,000,000 to $8,767,9,437,600 per year beginning April 2016. . CAISO grid transmission users may also incur congestion charges when the scheduling capacity of existing transmission lines is exceeded, and customers must pay to mitigate for congestion. These costs have the potential to be negligible or several million dollars per year; there is currently no effective means to estimate future congestion costs. In anticipation of PG&E’s contract expiring and the substantial increase and uncertainty in transmission costs associated with scheduling federal power to these facilities under the CAISO Tariff, Reclamation submitted a transmission service request to Western. Under this request, Western is considering various transmission service arrangements, including the construction of new federal transmission lines (not part ofto be included in the CAISO grid). Reclamation must continue to deliver federal water after the PG&E contract expires. Western must respond to Reclamation’s request for transmission service consistent with Western’s Open Access Transmission Tariff (OATT) and existing laws. Reclamation, on behalf of its water contractors, is evaluating options to pump, store, convey, and deliver federal water via the SLU at reasonable cost. While Western was exploring different options for meeting Reclamation’s load, Western received a separate transmission service request from Duke American Transmission Company (DATC) under Western’s OATT for between 1080 and 1600 megawatts (MW) of transmission service between the Tracy and Los Banos Substations. Western determined it could satisfy both requests by building a single 500-kV project. Reclamation has determined that paying the cost of constructing, operating, and maintaining a new 230- kV transmission line outside of the CAISO grid over a 50-year analysis is more cost effective than paying the estimated cost of the CAISO Tariff charges that are likely to occur over the same period. Refer to the Appendix K (Cost Analysis) for details of this analysis. Furthermore, the federal transmission line will provide more cost certainty, in that it will continue to be used after that period of analysis where the capital cost of the Project would have been repaid and with just O&M costs as the only continuing cost, whereas costs of transmission service from the CAISO grid would be uncertain. continue to include additional new facilities and at rates that will be higher and uncertain. Having Western own and operate the transmission facilities provides Reclamation and its water customers with cost certainty that is not available under the CAISO. SLTP as a 500-kV Project provides additional economic savings compared to a federal-only 230-kV project. The preliminary cost estimate to construct the Proposed Project in 2015 dollars, based on comparative cost estimates and a 25 percent contingency, would be approximately $400 million. Reclamation would be responsible for a 25 percent share of the Proposed Project (500-kV) to accomplish their purposes and needs. This 25 percent share amount would be included in the Balancing Authority of Northern California. As such, its costs would be substantially below the anticipated costs that Reclamation would incur under the CAISO Tariff for the same 50-year period. In addition to being more cost effective, the construction of a new transmission line by the Federal Government would provide more “cost certainty” for delivering federal power to the primary SLU loads. CAISO cost recovery methodology is used to determine the high-voltage and low-voltage TAC. For instance, in January 2013, the CAISO high-voltage TAC was $7.73 per MWh. In January 2015, the CAISO high-voltage TAC had increased to $9.42 per MWh, and by March 2015, the CAISO high-voltage TAC was $10.16 per MWh. It has since decreased to $9.7986 in August 2015. In contrast, constructing the Proposed Project would limit any future cost increases to those necessary for operation, maintenance, and replacement of the Proposed Project instead of the entire CAISO grid. In October 2013, an eligible Western transmission customer1DATC submitted a transmission service request in accordance with Western’s OATT for transmission service within the same corridor as 1 Pending its decision to participate in the Project, the identity of this customer is confidential. Details on the interconnection request are available at: http://www.oasis.oati.com/wasn/index.html (see Transmission Queue page for updates) requested by Reclamation. Western is evaluating both requests jointly in order to determined if it can could satisfy Reclamation’s need and the eligible customer’sboth requests with by building a single project. This Project would require at least a single-circuit 500-kV transmission line between the Tracy and Los Banos areas. Therefore, this EIS/EIR evaluates a 500-kV transmission line with an design voltage options to construct at 230-kV should the eligible transmission customerDATC decide not to participate. It is anticipated that the eligible Western transmission customerDATC will decide whether to participate by spring 2016. If Western constructs the Proposed Project (500-kV) with DATC, 1200 MW of this 1600-MW line would be included in the CAISO Balancing Authority Area, where it would strengthen the capacity of the primary north-south extra high voltage transmission path in California, reduce congestion on that line, and facilitate export of renewable generation from the San Joaquin Valley to loads in urban areas of California. DATC would invest 75 percent of the capital cost of the Project, and receive a transmission payment from the CAISO as approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 1.3 Project Objectives The Project objectives for the SLTP are to: . obtain durable, long-term, cost certain, and efficient transmission delivery of CVP power from federal power generation sites to the major pumping stations of the SLU to reliably deliver water to Reclamation and the Authority’s member agencies (federal water service contractors); . reinforce a critical link in the California transmission grid to reduce congestion, increase reliability, and facilitate the deliverability of renewable resources from the San Joaquin Valley to loads in urban areas of California; . locate and install transmission facilities in a safe, efficient, and cost-effective manner that meets Project needs while minimizing environmental impacts; . locate facilities to minimize the potential of environmental impacts resulting from damage by external sources; . maximize the use of existing transmission corridors and rights-of-way in order to minimize effects on previously undisturbed land and resources; and . obtain stable and reliable transmission that meets Project needs in a cost-effective and timely manner. 1.4 Agency Background 1.4.1 Western Area Power Administration Western markets and delivers reliable, cost-based hydroelectric power and related services within the central and western United States. Western is one of four power marketing administrations within DOE that markets and transmits electricity from multi-use water projects, primarily to statutorily defined preference customersconsumer-owned utilities. Western’s mission is to market and deliver clean, renewable, reliable, cost-based federal hydroelectric power and related services within 15 central and western states. Western’s 17,000-mile, high-voltage transmission system carries electricity from power plants operated by Reclamation, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), and the International Boundary and Water Commission. The SLTP is located within Western’s Sierra Nevada Region (SNR). SNR maintains and operates numerous substations and more than 1,500 circuit miles of transmission lines in five geographic regions to nearly 700 approximately 80 preference customersnon-profit utilities. By law, Western markets power that is in excess of federal project requirements to preference customers, such as federal and State agencies, Native American tribes, electric cooperatives, municipal utilities, public utility districts, irrigation districts, and water districts. Western sells wholesale electricity to more than 70 customers in central and northern California and Nevada from the CVP and Washoe Project. As described in Section 1.1, Western is the lead federal agency under NEPA. Under Western’s OATT, Western must respond to requests for transmission services. Theis Draft EIS/EIR, together with thise Final EIS/EIR and other permitting requirements, is the means by which Western will comply with NEPA. Findings from the EIS/EIR and all comments received will become part of the administrative record and will be used to make decisions on whether and how to proceed on the SLTP. Portions of the Proposed Project may affect floodplains and wetlands. In accordance with DOE floodplain and wetland environmental review requirements (10 CFR part 1022), this EIS/EIR includes a floodplain and wetlands assessment (see the “Water Resources and Floodplains” section in chapters 3 and 4). A floodplain statement of findings will be included in the Record of Decision (ROD) (10 CFR 1022.14(c)). 1.4.2 San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority The Authority consists of 28 federal and San Joaquin River exchange water service contractors that provide water to more than 2.1 million acres of service territory within the western San Joaquin Valley, as well as San Benito and Santa Clara Counties. The Authority was established in 1992 and assumed the operation and maintenance (O&M) responsibilities of certain CVP facilities. The Authority operates and maintains the Delta-Mendota Canal, which delivers approximately 3 million acre-feet of water within the Authority’s service area, the C.W. “Bill” Jones Pumping Plant (formerly Tracy Pumping Plant), O’Neill Pumping/Generating Plant, Tracy O&M Facilities, the San Luis Drain, and several other components of the CVP. As described in Section 1.1, the Authority is the CEQA lead agency. This EIS/EIR is intended to inform the public, other agencies, and the Authority’s 19-member governing board of directors of potential environmental impacts, mitigation measures, and alternatives prior to the Authority’s decision to approve or disapprove the Project. 1.4.3 Bureau of Reclamation Reclamation is the largest wholesaler of water in the United States, supplying more than 31 million people and providing irrigation water for 10 million acres of farmland. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydroelectric power in the western United States with 53 power plants that provide more than 40 billion kilowatt-hours annually and generate nearly a billion dollars in power sales revenue. Reclamation’s mission is to assist in meeting the increasing water demands of the western United States while protecting the environment and the public’s investments in these structures. Reclamation emphasizes fulfilling its water delivery obligations, water conservation, water recycling, and reuse goals; developing partnerships with customers, states, and Native American tribes; and finding ways to address the competing needs for limited water resources. Reclamation owns, operates, and manages the dams, power plants, and canals of the CVP. The SLTP also passes through lands managed by the Reclamation. Under NEPA regulations, Reclamation is a cooperating agency involved in the preparation of the EIS/EIR for the SLTP. 1.4.4 California Department of Water Resources DWR, established in 1956 by the California State Legislature, plays an important role in sustaining California’s economy, environment, and quality of life. DWR’s major responsibilities include overseeing the statewide-process of developing and updating the California Water Plan (Bulletin 160 series); protecting and restoring the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta; regulating dams, providing flood protection, assisting in emergency management, educating the public about the importance of water and its proper use; providing technical assistance to service local water needs; and planning, designing, constructing, operating, and maintaining California’s State Water Project (SWP). SWP is the largest State-built multi-purpose, water project in the United States. In addition to supplying water to California’s cities, industries, and farms, the SWP also provides flood control, hydroelectric power generation, recreation, and enhancement and protection of fish and wildlife habitat. The SWP provides water supply for an estimated 25 million Californians and about 750,000 acres of farmland, and includes 34 storage facilities, 20 pumping plants, five hydroelectric power plants, four pumpinggenerating plants, and approximately 700 miles of canals, tunnels, and pipelines. The JUF is an essential component of the SWP. Pursuant to the 1961 Agreement between the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and DWR, DWR has a contractual obligation for operations and maintenance (O&M) of the JUF including the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations. The SLTP interconnects to the facilities that are operated and maintained by the DWR. The SLTP would necessitate consultation with DWR and DWR concurrence related to interconnection design, protection, operations, maintenance, communications, and NERC/WECC compliance responsibilities. Under CEQA, DWR is considered a responsible agency for the SLTP based on its jurisdiction over certain facilities that may be affected by the Project, the approval authority it holds for interconnection at SWP-operated and maintained facilities, and approval of encroachment permits. 1.5 Public Participation Public involvement is a vital part of the environmental review process under NEPA and CEQA. Western provided multiple opportunities for public involvement during the development of the Draft Western EIS/EIR. These opportunities intend to establish a collaborative, systematic, and inclusive process to gather and share information and identify public concerns and issues regarding the Project. 1.5.1 Scoping Western and the Authority held public open-house meetings to answer questions and receive comments on the scope of the environmental analysis for the SLTP. These meetings were held on January 8, 2014, in Tracy, California and on January 9, 2014, in Santa Nella, California. The 60-day public scoping comment period began on November 22, 2013 when the Notice of Intent was published in the Federal Register, and the Notice of Preparation was filed with the California State Clearinghouse. The 60-day public scoping comment period ended on January 21, 2014. Western distributed notices to 75 local agencies, 8 state agencies, 6 federal agencies, 21 organizations, and 39 elected officials. Western also sent postcards announcing the public scoping meetings and comment period to all property owners within or adjacent to the Proposed Project or alternative routes, and published advertisements on the meetings and comment period in five local newspapers. The postcards and advertisements also provided an overview map of the Project area, a brief summary of the SLTP, how to provide scoping comments, and where to find additional information on the Proposed Project. A total of 21 unique commenters (8 individuals, 4 organizations, and 9 agencies) submitted 21 comment documents (letters, emails, faxes, and comment cards). Within these comment documents, a total of 81 individual scoping comments were submitted. These comments are summarized in the Scoping Report (Appendix B). 1.5.2 Public Review of the Draft EIS/EIR The Notice of Availability (NOA) of the Draft EIS/EIR was published in the Federal Register, filed with the State Clearinghouse, and mailed to interested parties on July 17, 2015. The NOA included information on how to access the Draft EIS/EIR, the dates, times, and locations of the Draft EIS/EIR public meetings, and how to comment on the Draft EIS/EIR. Its distribution started a 45-day public comment period that ended on August 31, 2015. Public hearings on the Draft EIS/EIR were held in Tracy on August 10, 2015 and Los Banos on August 11, 2015. These consisted of an open house where Project information was shared, followed by an opportunity to record verbal comments from the public. Notice of the public meetings was published in the Tracy Press and Los Banos Enterprise newspapers. Four people provided verbal comments at the Los Banos meeting; no verbal comments were provided at the Tracy meeting. An additional 26 comment letters and emails were received during the 45-day public comment period (refer to Appendix L for a detailed list of commenters and copies of all comment correspondence). 1.5.3 Other Public Participation Efforts Additionally, two three newsletters have been distributed to affected and interested landowners, organizations, and agencies. The first newsletter, distributed May 2014, announced the availability of the Scoping Report and the Alternatives Screening Report on the SLTP website.1 It also provided a summary of the alternatives considered and eliminated in the Draft EIS/EIR. The second newsletter, distributed February 2015, announced that a new alternative corridor (the Billy Wright Road Alternative) and two proposed new substations (the Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations) would be evaluated in the Draft EIS/EIR. It also announced the availability of an updated Alternatives Screening Report on the SLTP website. The third newsletter was distributed in August 2015. It announced the availability of the Draft EIS/EIR, described how to comment on the Draft EIS/EIR, and provided the dates, times and locations of the Draft EIS/EIR public meetings. 1 http://www.sltpeis-eir.com/  Information about the project is available on two websites: http://www.sltpeis-eir.com and https:// www.wapa.gov/regions/SN/environment/Pages/san-Luis-transmission-project.aspx. These websites provide general information about the Project and electronic versions of Project documents, including the Scoping Report, Alternatives Screening Report, public meeting materials, Project maps, newsletters, and the Draft and Final EIS/EIR. 1.6 Revisions to the Draft EIS/EIR The Draft EIS/EIR, as revised in this document, comments received during the public comment period, and written responses collectively comprise the Final EIS/EIR. Where the Draft EIS/EIR has been revised, the text has been marked in strikethrough for deletions and underline for additions.2 These revisions have been made in response to comments received on the Draft EIS/EIR, as presented in Appendix L. Portions of the Draft EIS/EIR were also revised for the purposes of clarifications, typographical corrections, and other editorial adjustments. 2 Appendix J (Disclosure Statements), Appendix K (Cost Analysis), Appendix L (Draft EIS/EIR Comments and Responses), and Appendix M (Draft Conformity Determination) are new sections of the Final EIS/EIR that expand and clarify the information in the Draft EIS/EIR, but are not presented as underlined text. Appendix I (Air Quality Emission Calculations) has been updated in the Final EIS/EIR without strikethrough and underlined text.  Chapter 2 Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives This chapter describes the Proposed Project and alternatives; proposed construction, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning activities; the Environmental Protection Measures (EPMs); and standard construction, operation, and maintenance practices that would be implemented as part of the Project. It also identifies the Environmentally Preferred Alternative. At this time, the exact locations and quantities of Project components (e.g., access roads, staging areas, pulling sites) are unknown and, in some cases, quantities of Project components are conservatively estimated (see Appendix E). To provide flexibility in siting Project components, particularly access roads that may extend outside of the proposed easements, a one-mile buffer was added on the west side of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. The buffer was extended up to I-5 on the east side of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors, except where the Project would be located east of I-5 near the Dos Amigos Substation. The area within this buffer is referred to as the study area, unless otherwise defined in Chapter 3 for a specific resource. This EIS/EIR uses the term Project area to collectively describe the area within which Project components could be located. A corridor is a linear area within which the easements (also known as rights-of-way) would be located; proposed corridors are part of the Project area. 2.1 Proposed Project Western proposes to construct, own, operate, and maintain about 95 miles of new transmission lines within easements ranging from 125 to 250 feet wide through Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties along the foothills of the Diablo Range in the western San Joaquin Valley. Western also would upgrade or expand its existing substations, make the necessary arrangements to upgrade or expand existing PG&E substations, or construct new substations to accommodate the interconnections of these new transmission lines. An overview of the Proposed Project is illustrated in Figure 2-1. 2.1.1 Overview The Proposed Project consists of: . A 500-kV transmission line. A single-circuit 500-kV transmission line, about 65 miles long, terminating at the existing, expanded, or new substations in the Tracy and Los Banos areas. . 230-kV transmission lines. A single-circuit 230-kV transmission line (called the “tie-line”), about 3 miles long, connecting the San Luis Substation and the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation; and a single-circuit 230-kV transmission line, about 20 miles long, connecting the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations or a single-circuit 230-kV transmission line, about 18 miles long, connecting the new Los Banos West and existing Dos Amigos Substations. . A 70-kV transmission line. A single-circuit 70-kV transmission line, about 7 miles long connecting the San Luis and O’Neill Substations. Much of the Proposed Project would be located adjacent to existing high-voltage transmission line easements along the foothills west of Interstate 5 (I-5). Figure 2-1, titled “Project Overview," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") ") ") Tracy East Los Banos West O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy £.101£.101 ST152 ST156 ST25 ST129 ST108 ST108 ST25 ST156 ST152 ST25 ST152 ST120 ST152 ST152 ST152 ST108 ST152 ST132 ST132 ST152 §¨.5 §¨.580 §¨.205 ST99 ST152 ST165 ST33 ST140 ST132 ST120 ST108 ST25 ST108 ST33 ST33 ST140 ST120 Modesto Prunedale Tracy Manteca San Jose Gilroy Lathrop Turlock Merced Ceres Morgan Hill Salida Delhi Hollister Los Banos Tracy Ripon Atwater Oakdale San Martin East Oakdale Keyes Winton Riverbank Salinas Livingston Hilmar-Irwin Aromas Grayson Denair Del Rio Patterson Aromas Livermore Escalon Empire Westley Gustine Waterford Newman Hickman Dos Palos West Modesto Bystrom Hughson San Jose Riverdale Park South Dos Palos Byron French Camp West Modesto Interlaken Merced County Stanislaus County Santa Clara County San Joaquin County Fresno County Alameda County Monterey County Tuolumne County Contra Costa County Madera County Santa Cruz County Calaveras County ") ") Tracy East§¨.580§¨.205 Tracy Figure 2-1 Proposed Project Overview 0 6 12Miles Final EIS/EIR I ") ") ") Los Banos West ") O'Neill San Luis Los Banos §¨.5 ST152 ST33 ") Existing Substations ") Proposed New Substations Streets City Boundary Counties San Luis Reservoir O'Neill Forebay O'Neill Forebay Patterson Pass Road Kelso Road Delta-Mendota Canal Mountain House Road California Aqueduct Land Ownership Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Reclamation Local Government San Luis Transmission Project 2. Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives Proposed Project 70-kV Corridor 230-kV Corridor 230-kV Corridor (tie-line) 500-kV Corridor March 2016 2-2Western is proposing to construct two new 500-kV substations: Tracy East Substation and Los Banos West Substation. The Tracy East Substation would be adjacent to and east of the existing Tracy Substation with a footprint of up to 50 acres (see Figure 2-6a). The Los Banos West Substation would be adjacent to and west of the existing Los Banos Substation with a footprint of up to 50 acres (see Figure 2-6c). Western may also interconnect the existing Western 500-kV Los Banos-Gates No. 3 transmission line just south of PG&E’s existing Los Banos Substation into this new Los Banos West Substation. The existing Tracy, Los Banos, San Luis, and/or Dos Amigos Substations may be expanded to add new or modify existing 230-kV terminal bays. Western would also construct a 230/70-kV transformer bank and associated facilities at the San Luis Substation. The Proposed Project also would include ancillary facilities, such as communication facilities, improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads to facilitate construction activities. Western would acquire the necessary easements and fee land for the Proposed Project. 2.1.1.1 500-kV Transmision Line As shown in Figure 2-1, the proposed single-circuit 500-kV transmission line corridor would begin at the new Tracy East Substation, located at the intersection of Mountain House Road and Kelso Road, about 6 miles northwest of the City of Tracy in Alameda County. From the substation, the proposed corridor heads east along Kelso Road and turns south, adjacent to an existing 230-kV transmission line through agricultural fields. The proposed corridor then continues south and crosses the Delta-Mendota Canal (Canal) and a 69-kV transmission line. Then, it turns southeast to cross these features again and continues along the northeastern side of the canal and into San Joaquin County, crossing Interstate 205 (I-205) and a 230-kV transmission line. The proposed corridor then turns south, and continues adjacent to two existing 230-kV and 500-kV transmission lines to an area just east of PG&E’s Tesla Substation, south of Patterson Pass Road. Next, the proposed corridor turns south and runs adjacent to the east side of the existing transmission line corridor, which contains up to five high-voltage transmission lines. Along this section, the existing easements adjacent to the proposed corridor contain several 500-, 230-, and 115-kV transmission lines in various configurations. The proposed corridor would run adjacent to these transmission lines, with minor deviations to avoid existing infrastructure, south to the O’Neill Forebay. Just north of the O’Neill Forebay, the proposed corridor would turn southeast, around the east side of the O’Neill Forebay and would terminate into the existing Los Banos Substation or the new Los Banos West Substation. 2.1.1.2 230-kV Transmision Lines There are two new proposed single-circuit 230-kV transmission line corridors. The first 230-kV transmission line corridor would be between the existing San Luis Substation and new Los Banos West Substation; this transmission line corridor is on the south side of Highway 152 and is referred to as a “tie-line.” The second proposed new 230-kV transmission line would connect the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations or the new Los Banos West Substation and Dos Amigos Substation. This corridor heads southeast from the Los Banos area adjacent to and east of the existing PG&E transmission line. Just south of the Los Banos Reservoir, it crosses to the west of the existing PG&E transmission line corridor and continues southeast for about 7 miles until it crosses I-5 to the Dos Amigos Substation. These proposed corridors are shown in Figure 2-1. 2.1.1.3 70-kV Transmision Line The proposed single-circuit 70-kV transmission line connects the San Luis and O’Neill Substations around the east side of the O’Neill Forebay. This component of the Proposed Project is located within the proposed 230-kV and 500-kV corridors described above (see Figure 2-1). 2.1.1.4 Operational Voltage Options As described in Section 1.2, the operational voltage needed for the Project is dependent on the participation of an eligible transmission customerDATC. The Proposed Project described herein assumes participation by the customerDATC. If the customerDATC declines to participate, one of the following operational voltage options may be selected by Western and the Authority in their decision-making processes pursuant to NEPA and CEQA. 500-kV Transmission Line operated at 230-kV This voltage option would consist of a 500-kV transmission line constructed between the Tracy and Los Banos San Luis Substations. However, it would be operated at 230-kV. The proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be constructed. The 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, as well as the 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations, are the same as the Proposed Project. 230-kV Transmission Line This voltage option would consist of a 230-kV line constructed between the Tracy and San Luis Substations. The proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be constructed. The 230-kV transmission line between the San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, as well as the 70-kV transmission line between the San Luis and O’Neill Substations, are the same as the Proposed Project. 2.1.2 Project Components 2.1.2.1 Easements Western does not have existing transmission line easements within the Project area for the Proposed Project, and therefore, would need to acquire easements for the entire Project. Western would locate lines adjacent to existing easements or transmission lines wherever feasible. Generally, easements would be 125 to 175 feet wide for a 230-kV transmission line and 200 to 250 feet wide for a 500-kV transmission line. The actual width and location of the proposed easement within the corridor may vary depending on engineering considerations, as well as constraints identified during environmental surveys. 2.1.2.2 Aces Roads Improvements to existing access roads, new permanent access roads, and temporary access roads would be needed for construction and maintenance of the transmission line. Typically, upgrading existing roads and constructing temporary and permanent new access roads requires a construction width of 14 feet along straightaways and 16 to 20 feet around corners to facilitate safe movement of equipment and vehicles. However, all temporary roads will be restored to pre-existing conditions when they are no longer needed, and all upgraded existing roads and new permanent roads will be restored to a width of 12 feet. Although specific locations have not been determined, new access roads for the Project would be located to minimize environmental impacts and to accommodate engineering constraints. Access roads would be occasionally graded for maintenance purposes and culverts would be added, as needed. Appendix E quantifies the estimated area of disturbance for proposed new and existing access roads 2.1.2.3 Structures Tubular steel monopoles or lattice steel structures would be used to support the 500-kV and 230-kV lines of the Proposed Project, and smaller wood or steel monopoles would be used for the 70-kV line. Typical dimensions of the proposed structures are shown in Figures 2-2 through 2-4 and summarized in Table 2-1. Ancillary Facilities Communication facilities, including fiber optic overhead ground wires would be installed on the transmission line structures for control and protection. Construction, expansion, and maintenance of these facilities would occur within the corridors. 2.1.3 Construction 2.1.3.1 Construction Schedule Construction would commence after securing all required permits and land rights. Multiple crews would work simultaneously on different Project components. Table 2-2 presents Western’s proposed schedule for constructing the SLTP. Construction generally would take place between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., 6 days per week, except for those areas where local ordinances and traffic considerations dictate otherwise, in which case working hours would be consistent with local requirements. 2.1.3.2 Ground Disturbance Ground disturbance would occur from grading construction staging areas, grading and drilling holes for new structure foundations, constructing and improving roads for vehicle and equipment access, establishing pull sites for conductor installation, as well as expanding existing and/or construction of new substations. The typical ground disturbance area for each of these activities is shown in Table 2-3. Proposed construction methods are described in the following sections. Table 2-1. Typical Structure Dimensions Structure Type Height (feet) Structures Per Mile 500-kV single-circuit lattice 100-170 4 to 5 500-kV single-circuit steel pole 140-170 4 to 5 230-kV single- or double-circuit lattice 100-150 4 to 5 230-kV single- or double-circuit steel pole 125-140 4 to 5 70-kV wood or steel pole 50-70 10 to 15 Table 2-2. SLTP Proposed Construction Schedule Construction Phases Estimated Days Estimated Schedule Engineering and Design 430 Begin in Fall 2017 Construction 525 Begin in Summer 2018 Final Testing/Operation 135 2021  Figure 2-2, titled “SLTP Representative 500-kV Structure Types," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Single-Circuit Lattice Tower Single-Circuit Steel Pole Typical 100’ - 170’ Typical 140’ - 170’ Figure 2-2 SLTP Representative 500-kV Structure Types San Luis Transmission Project 2-6 Draft EIS/EIRFigure 2-3, titled “SLTP Representative 230-kV Structure Types," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. San Luis Transmission Project Single-Circuit Lattice Tower Single-Circuit Steel Pole Typical Typical 100’ - 150’ 125’ - 140’ Figure 2-3 SLTP Representative 230-kV Structure Types 2-7 Draft EIS/EIRFigure 2-4, titled “SLTP Representative 70-kV Structure Types," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. San Luis Transmission Project Single-Circuit Steel or Wood Pole Typical 40’ - 70’ Figure 2-4 SLTP Representative 70-kV Structure Types 2-8 Draft EIS/EIRTable 2-3. Typical Ground Disturbance for Construction Activities1 Activity Temporary Disturbance Permanent Disturbance Staging area 5 acres every 15 miles 0 acres Structure footing 500-kV lattice up to 0.9 acres up to 0.1 acres 500-kV steel pole up to 0.9 acres up to 0.1 acres 230-kV lattice up to 0.6 acres up to 0.1 acres 230-kV steel pole up to 0.6 acres up to 0.1 acres 70-kV wood or steel pole up to 0.1115 acres up to 0.0001 acres Foundation excavation 500-kV and 230-kV lattice and steel poles 40 feet deep,12 feet in diameter 0 acres2 70-kV wood or steel pole 8 to 10 feet deep, 4 feet in diameter 0 acres2 Conductor pull site 0.4 acres 0 acres Access road construction/improvement Up to 30 feet wide 12 feet wide Tracy, Los Banos, San Luis, and Dos Amigos Substation expansion up to 0.1 acres within existing substation up to 0.1 acres within existing substation Tracy East Substation 0 acres up to 50 acres Los Banos West Substation 0 acres up to 50 acres 1 - These dimensions represent worst-case and are used in the impact analysis of Chapter 4, but could be reduced during final engineering design or consultation with resources agencies. Note that these dimensions will be influenced by topography, location, easement width, etc. Also see Appendix E for details on disturbance assumptions. 2 - Included in structure footings 2.1.3.3 Construction Equipment and Workforce Typical quantities of personnel and equipment needed for proposed construction activities are shown in Table 2-4. The tasks would be conducted in stages; therefore, personnel and equipment would not be working on all tasks simultaneously at a given location, but there would be some overlap in tasks. Table 2-4. Typical Personnel and Equipment Activity Personnel Equipment Right-of-Way (access roads and vegetation clearing) 2 to 4 equipment operators . 1 motor grader . 2 pickup/trucks . 2 bulldozers . 1 backhoe Excavation for foundations 4 to 8 laborers/equipment operators . 2 augers . 2 backhoes . 2 pickup trucks . 2 compressors Foundation installation (anchor bolt/rebar cages) 4 to 6 laborers/equipment operators 3 to 5 ironworkers . 2 flat-bed trucks . 2 pickup trucks . 2 air compressors . 2 hydro lifts . 2 welders . 2 to 3 mixer trucks per structure for direct-embedded foundations . 10 to 12 mixer trucks per structure anchor bolt foundations Structure assembly and erection 4 to 6 linemen/laborers and crane operators . 2 hydro-cranes . 2 tractors . 2 manlifts . 2 pickup trucks Helicopter use 1 pilot 1 ground person fueler . Helicopter Hughes 500 . fuel truck Conductor stringing 20 to 25 linemen/groundmen . 2 pullers . 2 tensioners . 2 bulldozers . 4 reel trailers . 1 materials truck . 2 manlifts . 5 to 6 pickup trucks . 1 light truck Table 2-4. Typical Personnel and Equipment Activity Personnel Equipment Disturbance area restoration (Cleanup and Revegetation) 3 to 6 laborers . 1 bulldozer w/ripper . 1 blader . 1 front-end loader . 1 tractor/harrow/disc . 1 light truck Substation improvement and expansion 20-25 electricians, linemen, laborers, equipment, operators, and ironworkers . 2 flatbed trucks . 2 bulldozers . 2 cranes . 2 excavators . 5 pickup trucks . 1 fuel truck . 1 puller . 1 tensioner . 2 reel trailers . 1 tractor . 2 materials trucks . 1 blader . 2 mixer trucks . 1 front end loader Substation construction (Tracy East and Los Banos West) 20-40 electricians, linemen, laborers, equipment, operators, and ironworkers . 2 flatbed trucks . 2 bulldozers . 2 cranes . 2 excavators . 5 pickup trucks . 1 fuel truck . 1 puller . 1 tensioner . 2 reel trailers . 1 tractor . 2 materials trucks . 1 blader . 2 mixer trucks . 1 front end loader 2.1.3.4 Construction Staging Temporary construction staging areas would be needed to store and stage materials, construction equipment, and vehicles. Although the exact locations have not been determined, locations would be selected that minimize ground disturbance. 2.1.3.5 Right-of-Way Aces and Improvements Construction of a new transmission line requires access to each tower site for construction crews, materials, and equipment. Access to each site would be on an existing road where feasible or on new roads. Existing roads may need to be improved. Improving existing access roads would involve brush clearing, grading, erosion control and the installation of culverts or rip-rap to maintain stormwater flows within ephemeral wash areas. Lost surface material would be replaced and the road would be graded and shaped. A motor grader is the primary equipment type used to conduct this work, but bulldozers may be used in some areas. Watering may be required to control dust and to retain fine surface rock. In determining the final location of new roads, large trees or other natural features will be avoided. New access roads would be constructed using a bulldozer or grader, followed by a roller to compact and smooth the ground. Front-end loaders would be used to move the soil locally or off site. After Project construction, existing and new permanent access roads would be used by maintenance crews and vehicles for inspection and maintenance activities. Temporary construction roads not required for future maintenance access would be removed and restored to pre-construction condition to the extent feasible. 2.1.3.6 Excavation and Foundation Instalation for Transmision Line Structures Installation of structure foundations may require grading and vegetation removal. Where grading is needed, topsoil would be removed and stockpiled for use in site restoration. Temporary topsoil stockpiles would be protected from erosion during construction. Excavating transmission structure foundations is typically done with a backhoe, front-end loader, or pressure auger. Excavation to bedrock or other suitable base material would be required. A rock drill may be used if rock is encountered during excavation. Four holes would be excavated for each lattice structure and one for each tubular steel or wood pole. Reinforced concrete foundations would be used for most structures. After the foundation concrete is placed, a mechanical tamp would be used to re-compact soil around the foundation. The disturbed area would be re-graded so that surfaces drain naturally, blend with the natural terrain, and are left in a condition that will facilitate re-vegetation or re-seeding, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. 2.1.3.7 Structure Assembly and Erection Structure components would typically be transported to installation sites by truck or helicopter. Structures would be erected with cranes. Structure assembly equipment may include cranes (ground or helicopter), augers, bulldozers, bucket trucks, backhoes, air compressors, electric generators, pickup trucks and other vehicles, machinery, and equipment. Structures would be assembled, erected, and attached to the foundations (see Figure 2-5). 2.1.3.8 Conductor Stringing Conductor stringing would occur at designated pull and tensioning sites (see Figure 2-5). Generally the pull sites would be located within the easement. Angle-structure pull sites would require temporary easement rights if located outside the easement to pull the conductor on a straight line. The locations of pull sites depend on environmental constraints, conductor length, and equipment access. Pull sites would be located within the study area. Large reels of conductor would be transported to the staging areas or pulling sites on flatbed trucks. Other equipment would include stringing trailers, tensioning machines, pullers, bulldozers, and several trucks including a bucket truck. Temporary stringing sheaves or travelers (pulleys) would be attached on the cross-arms of each structure at the bottom of the insulator strings. A sock line (rope or lightweight wire) would then be strung from structure to structure through the stringing sheaves. This may be completed using a helicopter. A pulling line would then be attached to the end of the sock line and pulled back through the sheaves between pull site locations. Conductor would then be strung using the pulling line. Powered pulling equipment would be used at one end and tensioning equipment would be used at the other end to establish the proper tension and sag for crews to permanently “clip” conductors onto structure hardware, and to maintain the proper ground clearance for the conductors. After conductors are clipped in, the stringing sheaves would be removed and the new conductor would be connected to the insulators hanging from the cross-arms. Ground wire would be installed last and would be attached to the top of the structures using a pulling technique similar to that used for the conductors.  Figure 2-5, titled “Typical Tower Construction and Wire Conductoring Activities and Equipment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.2.1.3.9 Substations Existing Substations Modifications to and/or expansion of existing substations would be needed to interconnect SLTP facilities. Modifications may include constructing new 230-kV line terminal bay facilities at the Tracy, San Luis, Los Banos and/or Dos Amigos Substations. Expansion of existing substations may be required if the existing substations are unable to accommodate a new terminal bay. Western also would construct a new 230/70-kV transformer bank bay and interconnection facility at the San Luis Substation. To accommodate these modifications, the existing substations may be expanded within the limits of the Project area. Proposed New Substations Generally, substation construction would include site grading, property and substation fencing, and installation of electrical facilities. The site would be excavated and graded to accommodate the required construction and permanent facility buildings, equipment, and electrical structures. A fence would be erected around the substation perimeter. Up to 50 acres would be graded for each new substation. Area lighting would be provided by multiple 300-watt tungsten-quartz lamps mounted near major electrical equipment. Additionally, downward-oriented 100-watt yellow flood lamps would be placed near entrances and the substation gate for night entry and would remain on throughout the night. The electrical facilities proposed for the new Tracy East Substation would accommodate the termination of one 500-kV transmission line. These facilities would include a 500-kV terminal bay, associated breakers, disconnect switches, protective relays, metering and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system equipment, and associated features. The electrical facilities proposed for the new Los Banos West Substation would accommodate the termination of three 500-kV transmission lines and one 230-kV transmission line. These facilities would include three 500-kV terminal bays, a 230-kV terminal bay, a 500/230-kV transformer bay and associated breakers, disconnect switches, protective relays, metering and SCADA system equipment, and associated features. 2.1.3.10 Disturbance Area Restoration Areas temporarily disturbed by construction would be restored to pre-construction conditions, to the extent feasible. Western would re-grade disturbed areas to establish original contours, and redistribute topsoil. All disturbed soil, other than surfaces intended for permanent access roads, would be seeded with native species free of invasive seeds. Where necessary, water diversions (i.e., waterbars) would be constructed along access roads to control surface water drainage and erosion. See Appendix E for SLTP ground disturbance assumptions. 2.1.4 Operation and Maintenance Western must comply with North American Electric Reliability Corporation and Western Electricity Coordinating Council standards and requirements for transmission system reliability, including maintenance and vegetation management. In order to comply with these requirements, Western has a comprehensive O&M program for all of its property and facilities including transmission lines, substations, communication facilities, and legal access roads. This O&M program ensures reliability of the transmission systems and safe, all-weather access to the transmission line structures and other Western facilities. The O&M activities proposed for the SLTP would be consistent with Western’s O&M program, which is presented in Appendix D. 2.1.5 Decomisioning If no longer needed, facilities any one of the transmission lines would be removed. Removed facilities would include wires, insulators, hardware, structures, and foundations from the easements. All decommissioning activities would occur within the same disturbance area identified for construction. Material would be disposed of in accordance with applicable regulations, and may be salvaged or sold. The equipment required to safely remove the wires and structures would be nearly the same as that required for installation. Following removal, any areas disturbed during line dismantling would be restored and rehabilitated. Disturbed surfaces would be restored to the original contour. All disturbed soil, other than surfaces intended for permanent access roads, would be seeded with native species free of invasive seeds. Western would reclaim temporary service roads following abandonment in accordance with land management agency or landowner agreements. Equipment and personnel for restoration operations would be similar to that required at the end of construction. Where required by the land management agency or landowner, compacted areas would be ripped (with a dozer) and sediment control measures (e.g., revegetation) would be implemented. 2.1.6 Environmental Protection Measures and Construction Standards Western implements Environmental Protection Measures (EPMs) and Construction Standards to reduce environmental consequences associated with its construction and maintenance activities. The analysis of environmental consequences (Chapter 4) accounts for the EPMs listed in Table 2-5 and the Construction Standards presented in Appendix F, which would be implemented as part of the Project. Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Air Quality Project participants will comply with applicable federal, State, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. Air Quality Equipment and vehicles will be operated in compliance with applicable federal, State, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. Air Quality Vehicles and equipment used in construction and maintenance of the Proposed Project or alternatives will maintain appropriate emissions control equipment and be appropriately permitted. Air Quality Regular watering of exposed soils and unpaved access roads will be conducted during the construction period. Air Quality Engine idling will be in accordance with an idling policy compliant with applicable the California State regulations. Air Quality If new sulfur hexafluoride equipment is installed as part of the Project, Western will include this information in their annual reports to California Air Resources Board and the Environmental Protection Agency. Best management practices will be followed to eliminate sulfur hexafluoride emissions during installation and commissioning. Biological Resources All Western and contract crews will complete biological awareness training to ensure they are familiar with sensitive biological resources and the associated EPMs and mitigation measures. All supervisors and field personnel will have on file a signed agreement that they have completed the training, and understood and agreed to the terms. EPMs and applicable mitigation measures will be written into the contract for construction and O&M work, and contractors will be held responsible for compliance. Biological Resources Vehicle traffic will be restricted to designated access routes and the immediate vicinity of construction and O&M sites. Vehicle speeds will not exceed 15 mph on nonpublic access and maintenance roads and 10 mph on unimproved access routes. Vehicles and equipment will be parked on pavement, existing roads, and previously disturbed areas, to the extent feasible. Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Biological Resources No pets or firearms will be permitted at Project sites. Biological Resources At the end of each work day, construction and O&M workers will leave work areas and adjacent habitats to minimize disturbance to actively foraging animals, and remove food-related trash from the work site in closed containers for disposal. Workers will not deliberately or inadvertently feed wildlife. Biological Resources Nighttime construction and O&M activities will be minimized to emergency situations. If nighttime construction and O&M work is required, lights will be directed to the minimum area needed to illuminate Project work areas. If night time work is required, a speed limit of 10 mph will be enforced on all nonpublic access roads. Biological Resources Mortalities or injuries to any wildlife that occur as a result of Project- or maintenance-related actions will be reported immediately to the Western Natural Resources Department or other designated point of contact, who will instruct construction and O&M personnel on the appropriate action, and who will contact the appropriate agency if the species is listed. The phone number for the Western Natural Resources Department or designated point of contact will be provided to the construction contractors, maintenance supervisors and to the appropriate agencies. Biological Resources Caves, mine tunnels, and rock outcrops will never be entered, climbed upon, or otherwise disturbed. Biological Resources If a pesticide label stipulates a buffer zone width for protection of natural resources that differs from that specified in a Project mitigation measure or EPM, the buffer zone width that offers the greatest protection will be applied. Biological Resources At completion of work and at the request of the landowner/manager, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. Biological Resources Prior to any application of herbicide, Western will query the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database, entering location information by county, township, range, and section, entering both the commercial name and the formulation of the desired pesticide, and will follow all use limitations provided to ensure compliance with applicable pesticide standards. This database is currently located at http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/endspec/prescint.htm. The measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database will supersede those in the Project EPMs where they are different. Biological Resources Seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. Biological Resources Equipment will be washed prior to entering sensitive areas within the Project area to control noxious weeds. The rinse water will be disposed of through the sanitary sewage system or other appropriate disposal method that minimizes the spread of noxious weeds. Biological Resources Measures described in the Suggested Practices for Avian Protection on Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2006 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2006 or more current version) and Reducing Avian Collisions with Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2012 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2012 or more current version) will be implemented during O&M activities to minimize bird mortality and injury. At such time when Western finalizes an Avian Protection Plan, Western will adhere to the guidance in that document. Biological Resources Construction and O&M excavations greater than 3 feet deep will be fenced, covered, or filled at the end of each working day, or have escape ramps provided to prevent the entrapment of wildlife. Trenches and holes will be inspected for entrapped wildlife before being filled. Any entrapped animals will be allowed to escape voluntarily before construction and O&M activities resume, or they may be removed by qualified personnel, with an appropriate handling permit if necessary. Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Biological Resources A hazardous-spill plan will be developed prior to construction and will remain in effect for all O&M activities. The plan will describe what actions will be taken in the event of a spill of toxic or hazardous materials. The plan will incorporate preventive measures to be implemented for vehicle and equipment staging, cleaning, maintenance, and refueling, and for containment management and storage of hazardous materials, including fuel. In the event of a contaminant spill, work at the site will immediately cease until the contractor has contained and mitigated the spill. The contractor will immediately prevent further contamination, notify appropriate authorities, notify Western’s regional environmental manager, and will mitigate damage as appropriate. Adequate spill containment materials, such as oil diaper mats and hydrocarbon cleanup kits, will be available on site at all times, as will containers for storage, transportation, and disposal of contaminated absorbent materials. Cultural Resources, Paleontological Resources Before construction, all construction personnel will be instructed by Western on the protection of cultural and paleontological resources and that cultural and paleontological resources might be present in the study area. To assist in this effort, the construction contract will address applicable federal and State laws regarding cultural and paleontological resources, including historic and prehistoric resources, and fossils. Construction personnel will be informed of the penalties for collection and removal of such resources, as well as the importance of these resources and the purpose and necessity of protecting them. Contractors will be trained to stop work near any discovery and notify Western’s regional environmental manager immediately, who will ensure that the resource is evaluated and avoided. Known cultural and paleontological resources will be flagged for avoidance and a minimum distance maintained for work disturbances. Cultural Resources Western will have qualified archaeological monitors on site during ground disturbing construction activities. Archaeological monitors will look for any inadvertent cultural resource discoveries or other sensitive resources that may be important to tribes. Archaeologists will stop work in the immediate area should any such resources be uncovered until an assessment of the find can be made by Western. Cultural Resources Cultural resources would be considered during post-EIS/EIR phases of Project implementation. Surveys would be completed prior to any ground disturbing activities or Project construction activities in order to inventory and evaluate cultural resources of the Project, or of any components that might be added to the Project, or any existing components that would be modified. These surveys and any resulting historic property evaluation and analysis of effects would be conducted in accordance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO). If adverse effects to historic properties cannot be avoided, Western would develop a Programmatic Agreement (PA) or Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) in consultation with the SHPO to determine appropriate mitigation to avoid lessen any adverse effects to cultural resources. Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources Erosion control measures will be implemented to prevent loss of soil. Construction will be in conformance with Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management Environmental Guidance Manual. Land Use and Agriculture Post proper signage in areas within the easement that will require temporary closure or limited access to accommodate certain land uses. Where feasible, construction activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If this is not feasible and damage occurs, the landowner may be compensated. Land Use and Agriculture On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads will be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. Land Use and Agriculture During construction, movement will be limited (to the greatest extent feasible) to the access roads and within a designated area in the easement to minimize damage to agricultural land. Land Use and Agriculture Damaged fences and gates will be repaired or replaced to restore them to their pre-construction condition. Land Use Construction and operations will be conducted in a manner that prevents unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings and to preserve the natural landscape to the extent practicable. Land Use No permanent discoloring agents will be applied to rocks or vegetation to indicate limits of survey. Noise All vehicles and equipment will be equipped with required exhaust noise abatement suppression devices. Table 2-5. Environmental Protection Measures Resource EPM Traffic and Transportation Western will restrict all necessary lane closures or obstructions on major roadways associated with construction activities to off-peak periods to avoid substantial traffic congestion and delays. Traffic and Transportation Western will ensure that roads or sidewalks damaged by construction activities will be properly restored to their pre-construction condition. Traffic and Transportation Conform with applicable safety requirements for maintaining the flow of public traffic and conduct construction and operations to minimize obstruction and inconvenience to public transportation. Traffic and Transportation Mark structures and/or shield wire with highly visible devices for identified locations, as required by applicable laws and regulations (for example, Federal Aviation Administration regulations). Water Resources, Wetlands Runoff from the construction and O&M sites will be controlled and meet applicable RWQCB stormwater requirements and the conditions of a construction stormwater discharge permit. A stormwater pollution prevention plan will be prepared and implemented. Water Resources and Floodplains All contaminated discharge water created by construction and O&M activities (e.g., concrete washout, pumping for work area isolation, vehicle wash water, drilling fluids) will be contained and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, State, and local regulations. Water Resources and Floodplains All fill or rip-rap placed within a stream or river channel will be limited to the minimum area required for access or protection of existing Western facilities. Water Resources and Floodplains All equipment will be stored, fueled, and maintained in vehicle staging areas 300 feet or the maximum feasible distance from any aquatic habitat (vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, seasonal wetland, seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh) and no closer than 200 feet unless a bermed (no ground disturbance) and lined refueling area is constructed and hazardous-material absorbent pads are available in the event of a spill. Vehicles and construction equipment will be inspected daily for fluid leaks before leaving staging areas during construction and O&M activities. Fluid leaks will be repaired before equipment is moved from staging areas. Water Resources and Floodplains All instream work, such as culvert replacement or installation, bank recontouring, or placement of bank protection below the high-water line, will be conducted during no-flow or low-flow conditions and in a manner to avoid impacts to water flow, and will be restricted to the minimum area necessary for completion of the work. Water Resources and Floodplains All equipment used below the ordinary high-water mark will be free of exterior contamination. Water Resources and Floodplains Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. Water Resources and Floodplains Non-biodegradable debris will be collected and removed from the easement daily and taken to a disposal facility. Slash and other biodegradable debris will be left in place or disposed of. Water Resources and Floodplains All soil excavated for structure foundations will be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Excess soil will be removed from the site and disposed of appropriately. Areas around structure footings will be reseeded with native plants. Water Resources and Floodplains Wherever feasible, new structures and access roads will be sited out of floodplains. Bridges will be used at new stream crossings wherever feasible. If avoidance is infeasible, Western will consult with USACE and obtain permits as required. Water Resources and Floodplains If wet areas cannot be avoided, Western will use vehicles, ground mats, and equipment that minimize ground impacts. Water Resources and Floodplains Construction vehicle movement outside of the easement will be restricted (to the extent feasible) to approved access or public roads. Water Resources and Floodplains Where feasible, all construction activities will be rerouted around wet areas while ensuring that the route does not cross sensitive resource areas. 2.2 Alternatives Development One of the most important aspects of the NEPA and CEQA processes is the identification and assessment of reasonable alternatives that have the potential for avoiding or minimizing the impacts of a Proposed Project. This EIS/EIR presents a range of alternatives based on whether or not the alternatives meet (1) most of the project objectives/purpose and need; (2) are considered potentially feasible; and (3) would avoid or substantially lessen any potential significant effects of the Proposed Project. For additional information on the alternatives development process refer to the Alternatives Screening Report (ASR) in Appendix A.  2.2.1 Coridor Alternatives The alternatives presented below have been chosen for detailed analysis in the EIS/EIR through the alternative screening process. Alternative corridors begin and end at points in common with the Proposed Project and other alternatives. The Project area was divided at the common points into four segments in order to facilitate a fair or equal comparison between the impacts of the alternatives and the Proposed Project. Table 2-6 and Figures 2-6a through 2-6e present the segments and the alternatives retained for analysis within each segment. 2.2.1.1 Paterson Pas Road Alternative An alternative corridor would extend from a point near Patterson Pass Road in the north to a point near Butts Road in the south. It would run parallel to the Proposed Project, but on the western side of the existing high-voltage transmission lines, further from I-5 for approximately 48 miles. 2.2.1.2 Buts Road Alternative At Butts Road, this alternative corridor would continue south on the west side of the existing transmission corridor for approximately 2.2 miles. At about McCabe Road, this alternative would turn southwest for about 4.0 miles, crossing State Route (SR) 152 and bypassing the existing San Luis Substation. This alternative would then head east paralleling SR 152 to the south for 2.8 miles where it would interconnect with the Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation, using the same corridor as tie-line. This alternative would be about 10 miles in length. 2.2.1.3 West of Cemetery Alternative At Butts Road, this alternative would head west and then south from the existing transmission corridor and then extend around the west side of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery (Cemetery) for approximately 2.6 miles. At this point, it would begin to follow an existing PG&E 500-kV corridor for about 1.4 miles until it turns southwest, crossing SR 152 and bypassing the existing San Luis Substation. This alternative would then head east paralleling SR 152 to the south for 2.8 miles where it would interconnect with either the existing Los Banos Substation or new Los Banos West Substation, using the same corridor as the tie-line. This alternative would be about 10 miles in length. Table 2-6. Alternatives by Segment Segments Number of Alternatives Alternative Name(s) North Segment 0 None Central Segment 1 Patterson Pass Alternative San Luis Segment 2 Butts Road Alternative West of Cemetery Alternative 1 (70-kV) West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative South Segment 2 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Billy Wright Road Alternative Figure 2-6a, titled “Proposed Project Segments," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 2-6b, titled “Corridor Alternatives - Central Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. San Luis Transmission Project 2. Description of the Proposed Project and Alternatives North Segment 99 580 5 San Luis Segment Central Segment 152 0 Patterson Pass Road Alternative Proposed Project Other Corridors 3 6 Figure 2-6b. Corridor Alternatives Central Segment Source: WAPA SNR, A spen EG, ESRI March 2016 2-20 Miles Final EIS/EIRFigure 2-6c, titled “Corridor Alternatives - San Luis Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 2-6d, titled “70-kV Corridor Alternatives - San Luis Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 2-6e, titled “Corridor Alternatives - South Segment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.2.2.1.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative corridor would extend from the San Luis Substation, cross SR 152, and run northeast for about 1 mile. At this point, it would begin to follow an existing PG&E transmission corridor for about 2.6 miles around the west side of the O’Neill Forebay to a point just north of McCabe Road. At that point, it would turn east and then turn to the southeast, in the preferred corridor, around the northeast side of the Forebay, following another PG&E high-voltage transmission corridor, to a point where it would terminate at the O’Neill Substation. 2.2.1.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative would start at San Luis Substation and would run parallel to SR 152 heading east for approximately 2.8 miles, using the same corridor as the tie-line, to a point near the Los Banos Substation; no interconnection with the Los Banos or the new Los Banos West Substations would occur. At this point, this alternative corridor would extend approximately 6 miles south along the western side of the existing high-voltage transmission lines. Just north of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, this alternative would cross the existing high-voltage transmission lines and would join the Proposed Project corridor as it extends to the Dos Amigos Substation. 2.2.1.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative This alternative would start at San Luis Substation and would run parallel to SR 152 heading east for approximately 2.8 miles, using the same corridor as the tie-line, to a point near the Los Banos Substation; no interconnection with the Los Banos or new Los Banos West Substations would occur. At this point, the alternative corridor would head south adjacent to and east of the existing PG&E 500-kV transmission lines for approximately 9 miles, before turning due east for approximately 4.5 miles to join the Proposed Project corridor as it extends to the Dos Amigos Substation. 2.2.2 Alternatives Considered and Eliminated The alternatives listed in Table 2-7 were eliminated from consideration in the EIS/EIR. Detailed descriptions of these alternatives and the reasons for their elimination are presented in the ASR (Appendix A). 2.3 No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction of the SLTP would not occur. Western would arrange for transmission service for the SLU from the CAISO through the use of existing electric infrastructure. The estimated increase cost to Reclamation the first full year by taking service under the CAISO Tariff is expected to be at least $8 million. (and could potentially be significantly higher). Reclamation’s operating costs associated with delivering federal energy from Tracy to the SLU pumping facilities are paid by its water service contractors. Reclamation has studied and compared the total cost of CAISO service with the estimated costs of constructing, operating, and maintaining the SLTP over the life of the Project. The total estimated range of CAISO Tariff service costs to be incurred by the Federal Government for the Gianelli, O’Neill, and Dos Amigos facilities upon termination of the PG&E contract will range from $5,306,400 to $8,767,600 per year beginning April 2016, and are expected to increase in the future. The uncertainty disparity in these costs going forward, and the potential for achieving cost certainty and cost savings over the life of a replacement transmission line, is so great that reasonable prudence requires Reclamation and the Authority to pursue and evaluate and pursue the proposed SLTP. Refer to Section 1.2 and Appendix K (Cost Analysis) for additional information on the economic analysis.) Table 2-7. Alternatives Considered and Eliminated Alternative Description Mountain House Road 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative to minimize the length of the Proposed Project and reduce impacts to houses in the Mountain House Developments. This alternative corridor would exit the Tracy Substation and extend due south for about 0.9 mile along Mountain House Road, then turn southeast for approximately 0.8 mile through agricultural fields before intersecting the Proposed Project at the existing transmission corridor. In comparison to the Proposed Project, however, it would result in greater agricultural and visual impacts and construction disturbance to nearby school and residents. This alternative would reduce some potential impacts of the Proposed Project, but create other impacts that are potentially more severe; therefore; it was eliminated from consideration. Grant Line Road 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to minimize canal crossings. It would deviate from the Proposed Project and the existing transmission line corridor to remain along the east side of the Delta-Mendota Canal for about 0.7 mile. This short alternative segment would be about the same length as the Proposed Project. However, it would be about 0.25 mile closer to a new residential community along Grant Line Road in unincorporated Tracy, and therefore result in greater visual impacts. This alternative would reduce some potential impacts of the Proposed Project, but create other impacts that are potentially more severe; therefore; it was eliminated from consideration. Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative in response to comments requesting an alternative that uses the corridor between the Delta-Mendota Canal and Interstate 580, to avoid houses west of the Proposed Project near Patterson Pass Road. The California Aqueduct runs down the center of this corridor, and therefore, more specifically, the route would be located between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580. This alternative also avoids impacts to the Tracy Hills conservation easements located west of Interstate 580. This corridor would deviate from the Proposed Project just south of the California Aqueduct and would continue south for about 7.3 miles between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 until it turns southwest, across Interstate 580, to rejoin the Proposed Project. In comparison to the Proposed Project, it would reduce land use and biological resource impacts. However, this alternative would increase visual impacts in comparison to the Proposed Project as it would introduce new transmission infrastructure to an area previously without transmission lines. Furthermore, It would be technically infeasible as certain locations between the California Aqueduct and Interstate 580 are too narrow to allow for construction, operation, and maintenance of a transmission line. East of Delta-Mendota Canal 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to address public comments about the proximity of the Proposed Project to houses near Patterson Pass Road. It would provide another option to the Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 Alternative. It would deviate from the Proposed Project 0.1 mile south of Interstate 205 and continue southeast on the east side of the Delta-Mendota Canal for about 3 miles. It would then cross the California Aqueduct and extend southeast, traversing agricultural fields, between the Delta-Mendota Canal and the California Aqueduct for about 1.3 miles before crossing the California Aqueduct to join the Delta-Mendota Canal/Interstate 580 Alternative. In comparison to the Proposed Project, this alternative would potentially reduce land use and biological resource impacts, but would potentially increase visual and agricultural impacts. Furthermore, this alternative is technically infeasible as certain locations between the Delta-Mendota Canal and existing cell towers are too narrow to allow for construction, operation, and maintenance of a transmission line. West of Cemetery 2 500-kV Corridor Western developed this alternative corridor to avoid approved solar development and to reduce visual impacts to visitors of the San Joaquin National Cemetery. It would provide another option to the West of Cemetery Alternative that is further from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. This alternative would extend south from the West of Cemetery Alternative Corridor at about 1.4 miles northeast of the Cemetery. This corridor would follow a valley, behind a ridgeline, until it turns east to rejoin the West of Cemetery Alternative about 1 mile southeast of the Cemetery. In comparison to the Proposed Project, this alternative would reduce potential land use conflicts and visual impacts. However, due to the ruggedness of the terrain this alternative would potentially cause soil erosion and water quality impacts, and may be technically infeasible. Table 2-7. Alternatives Considered and EliminatedAlternativeDescriptionForebay 500-kV CorridorWestern developed this alternative corridor to shorten the length of the Project and maximize use of existing transmission corridors. This alternative would provide another option to the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative. This alternative would deviate from the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative where that alternative turns southwest towards the San Luis Substation. This alternative would continue southeast following two existing PG&E 500-kV transmission lines across the southeastern portion of the O’Neill Forebay to the Los Banos Substation. A 0.7-mile segment of this alternative would cross the O’Neill Forebay in the existing transmission corridor. This alternative would maximize the use of existing transmission line easements. However, construction in the Forebay would result in potential water quality, soil erosion, and recreation impacts This alternative would not reduce the potential impacts of the Proposed Project; therefore; it was eliminated from consideration.Jasper Sears Road AlternativeWestern developed this alternative in response to scoping comments about potential land use conflicts of the Proposed Project with proposed solar development (Wright Solar Park), and current and proposed residential development (The Villages of Laguna San Luis), south of the Los Banos Substation. Scoping comments suggested an alternative alignment along Jasper Sears Road to minimize conflicts to The Villages of Laguna San Luis. This alternative corridor would exit the Los Banos Substation from the south and follow Jasper Sears Road and Western’s existing 500-kV transmission line for about 9 miles before turning due east for about 5.3 miles to join the Proposed Project. This alternative would avoid proposed solar development; however, it would conflict with the planned Agua Fria development. It would result in more ground disturbance than the Proposed Project. This alternative would reduce some potential impacts of the Proposed Project, but create other impacts that are potentially more severe; therefore, it was eliminated from consideration.2.4 Comparison of Alternatives This section identifies the environmentally preferred alternative (i.e., CEQA’s environmentally superior alternative) and the agency preferred alternative and presents detailed information regarding its their selection pursuant to the requirements of NEPA and CEQA. 2.4.1 Regulatory Requirements for Alternatives Comparison National Environmental Policy Act Under NEPA, the Draft EIS/EIR should identify the environmentally preferable or superior alternative from a range of alternatives considered if one exists at the draft stage. Commenters from other agencies and the public also are encouraged to address this question. However, in all situations, tThe environmentally preferable alternative must be identified in the Record of Decision on the Final EIS/EIR [Forty Questions No. 6(a) and 6(b)]. The answer to Forty Questions No. 6(a) states: a. Section 1505.2(b) requires that, in cases where an EIS has been prepared, the Record of Decision (ROD) must identify all alternatives that were considered, “...specifying the alternative or alternatives which were considered to be environmentally preferable.” The environmentally preferable alternative is the alternative that will promote the national environmental policy as expressed in NEPA’s Section 101. Ordinarily, this means the alternative that causes the least damage to the biological and physical environment; it also means the alternative which best protects, preserves, and enhances historic, cultural, and natural resources. The Council recognizes that the identification of the environmentally preferable alternative may involve difficult judgments, particularly when one environmental value must be balanced against another. The public and other agencies reviewing a Draft EIS can assist the lead agency to develop and determine environmentally preferable alternatives by providing their views in comments on the Draft EIS. Through the identification of the environmentally preferable alternative, the decisionmaker is clearly faced with a choice between that alternative and others, and must consider whether the decision accords with the Congressionally declared policies of the Act. California Environmental Quality Act CEQA requires the following for alternatives analysis and comparison: The EIR shall include sufficient information about each alternative to allow meaningful evaluation, analysis, and comparison with the Proposed Project. A matrix displaying the major characteristics and significant environmental effects of each alternative may be used to summarize the comparison. If an alternative would cause one or more significant effects in addition to those that would be caused by the project as proposed, the significant effects of the alternative shall be discussed, but in less detail than the significant effects of the project as proposed. Guidelines Section 15126.6(d) If the environmentally superior alternative is the No Project Alternative, CEQA requires identification of an environmentally superior action alternative among the other alternatives [CEQA Guidelines Section 15126.6(e)(2)]. In this EIS/EIR, the NEPA term “environmentally preferred alternative” is used to describe CEQA’s environmentally superior alternative. 2.4.2 Alternatives Comparison Methods To evaluate the various corridor alternatives, the Project area was divided into segments, as described in Section 2.2.1. The alternatives within each segment were compared to the analogous portion of the Proposed Project to identify the environmentally preferred corridor within each segment. The environmentally preferred corridor within the North, Central, San Luis and South segments were combined to comprise the Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative. Finally, the Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative was compared to the No Action Alternative to identify the Overall Environmentally Preferred Alternative. Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction of the SLTP would not occur. Western would arrange for transmission service for the SLU from the CAISO using existing electric infrastructure. As there would be no new adverse direct environmental impacts under this alternative, it is the Environmentally Preferred Alternative. However, as detailed in Section 1.2 and Appendix K, which address Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., the CAISO Tariff) over a 50-year period, the No Action/No Project Alternative is not cost effective and involves substantial cost uncertainties. Further, the No Action/No Project Alternative would not achieve the purpose and need or basic project objectives. CEQA Guidelines Section 15126.6(e)(2) requires that if the environmentally preferred alternative is the No Action/No Project Alternative, an EIR shall identify the environmentally preferred alternative among the action alternatives. Determining an environmentally preferred alternative requires balancing many environmental factors. In order to identify the environmentally preferred action alternative, the most important impacts in each issue area were identified and compared in Tables 2-8 through 2-11. Each of these tables presents a preference ranking and a brief explanation of the ranking for each environmental issue area. Although this Draft EIS/EIR identifies an Environmentally Preferred Alternative, it is possible that the decision- makers could balance the importance of each impact area differently and reach different conclusions when identifying the Agency Preferred Alternative in the Final EIS/EIR. 2.4.3 Comparison Among Coridor Action Alternatives For each area of the Proposed Project where an alternative is considered, the comparison begins with a summary of the significant impacts that cannot be mitigated. Significant and unavoidable impacts of the Proposed Project and any significant and unavoidable impacts either created or eliminated by each alternative are listed under each segment. Highlighting these areas of significant impacts identified which alternatives would be capable of eliminating significant unavoidable environmental effects of the Proposed Project, and which alternatives would create new significant impacts. This comparison helps identify the environmentally preferred alternative while considering all environmental resource areas. 2.4.3.1 Sumary of Significant and Unavoidable Impacts Noise The Proposed Project and every alternative in every segment would result in similar significant and unavoidable noise impacts during construction activities (listed below). These impacts would be shortterm (occurring intermittently for up to 1 to 2 weeks) at several isolated rural residences within approximately 500 feet of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. . Impact NOISE-1. Result in a substantial temporary or periodic increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project. . Impact NOISE-3. Result in noise levels that exceed local or federal noise regulations or guidelines. Neither the Proposed Project nor any alternatives would result in significant and unavoidable impacts for resource areas other than noise within the North, Central, or South segments. Significant and unavoidable impacts have been identified for Visual Resources (West of Cemetery Alternative only), Recreation (Proposed Project and alternatives), and Land Use (Proposed Project and alternatives) in the San Luis Segment, as described below. Visual Resources The Proposed Project would not result in significant and unavoidable impacts to visual resources in the San Luis Segment. However, the West of Cemetery Alternative would be prominently visible from a scenic overlook at the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, thereby resulting in the following significant and unavoidable impacts to Visual Resources: . Impact VIS-1. Cause degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of a visually important landscape. . Impact VIS-2. Introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape that are seen by highly sensitive viewer locations such as community enhancement areas or locations with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities that have been recognized as such through legislation or some other official declaration. . Impact VIS-3. Cause visual interruption that would dominate a unique viewshed or scenic view. Recreation The Proposed Project in the San Luis Segment would include construction of the new Los Banos West Substation, which would occupy up to 50 acres within the 150-acre Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. This would result in the following significant and unavoidable impacts to Recreation: . Impact REC-1. Conflict with established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. . Impact REC-2. Result in changes that alter or otherwise physically affect established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. . Impact REC-3. Decrease accessibility to areas established, designated, or planned for recreation. Each San Luis Segment alternative corridor would interconnect with the new Los Banos West Substation, thereby resulting in the same significant and unavoidable impacts as the Proposed Project. Land Use The Proposed Project in the San Luis Segment would include construction of the new Los Banos West Substation, which would occupy up to 50 acres within the 150-acre Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. This would result in the following significant and unavoidable impacts to Land Use: . Impact LU-1. Conflict with applicable land use plans, policies, goals, or regulations. . Impact LU-4. Conflict with State or federally established, designated, or reasonably foreseeable planned special use areas (e.g., recreation, wildlife management area, game management areas, waterfowl production areas, scientific and natural areas, wilderness areas, areas of critical environmental concern, etc.). Each San Luis Segment alternative corridor would interconnect with the new Los Banos West Substation, thereby resulting in the same significant and unavoidable impacts as the Proposed Project. 2.4.3.2 Alternatives Comparison Tables 2-8 through 2-11 present a comparison of the Proposed Project and corridor action alternatives in consideration of the most important impacts for every issue area within each corridor segment. The information in these tables is based on the conclusions presented in Chapter 4. Refer to the specific resource area analyses in Chapter 4 for additional information on affected resources, impact assessment methods, or the impacts. North Segment (500-kV) There are no alternatives to the Proposed Project in the North Segment. Therefore, the Proposed Project would be the environmentally preferred corridor. Central Segment (500-kV) In the Central Segment, the Patterson Pass Alternative would be the environmentally preferred corridor. The Proposed Project is approximately 1,000 feet closer to residences in this segment than the alternative Patterson Pass Alternative corridor; therefore, the Proposed Project would result in greater noise and visual resources impacts (refer to Table 2-8). Agricultural impacts also would be slightly greater than the Patterson Pass Alternative corridor. The Patterson Pass Road Alternative would result in greater impacts to biological resources than the Proposed Project. Table 2-8. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: Central Segment Issue Area Proposed Project Patterson Pass Alternative Agriculture . Rank = 2 . Permanent farmland impacts: 51.5 acres1 . Temporary farmland impacts: 34.8 acres . Preferred . Permanent farmland impacts: 46.9 acres . Temporary farmland impacts: 29.3 acres Air Quality and Climate Change . No preference2 . No preference Biological Resources . Preferred . Impacts fewer special-status plants . Impacts more ephemeral creeks, freshwater marsh, and vernal pools . Rank = 2 . Impacts more special-status plants . Impacts more wildflower fields, Great Valley riparian forest, intermittent creeks, and seasonal wetlands Cultural Resources and Native American Consultation . No preference . No preference Environmental Justice . No preference . No preference Geology, Minerals, and Soils . No preference . No preference Land Use . No preference . No preference Noise . Rank = 2 . Closer to residences . Preferred . Farther from residences Paleontological Resources . No preference . No preference Public Health and Safety . No preference . No preference Recreation . No preference . No preference Socioeconomics . No preference . No preference Traffic and Transportation . No preference . No preference Visual Resources . Rank = 2 . Closer to residences . Preferred . Farther from residences and scenic highway (I-5) Water Resources and Floodplains . No preference . No preference 1 - Farmland impacts are the sum of acreage potentially impacted within the Project study area and the Project corridor. 2 - No preference = impacts are similar or with negligible differences in intensity San Luis Segment (500-kV) In the San Luis Segment (500-kV), the Proposed Project would be the environmentally preferred corridor. The Proposed Project is the shortest route with the least ground disturbance. Therefore, it would result in fewer impacts to air quality, geology, paleontological resources, and water resources. The Proposed Project is furthest from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, and therefore, would avoid noise and visual impacts to this sensitive resource. Additionally, it would impact the least amount of habitat for the federally and State endangered and State fully protected blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Table 2-9. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (500-kV) Issue Area Proposed Project Butts Road Alternative West of Cemetery Alternative Agriculture . Rank = 2 . Permanent farmland impacts: 17.6 acres1 . Temporary farmland impacts: 7.2 acres . Preferred . Permanent farmland impacts: 12.5 acres . Temporary farmland impacts: 4.6 acres . Rank=3 . Permanent farmland impacts: 19.8 acres . Temporary farmland impacts: 3.6 acres Table 2-9. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (500-kV) Issue Area Proposed Project Butts Road Alternative West of Cemetery Alternative Air Quality and Climate Change . Preferred . Least emissions and dust . Shortest route requiring the use of construction equipment for the shortest duration . Rank = 2 . More emissions and dust than the Proposed Project . Longer route than the Proposed Project requiring the use of construction equipment for longer duration . Rank = 3 . Most emissions and dust . Longest route requiring the use of construction equipment for the longest duration Biological Resources . Preferred . Least impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat (federally endangered, State endangered, State fully protected) . Most impacts to sensitive plant communities and jurisdictional resources . Crosses two conservation easements . Rank = 2 . Greater impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat . Least impacts to sensitive plant communities and jurisdictional resources . Crosses one conservation easement . Rank = 3 . Greater impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat . Less impacts to sensitive plant communities and jurisdictional resources . Crosses one conservation easement Cultural Resources and Native American Consultation . No preference . No preference . No preference Environmental Justice . No preference . No preference . No preference Geology, Minerals, and Soils . Preferred . Shortest route would result in the least soil disturbance . Rank = 2 . Longer route would result in more soil disturbance than the Proposed Project . Rank = 3 . Longest route would result in the most soil disturbance . Steeper terrain would increase the potential for erosion and landslide Land Use . Rank = 2/No preference . Impacts are the same as the Butts Road Alternative . Rank = 2/No preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Preferred . Would avoid residences, recreation areas, and wildlife preserve lands Noise . Preferred . Would expose the fewest sensitive receptors (residences, recreation areas) to construction noise . Rank = 2 . Would expose more sensitive receptors (residences, recreation areas, San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery) to construction noise . Rank = 3 . Would expose more sensitive receptors to construction noise . Closest to San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery Paleontological Resources . Preferred . Would require the least ground disturbance, and therefore, has the lowest potential for impacts to paleontological resources . Rank = 2 . Would require more ground disturbance, and therefore, has higher potential for impacts to paleontological resources than the Proposed Project . Rank = 3 . Would require the most ground disturbance, and therefore, has the highest potential for impacts to paleontological resources Public Health and Safety . No preference . No preference . No preference Recreation . Preferred . Rank = 2/no preference . Would overlap a greater portion of the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area and the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area in comparison to the Proposed Project . Rank = 2/no preference . Impacts to recreation are the same as Butts Road Alternative Socioeconomics . No preference . No preference . No preference Table 2-9. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (500-kV) Issue Area Proposed Project Butts Road Alternative West of Cemetery Alternative Traffic and Transportation . No preference . No preference . No preference Visual Resources . Preferred . Rank = 2 . Would be more visible (closer) to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and to recreation areas on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay than the Proposed Project . Rank = 3 . Would result in a significant and unavoidable (Class I) impact to viewers at the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery & residences in this area Water Resources and Floodplains . Preferred . Rank = 2 . Longer route would result in more soil disturbance than the Proposed Project . Rank = 3 . Longest route would result in most soil disturbance . Steeper terrain would increase the potential for erosion and potentially result in greater impacts to water quality 1 - Farmland impacts are the sum of acreage potentially impacted within the Project study area and the Project corridor. San Luis Segment (70-kV) In the San Luis Segment (70-kV), the Proposed Project would be the environmentally preferred corridor. The Proposed Project and alternative are the same length, have the same length of new access roads, and have the same number of support structures. Therefore, impacts are similar and there is no preference between corridors for most issue areas. However, the Proposed Project would result in fewer impacts to habitat for federally and State-listed species including San Joaquin kit fox, California tiger salamander, and blunt-nosed leopard lizard. Additionally, the Proposed Project would be farther from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, thereby resulting in fewer land use, noise, and visual resources impacts than the West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative. Table 2-10. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (70-kV) Issue Area Proposed Project West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Agriculture . No preference . Permanent farmland impacts: 0.3 acre1 . Temporary farmland impacts: 3.3 acres . No preference . Permanent farmland impacts: 0.3 acre . Temporary farmland impacts: 8.0 acres Air Quality and Climate Change . No preference . No preference Biological Resources . Preferred . Fewer impacts to habitat for federally and State-listed species including San Joaquin kit fox, California tiger salamander, and blunt-nosed leopard lizard . Fewer impacts to non-native grassland, seasonal wetland, and northern claypan vernal pool habitat . Greater impacts to Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitat . Would be located in the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area . Not likely to cross conservation easements . Rank = 2 . Greater impacts to habitat for federally and State-listed species including San Joaquin kit fox, California tiger salamander, and blunt-nosed leopard lizard . Greater impacts to non-native grassland, seasonal wetland, and northern claypan vernal pool habitat . Fewer impacts to Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitat . Would be located in the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area . Crosses two conservation easements Cultural Resources and Native American Consultation . No preference . No preference Table 2-10. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: San Luis Segment (70-kV) Issue Area Proposed Project West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Environmental Justice . No preference . No preference Geology, Minerals, and Soils . No preference . No preference Land Use . Preferred . Would encroach into the Village of Santa Nella and the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area . Rank = 2 . Would encroach into recreation areas and the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery Noise . Preferred . Rank = 2 . Would be closer to, and therefore result in, greater exposure of sensitive receptors (San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area, San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery) to construction noise Paleontological Resources . No preference . No preference Public Health and Safety . No preference . No preference Recreation . Preferred . Rank = 2 . Would overlap a greater portion of the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area and the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Socioeconomics . No preference . No preference Traffic and Transportation . No preference . No preference Visual Resources . Preferred . Rank = 2 . Would be more visible (closer) to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and to recreation areas on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay Water Resources and Floodplains . No preference . No preference 1 - Farmland impacts are the sum of acreage potentially impacted within the Project study area and the Project corridor. South Segment In the South Segment, the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative would be the environmentally preferred corridor. The Proposed Project and the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative are adjacent, have the same length of easements and new access roads, and have the same number of support structures. Therefore, impacts are similar and there is no preference between corridors for most issue areas. However, the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative would have slightly fewer impacts to agricultural land. It would also be farther from more residences than the Proposed Project, thereby resulting in less construction noise impacts. The Billy Wright Road Alternative would be the least environmentally preferred alternative in this segment because it is the longest and would result in the most ground disturbance. Additionally, it would cross the Path of the Padres Trail, resulting in greater recreation impacts than the Proposed Project or the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative. Table 2-11. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: South Segment Issue Area Proposed Project San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Billy Wright Road Alternative Agriculture . Rank = 3 . Permanent farmland impacts: 31.2 acres1 . Temporary farmland impacts: 20.6 acres . Preferred . Permanent farmland impacts: 13.4 acres . Temporary farmland impacts: 18.3 acres . Rank=2 . Permanent farmland impacts: 19.1 acres . Temporary farmland impacts: 8.2 acres Table 2-11. Comparison of the Proposed Project to Alternatives: South Segment Issue Area Proposed Project San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Billy Wright Road Alternative Air Quality and Climate Change . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project Biological Resources . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Rank = 2 . Greater impacts to bluntnosed leopard lizard habitat . Greater impacts to jurisdictional resources Cultural Resources and Native American Consultation . No preference . No preference . No preference Environmental Justice . No preference . No preference . No preference Geology, Minerals, and Soils . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Rank = 2 . Longer route would result in more soil disturbance than the Proposed Project Land Use . No preference . No preference . No preference Noise . Rank = 3 . Would result in noise impacts to the most residences . Rank = 2 . Would reduce noise impacts for 2-3 residences and increase impacts at one residence in comparison to the Proposed Project . Preferred/no preference Paleontological Resources . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project Public Health and Safety . No preference . No preference . No preference Recreation . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Rank=2 . Overlaps the Path of the Padres Trail and a greater portion of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir Socioeconomics . No preference . No preference . No preference Traffic and Transportation . No preference . No preference . No preference Visual Resources . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Rank = 2 . 8 more structures, 4 more acres of land disturbed Water Resources and Floodplains . Preferred/no preference . Preferred/no preference . Impacts are the same as the Proposed Project . Rank = 2 . Longer route would result in more soil disturbance than the Proposed Project 1 - Farmland impacts are the sum of acreage potentially impacted within the Project study area and the Project corridor. Conclusion Based on the conclusions of Chapter 4, as summarized in Tables 2-8 through 2-11 above, the Environmentally Preferred Corridor Action Alternative is composed of (refer to Figure 2-7): . North Segment – Preferred Corridor Proposed Project . Central Segment – Patterson Pass Road Alternative . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – Preferred Corridor Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – Preferred Corridor Proposed Project . South Segment – San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative 2.4.4 Environmentaly Prefered Coridor Alternative vs. No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction of the San Luis Transmission Project would not occur. Western would arrange for transmission service for the San Luis Unit from the CAISO using existing electric infrastructure. As there would be no new adverse direct environmental impacts under this alternative, it would be preferable to the Environmentally Preferred Corridor Alternative. Therefore, the No Action/No Project Alternative is the Environmentally Preferred Alternative. As detailed in Section 1.2, Reclamation’s estimated transmission costs under the No Action/No Project Alternative (i.e., the CAISO Tariff) would be so expensive as to render this alternative infeasible. Further, the No Action/No Project Alternative is considered infeasible because it would not achieve the purpose and need or basic project objectives. 2.4.5 Environmentaly Prefered Action Alternative If the environmentally preferred alternative is the No Action/No Project Alternative, CEQA requires identification of an environmentally preferred action alternative among the other alternatives. The Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative is the Environmentally Preferred Corridor Alternative as described in Section 2.4.4 and illustrated in Figure 2-7. 2.4.4 Agency Prefered Alternative Determining the Agency Preferred Alternative requires that Western balance many factors with the Project’s purpose and need. It is the alternative that Western believes would fulfill its statutory mission and responsibilities, giving consideration to economic, environmental, technical, and other factors. As described above, the No Project/No Action Alternative is the Environmentally Preferred Alternative because it would avoid any adverse direct, indirect, or cumulative environmental impacts; however, it would not achieve the purpose and need or basic Project objectives. The Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative is composed of several segments, as listed in the preceding section. After analysis of public comments and further internal review of the EIS/EIR, Western has determined that its Agency Preferred Alternative is the same as the Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative in the Northern and San Luis (500-kV and 70-kV) segments.   Figure 2-7, titled “Enivronmentally Preferred Action Alternative," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.In the Central Segment, the Proposed Project is the agency preferred corridor. Although it would be closer to residences and have sight increases in the associated visual and temporary noise impacts, it would have less of an impact on biological resources. In particular, it would impact fewer special-status plant species. Additionally, it would require fewer crossings of the existing high voltage transmission lines, which would increase reliability by providing more space between circuits. In the Southern Segment, the Billy Wright Road Alternative is the agency preferred corridor. Although it would have greater recreation impacts by crossing the Path of the Padres Trail and slightly greater soil disturbance due to its longer length, it would avoid conflicts with the Wright Solar Park. At the time the Notice of Preparation and Notice of Intent for this EIS/EIR were published in November 2013, which set the baseline for analysis of environmental impacts in the Draft EIS/EIR, the Wright Solar Park was still early in its entitlement phase (the Project’s NOP was issued in October 2013). Western is aware that the Project is now fully permitted and expected to begin construction in 2016. In summary, the Agency Preferred Alternative is composed of (refer to Figure 2-8): . North Segment – Proposed Project . Central Segment – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – Proposed Project . South Segment – Billy Wright Road Alternative Table 2-12. Alternatives Comparison Summary Environmentally Preferred Alternative No Action/No Project Alternative Environmentally Preferred Action Alternative (Figure 2-7) . North Segment – Proposed Project . Central Segment – Patterson Pass Road Alternative . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – Proposed Project . South Segment – San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Agency Preferred Alternative (Figure 2-8) . North Segment – Proposed Project . Central Segment – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – Proposed Project . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – Proposed Project . South Segment – Billy Wright Road Alternative Figure 2-8, titled “Agency Preferred Alternative," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Chapter 3 Affected Environment 3.1 Introduction This chapter describes the existing conditions in the Project study area at the time of NOI and NOP publication. At this time, the exact locations and quantities of Project components (e.g., access roads, staging areas, pulling sites) are unknown and, in some cases, quantities of Project components are conservatively estimated (see Appendix E). To provide flexibility in siting Project components, particularly access roads that may extend outside of the proposed easement, a one-mile buffer was added on the west side of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. The buffer was extended up to I-5 on the east side of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors, except where the Project would be located east of I-5 near the Dos Amigos Substation. The affected environment sections below describe the resources within this buffer, which is referred to as the study area, unless otherwise defined for a specific resource. This EIS/EIR uses the term Project area to collectively describe the area within which Project components (transmission lines, access roads, and temporary construction areas) could be located. A corridor is a linear area within which the easements would be located; proposed corridors are part of the Project area. 3.1.1 Resources Considered and Eliminated Through internal and external scoping, Western and the Authority identified a number of issues of concern, which are evaluated in detail in Sections 3.2 through 3.16. Certain issue areas, presented below, were not further evaluated because they are not present in the study area or no measurable impacts would occur. Utilities and Service Systems The Proposed Project would not create significant adverse demands on local water, sanitary sewer, electricity, or natural gas systems. Water requirements for construction would be negligible. Given the number of workers and temporary duration of construction, there are no potentially significant impacts on local water, sewer systems, and electric service systems and the Project would not change the ability of the water and electricity suppliers to serve area demands. Therefore, utilities and service systems are not further evaluated. Public Services The temporary influx of construction personnel would not substantially increase demands on schools or hospitals, lower the level of service for fire protection or police protection, nor would it require the construction or expansion of facilities or services. There are no potentially significant impacts to public services associated with the Project; therefore, they are not further evaluated.  3.2 Agriculture 3.2.1 Proposed Project 3.2.1.1 Affected Environment The information used to describe the existing conditions was compiled primarily from maps and information published by the California Department of Conservation (DOC), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) – National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), and the California Department of Finance. In this section, agricultural resources are described within the Project study area as defined in Section 3.1. Quantitative data are provided for both the study area and the corridors to facilitate the impact analysis in Section 4.2 (Agriculture). Overview The Proposed Project lies entirely within the San Joaquin Valley (Valley), which is California’s top agricultural producing region, growing more than 250 unique crops. California is the nation’s leading dairy State, with three-quarters of its dairy cows located in the Valley. The annual gross value of agricultural production in the Valley is more than $25 billion (EPA, 2014). The Proposed Project crosses large portions of San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. These counties are ranked fifth, sixth, and seventh highest counties in total value of production within the State of California, respectively (CDFA, 2013). Eastern Alameda County is not typically a highly productive agricultural region, with the exception of the area along the northeastern edge of the county, which is traversed by the Proposed Project. This portion of Alameda County is part of the San Joaquin Valley, and therefore, is more similar in terms of agricultural land use and characteristics to San Joaquin County than to the remainder of Alameda County. Table 3.2-1 shows the total number of farms, amount of land in farms, average size of farms, and total harvested cropland for each county traversed by the Proposed Project based on the California Department of Finance Statistical Abstract (2009). Table 3.2-1. Number, Land Area, Average Size, and Harvested Crops of Farms by County County Number of Farms Land in Farms (acres) Average Size of Farms (acres) Harvested Cropland (acres) Alameda 424 218,094 514 7,926 San Joaquin 4,026 812,629 202 517,267 Stanislaus 4,267 789,853 185 347,750 Merced 2,964 1,006,127 339 479,156 Total of Counties (subtotal) 11,681 2,826,703 310 1,352,099 State 79,631 27,589,027 346 8,466,321 Source: California Department of Finance, Statistical Abstract, 2009  As shown, Stanislaus County had the greatest number of farms (4,267), Merced County had the greatest amount of land in farms (1,006,127 acres), and San Joaquin County had the greatest amount of harvested cropland (517,267 acres). Alameda County had the smallest number of farms (424), amount of land in farms (218,094 acres), and amount of harvested cropland (7,926 acres); however, it did have the largest average size of farms (514 acres). In total, all four counties contained 11,681 farms, which represents over 14 percent of the statewide total and the average farm size is slightly less than the statewide average. The total harvested cropland within the four counties was over 1.3 million acres, which represented over 15 percent of the total harvested cropland in the State. Characteristics Table 3.2-2 presents the primary cropland classification types (and total acres), as defined by the USDA NASS, of agricultural land within the study area. Grassland/Pasture is the largest single crop group grown in the study area (by acres), covering nearly 4,500 acres and accounting for about 4 percent of total farmland in the study area, followed by Other Hay/Non Alfalfa, Winter Wheat, and Alfalfa. Table 3.2-2. Cropland Classification Types within the Study Area Cropland Classification Study Area (Acres) Grassland/Pasture 4494.09 Other Hay/Non Alfalfa 236.41 Winter Wheat 224.65 Alfalfa 132.21 Fallow/Idle Cropland 93.03 Oats 57.60 Double Crop (Oats/Corn) 44.45 Grapes 18.47 Cherries 16.64 Source: USDA National Agriculture Statistics Service, 2014 The Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP) is a non-regulatory program administered by the California Department of Conservation, which provides an ongoing data set of agricultural land use and land use changes throughout California. The FMMP classifies land into a range of agricultural land use categories based on technical soil ratings and current land use. Important Farmland consists of four farmland designations: Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland, and Farmland of Local Importance. Table 3.2-3 defines these farmland categories and Table 3.2-4 provides for each category the number of acres and percentage of the total area within the study area and the Proposed Project corridor respectively. Table 3.2-3. California Department of Conservation Farmland Categories Farmland Category Definition Prime Farmland Farmland with the best combination of physical and chemical features able to sustain long-term agricultural production. This land has the soil quality, growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields. Farmland of Statewide Importance Farmland similar to Prime Farmland but with minor shortcomings, such as greater slopes or less ability to store soil moisture. Unique Farmland Farmland of lesser quality soils used for the production of the State’s leading agricultural crops. This land is usually irrigated, but may include non-irrigated orchards or vineyards as found in some climatic zones in California. Farmland of Local Importance Land of importance to the local agricultural economy as determined by each county’s board of supervisors and a local advisory committee. Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Land Resource Protection, 2012  Table 3.2-4. Important Farmland Acreages – Proposed Project Important Farmland Category Study Area (acres) Percent of Total Study Area (acres) Corridor (acres) Percent of Total Corridor (acres) Prime Farmland 14,205 4.4 495 3.7 Farmland of Statewide Importance 618 0.2 0 0.0 Unique Farmland 779 0.2 31 0.2 Farmland of Local Importance 57,035 17.4 1,561 11.6 Total 72,637 22.2 2,087 15.5 Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Land Resource Protection, 2012; Aspen calculations As shown in Figures 3.2-1a through 3.2-1d, the study area contains substantial amounts of Important Farmland (72,637 acres), which is consistent with the region’s highly productive agricultural land base. The greatest amount of land is designated as Farmland of Local Importance (57,035 acres) and Prime Farmland (14,205 acres). Farmland of Local Importance within the study area is primarily located south of the Patterson Pass Road. Prime Farmland within the study area is primarily located between the Tracy Substation and Patterson Pass Road with the exception of various parcels scattered throughout the corridor south of Patterson Pass Road. Within the Proposed Project corridors, the greatest amounts of agricultural land are designated as Farmland of Local Importance (1,561 acres) and Prime Farmland (495 acres). 3.2.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Farmland Protection Policy Act (FPPA). The Farmland Protection Policy Act, 7 U.S.C. §§ 4201, et seq., was enacted in 1981 to minimize the impact federal programs have on the unnecessary and irreversible conversion of farmland to nonagricultural uses. It ensures that to the extent possible, federal programs are administered to be compatible with State, local units of government, and private programs and policies to protect farmland. Federal agencies are required to develop and review their policies and procedures to implement the FPPA every two years. The FPPA does not authorize the Federal Government to regulate the use of private or non-federal land or, in any way, affect the property rights of owners. Projects are subject to FPPA requirements if they will irreversibly convert farmland (directly or indirectly) to nonagricultural use; and are either completed by a federal agency or with assistance from a federal agency. For the purpose of FPPA, farmland includes Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, and Land of Statewide or Local Importance (defined in Table 3.2-3 above). Farmland subject to FPPA requirements does not have to be currently used for cropland. It can be forest land, pastureland, cropland, or other land, but not water or urban built-up land. Compliance is to be coordinated with the USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). The California Land Conservation Act (Williamson Act). The California Land Conservation Act of 1965, more commonly referred to as the Williamson Act, established a program to allow local governments to enter into 10-year contracts with private landowners for the purpose of restricting specific parcels of land to agricultural or related open space use. In return, landowners receive property tax adjustments. The property tax assessments are determined based on the agricultural or open space land uses rather than the land’s full market value. Therefore, tax assessments for land parcels under the Williamson Act are much lower than normal. Utility corridors, including transmission line easements, are accepted as a compatible use under Williamson Act contracts. Figure 3.2-1a, titled “Important Farmlands,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.2-1b, titled “Important Farmlands,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.2-1c, titled “Important Farmlands,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.2-1d, titled “Important Farmlands,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Alameda General Plan. The East County Area Plan (ECAP), designated under the Alameda County General Plan, identifies a portion of the Proposed Project study area considered for expansion as “Large Parcel Agriculture (LPA).” Under the ECAP, the LPA designation is described as follows: “…this designation permits agriculture uses, agriculture processing facilities, limited agricultural support service uses, secondary residential units, visitor-servicing commercial facilities, recreational uses, public and quasi-public uses, solid waste landfills and related waste management facilities, quarries, windfarms and related facilities, utility corridors, and similar uses compatible with agriculture.” The Merced General Plan. The Merced County General Plan describes and maps a potential Agricultural Services Center (ASC) zone to the west of San Luis Reservoir. An ASC would provide a location for agricultural services, farm support operations, and convenience commercial services for the rural population. The General Plan also describes and maps potential Planned Agricultural Industrial Development (PAID) zones to the north and to the southeast of San Luis Reservoir. 3.2.2 Corridor Alternatives 3.2.2.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative As illustrated in Figures 3.2-1a through 3.2-1d, Tthe alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project. Therefore, the existing conditions in this segment will be similar to those described above and quantified in Table 3.2-4 for the Proposed Project. Existing agricultural resources include a significant amount of land parcels designated as Important Farmland and agricultural cropland. The alternative study area contains much of the Farmland of Local Importance found within the study area for the Proposed Project. However, in contrast to that of the Proposed Project, the alternative study area contains only a small portion of Prime Farmland. 3.2.2.2 Butts Road Alternative As illustrated in Figure 3.2-1d, Tthe alternative study area lies farther to the west in comparison to the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the Los Banos Substation. Existing agricultural resources in the alternative study area include several parcels of Farmland of Local Importance to the north and south of the Forebay. 3.2.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative As illustrated in Figure 3.2-1d, Tthe alternative study area overlaps the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. However, much of the alternative study area lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more varied terrain. This terrain tends to be less suitable for agricultural land use; therefore, the alternative study area contains only a few parcels designated as Important Farmland and less land under current agricultural production in comparison to the Proposed Project. 3.2.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative As illustrated in Figure 3.2-1d, Mmuch of the alternative study area overlaps the Proposed Project with the exception of a portion on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay. Where it overlaps, the existing agricultural resources are similar to those described for the Proposed Project. Existing agricultural resources include several land parcels designated Important Farmland as well as land under current agricultural production. The portion of the alternative study area that lies outside of the Proposed Project traverses varying terrain on mostly federal and State land. There are no lands under current agricultural use or designated as Important Farmlands. 3.2.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative As illustrated in Figure 3.2-1d, Tthe alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project between the San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation. Therefore, the existing agricultural resources will be similar to those described for the Proposed Project and quantified in Table 3.2-4. Existing agricultural resources include a significant amount of land parcels designated as Important Farmland, as well as land under current agricultural production. 3.2.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative As illustrated in Figure 3.2-1d, Iin the vicinity of the Los Banos Substation, the alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project., Aas a result, the existing agricultural resources will be similar to those described for the Proposed Project and quantified in Table 3.2-4. South of the Los Banos Substation, the alternative study area lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more rugged terrain. This terrain tends to be less suitable for agricultural land use. Therefore, the alternative study area contains only a few parcels designated as Important Farmland and less land under current agricultural production. 3.3 Air Quality and Climate Change 3.3.1 Proposed Project This section describes the existing air quality conditions in the study area, which is defined primarily as the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin (SJVAB). 3.3.1.1 Afected Environment Climate and Meteorology Air quality in a study area location is affected by the locations of air pollutant sources, the amount of pollutants emitted, and meteorological and topographical conditions affecting their dispersion. Atmospheric conditions, including wind speed, wind direction, and air temperature gradients, interact with the physical features of the landscape to determine the movement and dispersal of air pollutants. The climate in the San Joaquin Valley (Valley) is Mediterranean, with mild wet winters and warm dry summers. The local climate is most affected by the Pacific High Pressure System over the eastern Pacific Ocean, and local topography. During winter months, a persistent high-pressure area over the Great Basin Region to the east of the Sierra Nevada also affects the meteorology in the Valley. The geophysical boundaries of the Valley are the Sierra Nevada mountains to the east (8,000 to 14,000 feet in elevation), the Southern Coast Ranges to the west (averaging 3,000 feet), and the Tehachapi mountains in the south (6,000 to 8,000 feet). These topographic features restrict air movement through the Valley, and the generally high barometric pressure over the basin prevents movement vertically, thus preventing air pollutants from escaping (Western Regional Climate Center [WRCC], 2014). Wind direction and speed also play a substantial role in air quality. During summer, winds in the Valley are primarily from the north, ultimately flowing south with partial flow through Tehachapi Pass. During winter, the prevailing winds may be from the north or, less frequently, from the south, but are often stagnate. High atmospheric stability, calm winds, and cold temperatures during winter can trap pollutants in the Valley, especially carbon monoxide and particulate matter. Inversion layers during summer months trap pollutants during the day. As a result, the Valley is highly susceptible to pollutant accumulation over time (WRCC, 2014). Existing Air Quality Air quality is regulated by federal (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]), state (California Air Resources Board [ARB]), and local agencies (air districts). The federal Clean Air Act (CAA) of 1970, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401-7671, established National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) in 40 CFR Part 50. The NAAQS include both primary (protective of human health) and secondary (protective of property and natural ecosystems) standards for “criteria” pollutants such as: ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), particulate matter less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), and particulate matter less than 2.5 microns in diameter (PM2.5). Regions with air quality levels that exceed NAAQS are designated as “nonattainment” and regions with air quality levels that are less than or equal to NAAQS are designated as “attainment.” Air quality designations are determined for each criteria pollutant through ambient air quality monitoring. The 1990 CAA Amendments established attainment deadlines for all areas designated as nonattainment. The State of California has adopted standards known as the California Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS) that are typically more stringent than NAAQS. A comparison of federal and state standards is presented in Table 3.3-1. Table 3.3-1. National and California Ambient Air Quality Standards Pollutant Averaging Time CAAQS NAAQS Health Effects Ozone (O3) 1-hour 8-hour 0.09 ppm 0.070 ppm — 0.0750.070 ppm Breathing difficulties, lung tissue damage Respirable particulate matter (PM10) 24-hour Annual 50 .g/m3 20 .g/m3 150 .g/m3 — Respiratory disease, lung damage, cancer, premature death Fine particulate matter (PM2.5) 24-hour Annual — 12 .g/m3 35 .g/m3 15 12.0 .g/m3 Respiratory disease, lung damage, cancer, premature death Carbon monoxide (CO) 1-hour 8-hour 20 .g/m3 9.0 ppm 35 ppm 9.0 ppm Chest pain in heart patients, headaches, reduced mental alertness Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) 1-hour Annual 0.18 ppm 0.030 ppm 0.100 ppm 0.053 ppm Lung irritation and damage Sulfur dioxide (SO2) 1-hour 3-hour 24-hour Annual 0.25 ppm — 0.04 ppm — 0.075 ppm 0.5 ppm 0.14 ppm 0.03 ppm Lung disease and breathing problems in asthmatics Notes: ppm = parts per million .g/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter The ARB divided California into regional air basins according to topographic air drainage features. From a geophysical standpoint, the Proposed Project and all alternatives are located within the SJVAB. Project components within the North Segment and activities of the Proposed Project that take place in Alameda County are located in the jurisdiction of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). All other components and activities are in the jurisdiction of the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District (SJVAPCD). Table 3.3-2 provides the attainment status of the SJVAB in SJVAPCD jurisdiction with regard to the NAAQS and CAAQS identified in Table 3.3-1. Table 3.3-3 provides the attainment status of San Joaquin Valley portion (far eastern Alameda County) of the BAAQMD jurisdiction. Table 3.3-4 shows the maximum measurements and days over air quality standards for several criteria pollutants in the SJVAB. Table 3.3-2. San Joaquin Valley Attainment Status Pollutant NAAQS1 CAAQS2 Ozone – One hour No federal standard3 Nonattainment Ozone – Eight hour Nonattainment/Extreme4 Nonattainment PM10 Attainment5 Nonattainment PM2.5 Nonattainment6 Nonattainment Carbon monoxide Attainment/Unclassified Attainment/Unclassified Nitrogen dioxide Attainment/Unclassified Attainment Sulfur dioxide Attainment/Unclassified Attainment Lead (particulate) No designation/classification Attainment Hydrogen sulfide No federal standard Unclassified Sulfates No federal standard Attainment Visibility reducing particles No federal standard Unclassified Vinyl Chloride No federal standard Attainment 1 - See 40 CFR Part 81 2 - See CCR Title 17 Sections 60200-60210 3 - Effective June 15, 2005, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) revoked the Federal 1-hour ozone standard, including associated designations and classifications. EPA had previously classified the SJVAB as extreme nonattainment for this standard. EPA approved the 2004 Extreme Ozone Attainment Demonstration Plan on March 8, 2010 (effective April 7, 2010). 75 Fed. Reg. 10420 (2010) Many applicable requirements for extreme 1-hour ozone nonattainment areas continue to apply to the SJVAB. 4 - Though the Valley was initially classified as serious nonattainment for the 1997 8-hour ozone standard, EPA approved Valley reclassification to extreme nonattainment in the Federal Register on May 5, 2010 (effective June 4, 2010). 75 Fed. Reg. 24409 (2010). 5 - On November 12, 2008, EPA redesignated the San Joaquin Valley to attainment for the PM10 National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) and approved the PM10 Maintenance Plan. 73 Fed. Reg. 66759 (2008). 6 - The Valley is designated serious nonattainment for the 1997 PM2.5 NAAQS. EPA designated the Valley as serious nonattainment for the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQS on November 13, 2009December 22, 2015 (effective December 14, 2009). 74 Fed. Reg. 58688 (2009). For the activities within Alameda County and BAAQMD, Table 3.3-3 provides the attainment status of the BAAQMD jurisdiction. Table 3.3-3. BAAQMD Attainment Status for BAAQMD Pollutant NAAQS1 CAAQS2 Ozone – One hour No federal standard Nonattainment Ozone – Eight hour Nonattainment Nonattainment PM10 Attainment/Unclassified Nonattainment PM2.5 Nonattainment Nonattainment Carbon Monoxide Attainment Attainment Nitrogen Dioxide Attainment Attainment Sulfur Dioxide Attainment Attainment Lead (Particulate) No designation/classification Attainment Hydrogen Sulfide No federal standard Unclassified Sulfates No federal standard Attainment Visibility Reducing Particles No federal standard Unclassified Vinyl Chloride No federal standard Unclassified Source: BAAQMD; http://hank.baaqmd.gov/pln/air_quality/ambient_air_quality.htm. 1 - See 40 CFR Part 81 2 - See CCR Title 17 Sections 60200-60210  Table 3.3-4. SJVAB Criteria Pollutant Data, 2011-2013 Parameter 2011 2012 20131 8-Hour Ozone Maximum 0.105 2 0.116 2 0.106 2 Days above National Standard 109 2 105 2 89 2 Days above State Standard 131 2 134 2 112 2 Hourly Ozone Maximum 0.134 0.135 0.123 2 Days above National Standard 71 72 41 Days above State Standard 3 2 3 2 0 Daily PM2.5 Maximum 80.3 93.4 167.3 Average 18.1 17.9 18.7 Daily PM10 Maximum 151.8 138.6 350.7 2 Average 44.8 45.1 65.2 2 Days above National Standard 0 0 4.8 2 Table 3.3-4. SJVAB Criteria Pollutant Data, 2011-2013 Parameter 2011 2012 20131 8-Hour CO Maximum 2.71 2.22 NA Days above Standard 0 0 0 Hourly NO2 Maximum 69 78 118 2 Average 16 15 15 Days above Standard 0 0 1 2 1 - Values in 2013 were substantially affected by several wildfire and structure fires occurring simultaneously 2 - Indicates exceedance of State or Federal Standards All measurements in parts per million (ppm) Source: ARB Climate Change and Greenhouse Gases Climate scientists make global-scale observations and reconstructions of the climate system. For the period 1950 onwards, relatively comprehensive data sets of observations are available. Consensus expressed by the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) shows that: “warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, sea level has risen, and the concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased” (IPCC, 2013). Specifically, within the San Joaquin Valley, water availability is projected to decline and increases in peak temperatures are expected to drive higher peak period electricity demands for cooling. Between 2001 and 2010, streamflow totals in the Sacramento.San Joaquin river basin were at least 5 percent lower than the 20th century average annual flows (ICF, 2014). The Third U.S. National Climate Assessment, released on May 6, 2014, provides an authoritative and comprehensive source of scientific information to date about climate-change impacts across all U.S. regions and on critical sectors of the economy. For the Southwest United States, including the project area, the National Climate Assessment emphasizes the risks to scarce water resources and states: Climate changes pose challenges for an already parched region that is expected to get hotter and, in its southern half, significantly drier. Increased heat and changes to rain and snowpack will send ripple effects throughout the region’s critical agriculture sector, affecting the lives and economies of 56 million people—a population that is expected to increase 68 percent by 2050, to 94 million. Severe and sustained drought will stress water sources, already over-utilized in many areas, forcing increasing competition among farmers, energy producers, urban dwellers, and plant and animal life for the region’s most precious resource. Man-made emissions of CO2 are largely from combustion of fossil fuels. The major categories of fossil fuel combustion CO2 sources can be broken into sectors for residential, commercial, industrial, transportation, and electricity generation. The transportation sector includes all motor gasoline and diesel fuel combustion, and the GHG emissions of this sector are not split into activities or uses (i.e., there is no separate estimate for the level of GHG emissions caused by gasoline or diesel fuel combustion-related to statewide construction activities). Other GHG emissions such as methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are also tracked by state inventories but occur in much smaller quantities. The global warming potential of methane is about 21 times that of CO2. When quantifying GHG emissions, the different global warming potentials of GHG pollutants are usually taken into account by normalizing their rates to an equivalent CO2 emission rate (CO2 Eq.). California’s greenhouse gas emissions are large in a world-scale context and growing (CEC, 2007). The state emits approximately 500 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent (MMTCO2 Eq.) or more than one percent of the 49,000 MMTCO2 Eq. emitted globally (IPCC, 2007). Electricity generation within California emits about 50 million metric tons of CO2 (with yearly variations) or 15 percent of the total statewide CO2 emissions and about one percent of statewide methane emissions. Toxic Air Contaminants Toxic air contaminants (TACs) are a category of air pollutants, separate from criteria pollutants, that pose a present or potential hazard to human health, but which tend to be emitted on a localized and sourcespecific basis and cause impacts that are typically more localized than those created by criteria air pollutants. More than 900 toxic air contaminants are recognized by different regulatory agencies. Although there are no ambient air quality standards for these pollutants, sources are regulated with emission. and risk.based requirements at the federal, state, and local levels. 3.3.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards The federal CAA, as amended, and the California Clean Air Act both require that air quality management plans be prepared by the air districts to demonstrate how the ambient air quality standards will be achieved in nonattainment areas. Federal Air Quality Regulations, Plans and Standards . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) Emission Standards for Non-Road Diesel Engines. The USEPA has established a series of cleaner emission standards for new off-road diesel engines culminating in the Tier 4 Final Rule of June 2004. Tier 4 or Interim Tier 4 standards apply to all offroad diesel engines model year 2012 or newer. . USEPA Non-Road Diesel Fuel Rule. In May 2004, the USEPA set sulfur limits for non-road diesel fuel. Under this rule, sulfur levels in non-road diesel fuel are now limited to 15 ppm (USEPA, 2004). . USEPA Emission Standards for On-Road Trucks. To reduce emissions from on-road, heavy-duty diesel trucks, the USEPA established a series of cleaner emission standards for new engines, starting in 1988. . USEPA General Conformity Rule. Western must make a determination of whether approval of the Project (i.e., a federal action) would cause or contribute to a violation of the NAAQS or interfere with attainment planning (40 CFR Part 93 et seq.). State Air Quality Regulations, Plans and Standards . California ARB California Diesel Risk Reduction Plan. ARB has adopted several regulations that are meant to reduce the health risk associated with on- and off-road and stationary diesel engine operation. This plan recommends many control measures with the goal of an 85 percent reduction in diesel particulate matter (DPM) emissions by 2020. . California ARB Emission Standards for On-Road and Off-Road Diesel Engines. The ARB, similar to the USEPA on-road and off-road emissions standards, regulations described above, has established emission standards for new on-road and off-road diesel engines. These regulations have model year–based emissions standards for NOx, hydrocarbons, CO, and particulate matter. . California ARB Emission Standards for Off-Road Large Spark-Ignition Engines. The ARB has established emission standards for off-road equipment using large spark-ignition (e.g., gasoline-powered 25 horsepower and greater) engines produced in 2001 or later. These regulations have model year–based emissions standards for NOx, hydrocarbons, and CO. . California ARB In-Use Off-Road Vehicle Regulations. The state has also enacted a regulation for the reduction of diesel particulate matter (DPM) and criteria pollutant emissions from in-use off-road dieselfueled vehicles. . California ARB Heavy Duty Diesel Truck Idling Regulation. This ARB rule became effective February 1, 2005, and prohibits heavy-duty diesel trucks from idling for longer than five minutes at a time, unless they are queuing, and provided the queue is located beyond 100 feet from any homes or schools. . California ARB In-Use On-Road Heavy Duty Vehicle Regulation. This is the ARB regulation for the reduction of DPM and criteria pollutants from in-use on-road heavy duty diesel trucks. . California ARB California Diesel Fuel Regulations. In 2004, the ARB set limits on the sulfur content of diesel fuel sold in California for use in on-road and off-road motor vehicles. . California ARB Statewide Portable Equipment Regulation Program. The PERP establishes a uniform program to regulate portable engines and portable engine–driven equipment units. Local Air Quality Regulations, Plans and Standards . San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District rules and regulations including: Rule 4101 (Visible Emissions), Rule 4102 (Nuisances), and Regulation VIII (Fugitive PM10 Prohibitions). . San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District Guidance for Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts (March 2015). The Guidance defines the thresholds that the air district has adopted for determining the significance of criteria air pollutant emissions, toxic air contaminants, and odors. Climate Change Plans, Policies, and Regulations . The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Revised Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change Impacts and Greenhouse Gas Emissions (December 2014). This guidance indicates that GHG from a federal action usually warrant quantitative disclosure if likely to exceed a level of 25,000 MTCO2e annually. . The California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (Assembly Bill [AB] 32) mandates that certain state agencies approving a project analyze the project’s potential to contribute to climate change through emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG). . Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases Under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act (January 2010). . California ARB Regulation for Reducing Sulfur Hexafluoride (SF6) Emissions from Gas Insulated Switchgear (17 CCR 95350 to 95359). This regulation for reducing SF6 emissions from electric power system gas insulated switchgear requires jurisdictional owners of such switchgear to: (1) annually report their SF6 emissions; (2) determine the emission rate relative to the SF6 capacity of the switchgear; (3) provide a complete inventory of all gas insulated switchgears and their SF6 capacities; (4) produce a SF6 gas container inventory; and (5) keep all information current for CARB enforcement staff inspection and verification. 3.3.2 Coridor Alternatives The study areas for the corridor alternatives are entirely within the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin and the study area for the Proposed Project. Therefore, existing air quality is the same as described for the Proposed Project and the alternatives are subject to the same standards. 3.4 Biological Resources The information presented in this section is summarized from the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Survey Report, Appendix C of this Draft EIS/EIR. Refer to that document for more detailed information on the affected environment for the Proposed Project and alternatives. This section describes existing biological resources and the regulatory environment pertinent to this resource. Impacts to biological resources, including impacts to special-status plants, animals, and sensitive habitats as well as conflicts with planning documents pertaining to biological resources are analyzed in Section 4.4 (Biological Resources). 3.4.1 Proposed Project The study area for biological resources includes a buffer area surrounding the Proposed Project and its alternatives, as described in Section 3.1. The Project area is the area within which Project components (transmission lines, access roads, and temporary construction areas) could be located. The broader study area is used to identify biological resources in areas within and near the Project that could be subject to indirect effects, while direct effects would be limited to the Project area. Plant communities, wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State, and special-status species occurrences were surveyed only in the Project area, but their potential for occurrence has been extrapolated to the entire study area based on information obtained from the California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB), California Native Plant Society (CNPS) online electronic inventory of rare and endangered plants of California; review of aerial imagery; the online eBird database of bird sightings; local biological resources reports and conservation plans; literature review regarding regionally occurring special-status species; and consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW), and other local species experts. 3.4.1.1 Affected Environment Baseline data for the study area were collected from several sources, including the CNDDB; CNPS online electronic inventory of rare and endangered plants of California, 8th edition; review of aerial imagery; the online eBird database of bird sightings; local biological resources reports and conservation plans; literature review regarding regionally occurring special-status species; and consultation with the USFWS, CDFW (formerly CDFG), and other local species experts. The area covered by the CNDDB search included the USGS 7.5-minute series quadrangles through which the Project passes, as well as the surrounding quadrangles. Habitat-level reconnaissance surveys and vegetation mapping were conducted in spring of 2014. Portions of the Project area were not visited due to right-of-entry restrictions on several landholdings, and most of the unvisited areas were not visible from public access points. Refer to Appendix C for more information on surveys and background research. The study area is in the western San Joaquin Valley along the foothills of the Diablo Range. The study area encompasses primarily open space with varying terrain and sparse vegetation. Steep terrain in the western portion gives way to flat agricultural lands to the east. The study area roughly parallels I-5, the Delta-Mendota Canal, and the California Aqueduct. It also abuts the O’Neill Forebay and the east side of the San Luis Reservoir. This portion of the study area is primarily open space designated for recreational use and wildlife conservation. Several areas of residential and commercial development and scattered agricultural lands lie to the east near the Forebay. South of the Forebay, the study area crosses the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, then continues through rural and undeveloped private lands, with scattered development and agricultural lands to the east, before crossing over I-5 and terminating at the Dos Amigos Substation. Climate in the region is temperate, with mild winters and hot, dry summers. Plant Communities Plant communities were mapped only within the actual Project area; these are shown on Figure 3 of the Biological Survey Report in Appendix C and summarized below. See Appendix C for detailed vegetation descriptions. Sensitive Plant Communities The following plant communities are designated as sensitive by the CDFW. . Freshwater Marsh. This vegetation corresponds to the coastal and valley freshwater marsh described in Holland (1986). It is dominated by perennial, emergent monocots up to 4-5 meters tall, often forming completely closed canopies. Schoenoplectus spp. and Typha spp. dominate. It occurs in sites that lack significant water currents and that are permanently flooded by freshwater. In the Project area, freshwater marsh was mapped in various drainages including Patterson Run, Corral Hollow Creek, Mountain House Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Lone Tree Creek, and Salado Creek. . Riparian Great Valley Forest. This vegetation corresponds to the great valley cottonwood riparian forest and sycamore alluvial woodland described in Holland (1986). It is a dense, broad-leafed, winterdeciduous riparian forest dominated by cottonwood (Populus fremontii) and willow (Salix spp.) that occurs on fine-grained alluvial soils near perennial or nearly perennial streams. In sycamore alluvial woodland, sycamores (Platanus racemosa) are dominant and mostly well-spaced. Understory vegetation is mulefat (Baccharis salicifolia), willows, California sagebrush (Artemisia californica), and non-native grasses. In the Project area, riparian great valley forest was mapped along major drainages, including Corral Hollow, Lone Tree, and Salado creeks. Sycamore alluvial woodland was mapped along Orestimba creek. . Vernal Pool. This corresponds to the northern claypan vernal pool described in Holland (1986). It occurs in depressions in grassland with vernal pool plants such as Eryngium spp., Plagiobothrys spp., Lasthenia spp., Psilocarphus spp., etc. Often more or less saline. Vernal pools were mapped in grasslands in the central and southern portions of the Project area. . Grassland, Native Perennial. This vegetation corresponds to the valley needlegrass grassland and valley wildrye grassland described in Holland (1986). Valley needlegrass grassland has at least 5 percent absolute cover or 10 percent relative cover of purple needle grass (Nasella pulchra); other species include non-native grasses such as red brome (Bromus rubens), wild oats (Avena spp.), hare barley (Hordeum murinum ssp. leporinum), and native and non-native forbs. Valley wildrye grassland has at least 50 percent relative cover of creeping wildrye (Elymus triticoides). It typically occurs along creeks and drainages and can also be a seasonal wetland type. In the Project area, native grasslands were mapped in small areas near O’Neill Forebay and San Luis Reservoir. Other Plant Communities and Land Cover Types . Riparian Great Valley Scrub. This vegetation corresponds to the great valley willow scrub described in Holland (1986). It is dominated by shrubby willows such as arroyo willow (Salix lasiolepis) and narrow-leaved willow (Salix exigua), with few to no cottonwood trees. Understory species include mulefat, Himalayan blackberry (Rubus armeniacus), and herbaceous species such as rabbit’s-foot grass (Polypogon monspeliensis), nut sedge (Cyperus eragrostis), rushes (Juncus spp.), sedges (Carex spp.), curly dock (Rumex crispus), and brass buttons (Cotula coronopifolia). In the Project area, riparian great valley scrub was mapped along several unnamed intermittent drainages and also in isolated patches along Mountain House Creek. . Elderberry, Isolated. Elderberry shrubs (Sambucus nigra ssp. caerulea) were mapped because they can support the federally listed valley elderberry longhorn beetle (Desmocerus californicus dimorphus). Elderberry shrubs occur within the great valley cottonwood riparian forest in one area along Salado Creek. . Grassland, Non-native Annual. This vegetation corresponds to the non-native grassland described in Holland (1986). It is dominated by nonnative grasses and forbs. Native forbs occur at low density and include fiddleneck (Amsinckia menziesii), blow wives (Achyrachaena mollis), tall stephanomeria (Stephanomeria virgata), Ithuriel’s spear (Triteleja laxa), red maids (Calandrinia ciliata), purple owl’s clover (Castilleja exserta), small-headed matchweed (Gutierrezia microcephala), California poppy (Eschscholzia californica), vinegar weed (Trichostema lanceolatum), and sacred datura (Datura wrightii). Many of the non-native grasslands in the Project area were grazed and some had been disked. It is the most common and widespread vegetation type in the Project area. . Wildflower Fields. This vegetation corresponds to the wildflower fields described in Holland (1986). It is an herb-dominated type with conspicuous annual wildflower displays; species’ dominance varies from site to site and year to year. Wildflower fields are typically found on dry sites low in nutrients, and are associated with grasslands or oak woodlands. In most areas vegetation is relatively sparse with bare ground comprising up to 50 percent of the overall ground cover. Wildflower fields were mapped in small inclusions within non-native grasslands in the northern and central portions of the Project area. . Coyote Bush Scrub. This vegetation corresponds to the coyote bush scrub described in Holland (1986). It is a shrubland dominated by coyote brush (Baccharis pilularis), with a few mesquites (Prosopis glandulosa var. torreyana) and big saltbush (Atriplex lentiformis). Other species include ripgut brome, gum plant (Grindelia sp.), perennial pepperweed (Lepidium latifolium), fiddleneck, small melilot (Melilotus indicus), winecup clarkia (Clarkia purpurea ssp. quadrivulnera), seaside heliotrope (Heliotropium curassavicum), horehound (Marrubium vulgare), and field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis). In the Project area, coyote bush scrub was mapped in small areas near O’Neill Forebay and San Luis Reservoir; and the west side of Los Banos Creek Reservoir. . Agricultural Fields. Areas planted in orchards, irrigated pastures, grain fields planted with hay or alfalfa, and vineyards were mapped as agricultural fields. Agricultural fields were mapped primarily in the North Segment of the Project area. . Other. Areas that did not conform to the other vegetation types described above were mapped as “other.” These include eucalyptus groves and areas with planted trees. One area was a presumed mitigation site. Small areas of native California sagebrush (Artemisia californica) that occurs within and adjacent to the cottonwood riparian forest community at Corral Hollow Creek were also mapped as “other.” In the Project area, it was mapped at Corral Hollow Creek, near Garzas Creek, near Mustang Creek, and near Los Banos. . Barren. Barren areas generally consist of roads, road shoulders, dirt parking lots, and areas that were predominantly paved, rock, gravel, bare soils, or sand. It includes some bare areas from grazing. Vegetation is typically absent, although sparse cover of weedy species such as English plantain (Plantago lanceolata), filarees, prickly lettuce (Lactuca serriola), oats, soft brome, and ryegrass may be present. Some native plants may also occur such as sticky tarweed, gum plant, and foothill plantain. Barren areas are scattered throughout the Project area. . Commercial. Buildings and paved parking lots or other developed areas were mapped as “commercial.” This type is devoid of vegetation with the exception of some landscaped, ornamental plants. In the Project area, commercial areas comprise various roads and developments. Common Wildlife Common wildlife habitats in the Project area can be combined into a few distinct categories. Grassland and brush habitats comprise native and non-native grassland, wildflower fields, coyote brush scrub, and most “other” types. These habitats may feature ephemeral and intermittent drainages. Wildlife commonly associated with these habitats include western fence lizard (Sceloporis occidentalis), northern Pacific rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus oreganus), gopher snake (Pituophis catenifer), California toad (Anaxyrus boreas halophilus), California horned lark (Eremophila alpestris actia), western meadowlark (Sturnella neglecta), common raven (Corvus corax), Say’s phoebe (Sayornis saya), western kingbird (Tyrannus verticalis), black-tailed hare (Lepus californicus), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), non-native red fox (Vulpes vulpes), and coyote (Canis latrans). Riparian habitats in the Project area comprise a few narrow stands of riparian forest, including a stand of sycamore alluvial woodland in Orestimba Creek, and riparian scrub. These habitats support species including the ash-throated flycatcher (Myiarchus cinerascens), American kestrel (Falco sparverius), black phoebe (Sayornis nigricans), great horned owl (Bubo virginianus), Bullock’s oriole (Icterus bullockii), brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater), and house finch (Carpodacus mexicanus). Freshwater marshes support Sierran treefrog (Pseudacris sierra), marsh wren (Cistothorus palustris), great blue heron (Ardea herodias), Virginia rail (Rallus limicola), and red-winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus); and mallard (Anas platyrhynchos), American coot (Fulica americana), and common muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus) in areas with open water. Lake habitats in and near the Project area include O’Neill Forebay, San Luis Reservoir, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir. Wildlife include fishes such as bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus), common carp (Cyprinus carpio), largemouth bass (Micropteris salmoides), and white crappie (Pomoxis annularis); and birds such as American wigeon (Anas americana), bufflehead (Bucephala albeola), Canada goose (Anser canadensis), and mallard. Drainages with drying pockets of standing water during Project surveys were Corral Hollow Creek, Salado Creek, and Del Puerto Creek. These supported California toad larvae, American bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeiana) adults and larvae, and western pond turtle (Emys marmorata). American bullfrogs were observed in irrigation canals. The Delta-Mendota Canal and California Aqueduct are often used by mallard, coot, and double-crested cormorant (Phalacrocorax auritus), and bridges over these canals support nesting cliff swallows (Petrochelidon pyrrhonota) and nesting rock pigeons (Columba livia). Banks of these large canals often support higher densities of small mammals than surrounding habitats (USFWS, 2010c). Agricultural areas in the Project area include grain fields, pasture, orchard, and vineyard. Red-winged blackbird, Brewer’s blackbird (Euphagus cyanocephalus), western meadowlark, and foraging barn swallow (Hirundo rustica) were observed. Raccoon (Procyon lotor) and striped skunk commonly forage in agricultural areas. Woodland habitats are limited in the Project area to two eucalyptus groves that also contain scattered ornamental pines (Pinus spp.). Eurasian collared dove (Streptopelia decaocto), great horned owl, Say’s phoebe, American kestrel, house finch, mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), and other birds were observed. One small grove supported at least 10 different species of nesting birds during spring 2014 surveys. Special-Status Species Special-status species are those plants and animals that are classified in one or more of the following categories: . Federal Endangered Species Act (FESA), 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531, et seq. Listed as endangered or threatened; candidate for federal listing; or proposed for federal listing. . Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (BGEPA), 16 U.S.C. §§ 668-668d. Bald and golden eagles are protected under the federal BGEPA. . California Endangered Species Act (CESA). Listed as endangered or threatened; candidate for State listing; or designated as a rare plant. . Fully protected species under the California Fish and Game Code. . California Species of Special Concern (SSC). Designated by CDFW. . California Rare Plant Rank (CRPR). List of plants of conservation priority; maintained by the CNPS in coordination with CDFW. – CRPR 1A: Plants presumed to be extinct in California. – CRPR 1B: Plants rare or endangered in California and elsewhere. – CRPR 2: Plants rare or endangered in California but more common elsewhere. – CRPR 3: Plants about which more information is needed – a review list. – CRPR 4: Plants of limited distribution – a watch list. Critical Habitat Critical habitat is defined under the FESA as “the specific areas within the geographic area currently occupied by a species, at the time it is listed in accordance with Section 1533 of this title, on which are found those physical or biological features essential (I) to the conservation of the species and (II) which may require special management considerations or protection.” 16 U.S.C. § 1532(5). Either the USFWS or the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) may designate critical habitat for species listed as threatened or endangered under FESA. Designated critical habitat for 12 species or subspecies occurs within or near the study area: south central coast steelhead, central coast steelhead, Delta smelt, California tiger salamander, California red-legged frog, Alameda whipsnake, longhorn fairy shrimp, vernal pool fairy shrimp, Contra Costa goldfields, large-flowered fiddleneck, Greene’s tuctoria, and Hoover’s spurge (Figure 5 of Appendix C). Special-Status Plants Table 3.4-1 presents special-status plants that potentially occur in the study area, or that were observed during surveys of the Project area. It also identifies designated critical habitat for listed plants in and near the study area. See Appendix C for a full discussion of all species considered, including those determined to have low potential or are unlikely to occur in the study area. Table 3.4-1. Special-Status Plants and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence and Rationale5 Amsinckia grandiflora Large flowered fiddleneck and critical habitat FE/SE/1B Cismontane woodland and valley and foothill grassland. Blooms April to May. Elevation: 275–550m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, and San Joaquin Counties. Low. Potential grassland habitat in Project area. Known from fewer than 5 natural occurrences. Nearest critical habitat is less than 3 miles from the Tracy Substation. Astragalus tener var. tener Alkali milk-vetch —/—/1B Playas, valley and foothill grassland (alkaline clay), vernal pools in alkaline areas. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 1–60m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and vernal pool habitat in Project area. Recorded in Byron/Livermore and Clifton Court Forebay. Atriplex cordulata var. cordulata Heartscale —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, meadows and seeps, valley and foothill grasslands (sandy) in saline or alkaline areas. Blooms April to October. Elevation: 0–560m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in Project area. Records from Clifton Court Forebay. Atriplex joaquiniana San Joaquin spearscale —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, meadows and seeps, valley and foothill grasslands. Blooms April to October. Elevation: 1–835m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in Project area. Records from Byron, Bryon Hot Springs, Mountain House Rd, and Clifton Court Forebay. Blepharizonia plumosa Big tarplant —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland, usually on clay soils. Blooms July to October. Elevation: 30–505m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, and San Joaquin, Solano, and Stanislaus Counties. High. Potential grassland habitat in Project area. Records from Tracy, Tesla, Corral Hollow, and many other locations near Project area. California macrophylla Round-leaved filaree —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland on clay soils. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 15–1200m. Known from many counties including Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Merced, and San Joaquin Counties. Present. Habitat in Project area. Observed in the Project area (Central Segment, and Patterson Pass Road Alternative) along with Convolvulus simulans and Hesperevax caulescens. Caulanthus lemmonii Lemmon’s jewelflower —/—/1B Pinyon and juniper woodland, valley and foothill grassland. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 80–1220m. Known from Alameda, Fresno, Merced, San Joaquin, and other counties. High. Potential grassland habitat in Project area. Records from between Tesla and Corral Hollow, Corral Hollow and Los Banos. Chamaesyce hooveri Hoover’s spurge and critical habitat FT/-/1B Vernal pools on volcanic mudflow or clay substrate. Blooms July to October. Elevation 25–250m. Known from Butte, Colusa, Glenn, Merced, Stanislaus, Tehama, and Tulare Counties. Low. Potential vernal pool habitat in Project area on clay substrate but no volcanic mudflow vernal pools observed. There are no records for this species within the CNDDB search for the Project. Nearest critical habitat is about 15.5 miles north of the O’Neill Forebay. Table 3.4-1. Special-Status Plants and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence and Rationale5 Clarkia rostrata Beaked clarkia —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland on north-facing slopes, sometimes on sandstone. Blooms April to May. Elevation 60–500m. Known from Merced, Mariposa, Stanislaus, and Tuolumne Counties. Low. Potential grassland habitat in Project area. There are no records for this species within the CNDDB search for the Project. Convolvulus simulans Small-flowered morning-glory —/—/4 Chaparral (openings), coastal scrub, valley and foothill grassland on clay soils or serpentinite seeps. Blooms March to July. Elevation: 30–700m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and other counties. Present. Grassland habitat in Project area. This species was found along with California macrophylla within the Project area. Delphinium californicum ssp. interius Hospital Canyon larkspur —/—/1B Chaparral, cismontane woodland (mesic), coastal scrub in wet boggy meadows, openings in chaparral and in canyons. Blooms April to June. Elevation: 195–1095m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Not Likely to Occur. No potential habitat in Project area. CNDDB record from a 1938 collection. Delphinium recurvatum Recurved larkspur —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland in alkaline soils. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 3–790m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Merced, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in Project area but limited to areas with alkaline soils. Multiple records in the region. Eryngium racemosum Delta button-celery —/SE/1B Riparian scrub in vernally mesic clay depressions. Blooms June to October. Elevation: 3–30m. Known from Contra Costa, Merced, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential riparian habitat in Project area. Recorded near Grayson, 2 miles east of Westley. Eryngium spinosepalum Spiny-sepaled button celery —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland, vernal pools. Blooms April to May. Elevation: 80–255m. Known from Contra Costa, Merced, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and vernal pool habitat in Project area. Recorded at Byron Airport. Eschscholzia rhombipetala Diamond-petaled California poppy —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland on alkaline and clay soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation: 0–975m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Colusa, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, and Stanislaus Counties. High. Potential grassland habitat in Project area but limited to alkaline and clay soils. Records from Corral Hollow near Castle Rock, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and hills south of Byron. Hesperevax caulescens Hogwallow starfish —/—/4 Valley and foothill grassland in mesic sites and on clay soils, shallow vernal pools. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 0–505m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, Fresno, Merced, and other counties. Present. Grassland habitat in Project area. Observed within the Project area in same areas as California macrophylla (Central Segment, and Patterson Pass Road Alternative). Hibiscus lasiocarpos var. occidentalis Woolly rose mallow —/—/1B Freshwater marshes and swamps, often in riprap on sides of levees. Blooms June to September. Elevation: 0–120m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Low. Limited potential habitat in Project area. Recorded occurrences from Clifton Court Forebay. Table 3.4-1. Special-Status Plants and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence and Rationale5 Lasthenia conjugens Contra Costa goldfields and critical habitat FE/—/1B Cismontane woodland, alkaline playas, valley and foothill grassland, vernal pools in mesic sites. Microhabitat is vernal pools, swales and low depressions in open grassy areas. Blooms March to June. Elevation: 0–470m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Mendocino, Monterey, Marin, Napa, Santa Barbara, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma Counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and marginal vernal pool habitat in Project area and limited areas with alkaline soils. No records in vicinity. Nearest critical habitat is less than 2 miles from Tracy Substation. Layia munzii Munz’s tidy-tips —/—/1B Chenopod scrub, valley and foothill grassland on hillsides in white-grey alkaline soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation 150–700m. Known from Fresno, Kern, San Benito, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Low. Limited potential habitat in Project area based on microhabitat of white-grey alkaline soils. Lepidium jaredii ssp. album Panoche peppergrass —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland on white or grey clay lenses on steep slopes, incidental in alluvial fans and washes, prefers clay and gypsum soils. Blooms February to June. Elevation 185–275m. Known from Fresno, San Benito, and San Luis Obispo Counties. Low. Limited potential habitat in Project area based on microhabitat preference. Leptosyne hamiltonii Mt. Hamilton coreopsis —/—/1B Cismontane woodland in rocky areas. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 550–1300m. Known from Alameda and other counties. Not Likely to Occur. No habitat in Project area. Known from Mt. Hamilton Range. Lilaeopsis masonii Mason’s lilaeopsis —/SR/1B Brackish or freshwater marshes and swamps, riparian scrub. Blooms April to November. Elevation: 0–10m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Low. Typical habitat lacking in Project area. Recorded occurrences from Clifton Court Forebay and other areas. Limosella australis Delta mudwort —/—/2B Freshwater or brackish marshes and swamps, riparian scrub usually on mud banks. Blooms May to August. Elevation: 0–3m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Low. Limited habitat in Project area. Known from Victoria Canal. Madia radiata Showy golden madia —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland mostly on adobe clay in grassland or around shrubs. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 25–1215m. Known from Contra Costa, Fresno, Kings, Kern, Monterey, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in Project area but limited to adobe clay soils. Records from lower Hospital Canyon, mouth of Big Panoche Canyon, Corral Hollow, and Tumey Hills. Malacothamnus hallii Hall’s bush-mallow —/—/1B Chaparral, coastal scrub. Blooms May to October. Elevation: 10–760m. Known from Contra Costa, Merced, Stanislaus, and other counties. Not Likely to Occur. No habitat in Project area. Monardella leucocephala Merced monardella —/—/1A Valley and foothill grassland; requires moist subalkaline sands associated with low elevation grassland. Blooms May to August. Elevation 35–100m. Not Likely to Occur. This species is presumed extinct. The microhabitat requirements for this species area lacking in Project area. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB search. Table 3.4-1. Special-Status Plants and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence and Rationale5 Navarretia nigelliformis ssp. radians Shining navarretia —/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland, vernal pools, sometimes clay. Blooms April to July. Elevation: 76–1000m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland and vernal pool habitat in Project area. Recorded at Billie Wright Rd northeast of Los Banos Valley. Navarretia myersii ssp. myersii Pincushion navarretia —/—/1B Vernal pools, often acidic. Blooms April to May. Elevation 20–330m. Known from Amador, Calaveras, Merced, Placer, and Sacramento Counties. Low. Vernal pool habitat in Project area but not acidic soils. No records in CNDDB search. Phacelia ciliata var. opaca Merced phacelia —/—/3 Valley and foothill grassland on adobe or clay soils of valley floors, open hills or alkaline flats. Blooms February to May. Elevation: 60–100m. Known from Merced County. Very low. Limited potential grassland habitat in Project area. No known occurrences within CNDDB search area. Phacelia phacelioides Mt. Diablo phacelia —/—/1B Chaparral, cismontane woodland, on rock outcrops and talus slopes, sometimes on serpentinite. Blooms April to May. Elevation: 500–1370m. Known from Contra Costa, Stanislaus, and other counties. Not Likely to Occur. No habitat in Project area. Pseudobahia bahiifolia Hartweg’s golden sunburst FE/SE/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland on acidic clay soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation 15–150m. Known from Fresno, Madera, Merced, Stanislaus, Tuolumne, and Yuba Counties. Low. No acidic clay soils in Project area. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB search area. Sidalcea keckii Keck’s checkerbloom FE/—/1B Cismontane woodland, valley and foothill grassland — occurs on grassy slopes in blue oak woodland. Blooms April to June. Elevation: 75–650m. Known from Fresno and Merced Counties. Not Likely to Occur. No blue oak woodland in Project area. No recorded occurrences in CNDDB search area. Senecio aphanactis Chaparral ragwort —/—/2B Chaparral, cismontane woodland, coastal scrub, sometimes in alkaline soils. Blooms January to April. Elevation: 15–800m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Merced, and other counties. Not Likely to Occur. No habitat in Project area. Strepthanthus insignis ssp. lyonii Arburua Ranch jewel-flower —/—/1B Coastal scrub, sometimes serpentinite. Blooms March to May. Elevation: 230–855m. Known from Merced County. Not Likely to Occur. No habitat in Project area. Symphyotrichum lentum Suisun Marsh aster —/—/1B Brackish and freshwater marshes and swamps. Blooms May to November. Elevation: 0–3m. Known from Contra Costa, San Joaquin, and other counties. Low. Limited habitat in Project area. No known occurrences within 1 mile of Project area. Trichocoronis wrightii var. wrightii Wright’s trichocoronis —/—/2B Meadows and seeps, marshes and swamps, riparian forest, vernal pools. Microhabitat is mud flats of vernal lakes, drying river beds, alkali meadows. Blooms May to September. Elevation: 5–435m. Known from Merced County and presumed extirpated from San Joaquin County. Low. Microhabitat not present or very limited in Project area. Table 3.4-1. Special-Status Plants and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Federal2/State3/ CRPR4 Habitat Type/General Geographic Range Likelihood of Occurrence and Rationale5 Tropidocarpum capparideum Caper-fruited tropidocarpum —/—/1B Valley and foothill grassland, alkaline hills on alkaline clay soils. Blooms March to April. Elevation: 1–455m. Known from Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, San Joaquin, and other counties. Moderate. Potential grassland habitat in Project area but limited to alkaline clay soils. Records from Mountain House, Byron, Livermore, and Tracy. Tuctoria greenei Green’s tuctoria and critical habitat FE/CR/1B Vernal pools. Blooms May to September. Elevation 30–1070m. Known from Merced County. Presumed extirpated from Fresno, Madera, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus Counties. Very Low. Limited potential vernal pool habitat in Project area but no known occurrences within CNDDB search area. Nearest critical habitat is 29 miles northeast of the Project area. 1 - See Appendix C for locations of critical habitat. 2 - Federal Status: FE = Endangered – FESA FT = Threatened – FESA 3 - State Status: SE = Endangered – CESA ST = Threatened – CESA SR = State-designated Rare 4 - California Rare Plant Rank: 1A = CRPR Rank 1A: Plants presumed extirpated in California and either rare or extinct elsewhere. 1B = CRPR Rank 1B: Plants that are rare, threatened or endangered in California and elsewhere. 2B = CRPR Rank 2B: Plants that are rare, threatened or endangered in California but more common elsewhere. 3 = CRPR Rank 3: Plants about which more information is needed – a review list. 4 = CRPR Rank 4 Plants with a limited distribution – a watch list. 5 - Likelihood of occurrence determined by habitat presence and quality, regional species occurrence records, and geographic range. Special-Status Wildlife and Fish Table 3.4-2 presents special-status wildlife and fish that potentially occur in the Project area, or that were observed during Project surveys. It also identifies designated critical habitat for listed wildlife and fish in and near the study area. See Appendix C for a full discussion of all species considered, including those unlikely to occur in the study area. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 INVERTEBRATES Conservancy fairy shrimp Branchinecta conservatio FE * Inhabits relatively large, turbid cool-water vernal pools in the Central Valley. Occurs primarily in six disjunct populations in Tehama, Butte, Solano, Glenn, Merced, and northern Ventura Counties. Low. Project area outside of current known range, but potential habitat occurs. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Longhorn fairy shrimp and critical habitat Branchinecta longiantenna FE * Found in clear to highly turbid clay or grassbottomed vernal pools, pools in swales, clear pools in sandstone depressions, and roadside ditches. Known occurrences highly disjunct: 8–10 locations in Merced, Contra Costa, Alameda, and San Luis Obispo Counties, including Altamont Pass and other locations near the Project. Moderate. Potential habitat in vernal and other seasonal pools and swales within Project area. Nearest critical habitat is more than 6 miles from the Proposed Project. Valley elderberry longhorn beetle Desmocerus californicus dimorphus FT * Dependent on elderberry shrubs, which are generally found along waterways and in floodplains. Moderate. Potentially occurs in elderberries found along Salado Creek; elderberry shrubs may occur in other locations not yet surveyed. Vernal pool fairy shrimp and critical habitat Branchinecta lynchi FT * Found in pools ranging from small, clear sandstone rock pools to large, turbid, alkaline grassland valley-floor pools. Disjunct populations found in the Central Valley from Shasta County to Tulare County, and in the coast ranges from northern Solano County to Ventura County. Moderate. Potential habitat in vernal and other temporary pools within Project area. Nearest critical habitat is less than 2 miles from the Proposed Project. Vernal pool tadpole shrimp Lepidurus packardi FE * Inhabits vernal pools and swales ranging from clear to highly turbid and from small to large. Inhabits sites in the Central Valley from Shasta County to northern Tulare County and in the central coast range from Solano County to Alameda County. Moderate. Potential habitat in vernal pools within Project area. FISHES Green sturgeon Acipenser medirostris FT SSC Found in fresh and saltwater habitats, including deep pools in large, turbulent, freshwater rivers. Spawns in deep, fast water. Occurs in Sacramento River and tributaries, the Delta, and San Francisco, Suisun, and San Pablo bays. The Project does not overlap with critical habitat. Not Likely to Occur. Project is not near suitable or occupied aquatic habitat. Delta smelt and critical habitat Hypomesus transpacificus FT SE Found in the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta in brackish waters, also in Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers. Spawns in shallow waters. Critical habitat overlaps with the northernmost ~3 miles of the Project area. Low. While critical habitat overlaps with a small portion of the northern Project area, the Project is not near suitable or occupied aquatic habitat. Chinook–Central Valley spring-run ESU Onchorhynchus tshawytscha FT ST This ESU migrates through estuaries and spawns in spring in cold, clean, fast-flowing rivers with gravel bottoms. Occurs in Sacramento River and its tributaries. Not Likely to Occur. Project area does not overlap with the range of this ESU. Chinook–Sacramento River winter-run ESU Onchorhynchus tshawytscha FE SE This ESU migrates through estuaries and spawns in winter in cold, clean, fast-flowing rivers with gravel bottoms. Occurs in Sacramento River and its tributaries. Not Likely to Occur. Project area does not overlap with the range of this ESU. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Steelhead–Central Coast DPS and South Central Coast DPS and critical habitat Oncorhynchus mykiss FT * Anadromous form of rainbow trout found in Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers and their tributaries. Spawns in shallow, swift riffles with small gravel and cobble. The western boundary of this DPS encompasses most of the Project area. High. Steelhead are often rescued from fish facilities south of Clifton Court Forebay near the north end of Project. Critical habitat for the Central Coast DPS occurs east of Project area; critical habitat for South Central Coast DPS is west of Project area. Nearest critical habitat is less than 2 miles from the Project area. REPTILES Alameda whipsnake and critical habitat Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus FT ST Found in chaparral, valley-foothill riparian, and valley-foothill woodlands on south-facing slopes and ravines where shrubs form a mosaic with trees, grasslands, and rocky outcrops; may also use adjacent grasslands. Current range (2011): throughout Contra Costa County, most of Alameda County, and small portions of northern Santa Clara and western San Joaquin Counties. Moderate. Records from Corral Hollow area; however, suitable mosaic habitats and riparian are limited within and near Project area. Nearest critical habitat is approx. 2 miles from the Project area. Blunt-nosed leopard lizard Gambelia sila FE SE, CFP Occurs in semiarid grasslands, alkali flats, and washes; prefers flat areas with open space; avoids dense vegetation. Range extends from northwestern Santa Barbara County and western Kern Co north to central Merced County, but historic range extends northward to Stanislaus/ Alameda County line. High. Occurrence records in the southern portion of study area. From Dos Amigos Substation north to Santa Nella. California legless lizard Anniella pulchra (sensu stricto)5 * SSC Found in sandy and loamy sand soils in saltbush scrub, chaparral, and woodland habitats on Valley floor and adjacent inner coast range foothills. Range extends discontinuously throughout Project area, depending on soil type and vegetation. High. Multiple records throughout study area. Coast horned lizard Phrynosoma blainvillii * SSC Most common in lowlands along sandy washes with scattered low bushes, open areas for sunning, bushes for cover, patches of loose soil for burial, and abundant ant and insect prey. Coast ranges from Contra Costa County south to Baja, including Sierra foothills; absent from Central Valley floor. High. Occurrence records in Project area. Potential habitat in sandy washes associated with creeks and drainages. Giant garter snake Thamnophis gigas FT ST Found in sloughs, canals, and other small waterways with prey base of small fish and amphibians on the floor of the Central Valley. Requires grassy banks and emergent vegetation for basking, and areas of high ground protected from flooding during winter. Range extends from Chico in Butte County south to Mendota Wildlife Area in Fresno County. Known from Los Banos Creek, but no known records from closer than ~6 miles from Project area. Moderate. No records from within ~6 miles of Project area but known from Los Banos Creek. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Pacific pond turtle Emys marmorata * SSC Permanent or nearly permanent lakes, ponds, marshes, rivers, streams, & irrigation ditches with aquatic veg. Needs basking sites such as partially submerged logs, vegetation mats, or open mud banks. Nests in suitable uplands, such as sandy banks or grassy, open fields on unshaded, south-facing slopes with less than 25% slope. Present. Multiple records within 1 mile, and observed in Del Puerto Creek. San Joaquin whipsnake Masticophis flagellum ruddocki * SSC Occurs in open, dry vegetative associations with little or no tree cover. Found in the coast ranges and southern San Joaquin Valley from Contra Costa south to San Luis Obispo and Kern Counties. High. Recorded within 1 mile of Project area, with suitable habitat available through much of Project area. AMPHIBIANS California red-legged frog and critical habitat Rana draytonii FT SSC Found ponds, streams, and wetlands. Highly aquatic and prefers permanent, quiet pools and streams with dense vegetation. May travel in a direct route between habitats regardless of cover. In coast ranges from southern Monterey County south to Baja. High. Multiple records within 1 mile of Project from Corral Hollow north, and from Los Banos Creek. Project overlaps with critical habitat for about 5 miles (Figure 5 of Appendix C). California tiger salamander–central California DPS Ambystoma californiense FT ST, SSC Annual grasslands and grassy understory of valley-foothill hardwood habitats in central and northern Calif. Needs vernal pools or other aquatic habitats for breeding near uplands with underground burrow. Range from eastern foothills of Sierra west to outer coast range, from Sonoma and Yolo Counties south to Santa Barbara County. High. Records in northern Project area. Potential habitat in creeks, stock ponds, and vernal or other temporary pools adjacent to suitable uplands. Nearest critical habitat is approximately 2 miles from the Project area. Foothill yellow-legged frog Rana boylii * SSC Partly shaded streams and riffles with a rocky substrate. Basks on large rocks, dives into water when disturbed. Coast ranges from Oregon border south to Transverse Mountains of Los Angeles County, as well as Sierra and Cascades foothills. Moderate. Historic records from Corral Hollow and Los Banos Creek. Low potential in other drainages in Project area. Western spadefoot Spea hammondii * SSC Primarily found in grasslands but will occasionally use valley-foothill hardwood woodlands. Breeds in temporary rain pools without bullfrogs, fish, or crayfish; uses uplands when not breeding. Ranges throughout Central Valley and surrounding foothills from Redding south to southern California. High. Recorded at Salado Creek; potential habitat in Del Puerto Creek, other creeks, and vernal and other temporary pools in Project area. BIRDS Bald eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus (nesting and wintering) BGEPA SE, CFP Nests on cliffs or in large trees in mountain and foothill forests and woodlands near reservoirs, lakes, and rivers where it feeds on fish and waterfowl. In winter, also takes hares and other mammals. Resident in suitable nesting areas; winters through much of the rest of the State. High. No nesting habitat in Project area, but multiple winter and spring eBird reports from San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Burrowing owl Athene cunicularia (burrow and wintering sites) * SSC Grasslands, deserts, and along roads, canals, and edges of agricultural areas; rarely in vicinity of shrubs and trees; dens in underground burrows typically created by other animals, but also in culverts and debris piles. Found primarily in the Central Valley and other open, flat areas of the State; absent from steep terrain, foothill habitats, and higher elevations. Present. Potential habitat occurs throughout Project area. Low potential in deeply incised foothills between Corral Hollow and Highway 152. Multiple records in or near Project north of Corral Hollow Creek, an historic record near Del Puerto Creek, and recent records south of O’Neill Forebay. One owl and several active burrows were observed during Project surveys. California condor Gymnogyps californianus FE SE, CFP Permanent resident of semi-arid mountain ranges surrounding the southern Central Valley. Nests in caves, crevices, behind rock slabs, or on large ledges on high cliffs; roosts on cliffs and in large trees and snags. Forages over large areas of open rangeland; obligate carrion eater. Low. No occupied or suitable nesting areas within or near Project area. Some potential for foraging individuals from Pinnacles NP 40 mi southwest of south end of Project area. Nearest eBird record is 20 mi W of Los Banos Creek Reservoir, and nearest CNDDB record is more than 35 miles southwest of Dos Amigos Pumping Plant. Golden eagle Aquila chrysaetos (nesting and wintering) BGEPA CFP Rolling foothill or coast-range terrain where open grassland turns to scattered oaks, sycamores, or large digger pines. Nests primarily in cliffs and large trees, but also transmission towers and nest platforms in open areas. Resident through much of the State, winter-only in Central Valley. Present. Multiple records, and observed during spring 2014 surveys; suitable foraging habitat through much of Project area. Short-eared owl Asio flammeus (nesting) * SSC Require open country with high density of rodent prey, and herbaceous cover at least 12–15 inches tall. Moderate. Could nest in dense grasslands, open fields, and freshwater marshes, especially around Mountain House Creek and O’Neill Forebay. Long-eared owl Asio otus (nesting) * SSC Scarce over most of its range. Nests in conifer, oak, riparian, pinyon-juniper, and desert woodlands that are either open or are adjacent to grasslands, meadows, or shrublands. Prefers dense cover. Moderate. Could nest around O’Neil Forebay and Salado Creek. Least Bell’s vireo Vireo bellii pusillus (nesting) FE SE Found in lowland riparian with willows and dense understory. Nests in a variety of plants that provide concealment with dense foliage. Current range primarily southern Calif but expanding back into historic range, which included Central Valley north to Red Bluff. 2005-2007 nest records at San Joaquin River NWR, Stanislaus County; no recent nesting there. High. Could occur in any of the dense riparian habitats within the Project area. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Loggerhead shrike Lanius ludovicianus (nesting) * SSC Prefers open, thinly wooded land or scrub savanna with clearings, including meadows, pastures, old orchards. Nests in dense shrubs or small trees with thick foliage, sometimes isolated trees. Found in suitable habitats throughout the State; absent from Sierra and Cascades and primarily forested areas. Present. Recorded in multiple areas including Corral Hollow, Del Puerto Canyon, O’Neill Forebay, and from Patterson Pass Road north to Clifton Court Forebay. Observed in Project area during surveys, and likely to nest wherever trees and shrubs are found. Modesto song sparrow Melospiza melodia heermanni (nesting) * SSC Nests in low, dense vegetation in riparian areas and freshwater marshes. Modesto population occurs east of Suisun Marsh, north to Butte and Glenn Counties, south of the greater Bay Area down to northwest Baja. Moderate. Could nest in dense riparian and freshwater marshes within Project area. Mountain plover Charadrius montanus (wintering) *6 SSC Winter resident on plowed fields, open grasslands with short vegetation, and open sagebrush areas in Central Valley, generally below 1000 feet and rarely near water. Avoids high, dense cover. Found in Central Valley from Sutter/Yuba County south, foothill valleys west of San Joaquin Valley, and Imperial Valley. Moderate. No known occurrences or other reports within several miles, and most observations are from lower elevations than the Project, but there is potential habitat on grazed grasslands and other open areas with minimal vegetative cover. Northern harrier Circus cyaneus (nesting) * SSC Nests in a variety of open habitats, especially meadows, grasslands, and open rangelands in dense grasses and shrubs. Resident through much of the Central Valley and Bay Area as well as other parts of the State; may winter where it is not resident. Present. Observed in Project area during spring 2014 surveys. Recorded around O’Neill Forebay. Suitably dense nesting habitat is limited; nesting potential highest around San Luis Reservoir/O’Neill Forebay. Swainson’s hawk Buteo swainsoni (nesting) * ST Nests in riparian areas and isolated tree stands in open desert, grassland, and cropland. Forages in grasslands, pastures, and suitable grain or alfalfa fields. Primarily a summer resident of the Central Valley and northeastern California; small year-round population in the Delta. Present. Multiple observations in Project area during 2014 surveys. Recently recorded nesting at Orestimba Creek, and observed there during Project surveys; recent nest records near O’Neill Forebay and observed there during Project surveys. Potential to nest in multiple locations throughout Project area. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Tricolored blackbird Agelaius tricolor (nesting colony) * SE Nests in large colonies near open water in cattail, bulrush, willow, blackberry, wild rose, nettle, and thistle, with open foraging habitat nearby. Endemic and highly colonial. Most numerous in Central Valley. In December 2014, was emergency-listed as endangered for an initial term of 6 months (expires June 29, 2015). CDFW determined in March 2015 that a listing action may be warranted. Present. Recent records east of O’Neill Forebay, within Proposed Project corridor south of Gonzaga Rd, and around the western edge of San Luis Reservoir; slightly older records farther north. Suitable nesting habitat in a few locations and males heard singing (nesting not detected) at Mountain House Creek. Observed in the Proposed Project North Segment and the Butts Road and West of O’Neill Forebay alternatives during surveys. White-tailed kite Elanus leucurus (nesting) * CFP Low rolling foothills/valley margins with scattered oaks; open grasslands, meadows, or marshes near isolated dense-topped trees for nesting and perching. Found throughout coastal and interior California; absent from higher elevations and heavily wooded areas. Moderate. Historic record near Tracy Substation; few other reports in or near Project area. Suitable foraging habitat in shrublands, grasslands, and marshes; potential nesting habitat in riparian woodlands or non-native trees. Yellow-headed blackbird Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus (nesting) * SSC Nests in freshwater marshes near open water. Found in Central Valley, northeastern and eastern California, and patchily distributed in southern California. Scarce breeder in Central Valley. Moderate. Historic records from Project vicinity. Potential habitat in freshwater marshes around O’Neill Forebay. Migratory birds MBTA Cal FGC Nesting migratory birds and their eggs and nests are protected by State and federal statute. Present. Nests of a few species of migratory birds found in 2014 and others likely. MAMMALS American badger Taxidea taxus * SSC Most abundant in drier, open stages of most habitats; uses underground dens. Resident in suitable habitat throughout the State. Present. Presumed present throughout Project area. Fresno kangaroo rat Dipodomys nitratoides exilis FE SE Occurs in alkali sink and open grassland habitats on the floor of the San Joaquin Valley. Not known to occur west of I-5. Not Likely to Occur. Range of this species does not overlap with Project area. Giant kangaroo rat Dipodomys ingens FE SE Inhabits grassland and shrub communities on flat to gently sloping (10–22%) terrain. Historic range included Merced County; current range includes Fresno and San Benito Counties. Not currently known to occur in Merced County. Low. Project is outside of current known range, but suitable habitat is present. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 Short-nosed kangaroo rat Dipodomys nitratoides brevinasus * SSC Occupy grasslands with scattered shrubs and desert-shrub associations on friable soils on flats and gently rolling terrain; generally more numerous in lighter, friable soils. Not known to occur in the Project area; general range and habitat overlap with giant kangaroo rat. Moderate. Unlikely in most of Project area, but potential in grasslands south of O’Neill Forebay. Riparian (=San Joaquin) woodrat Neotoma fuscipes riparia FE SSC Found in riparian areas supporting trees and brush. Nests in trees, snags, or logs, talus, or lodges in downed woody material. Known only from a single population on San Joaquin River in Caswell Memorial State Park. Not Likely to Occur. Range does not overlap with Project area and suitable habitat not present. Riparian brush rabbit Sylvilagus bachmani riparius FE SE Typically inhabits dense thickets of wild rose, blackberry, coyote bush, and wild grape. Rarely ventures far from dense cover. Very restricted distribution; known only from in and around Caswell Memorial State Park in San Joaquin County and introduced to San Joaquin River NWR in Stanislaus County. Not Likely to Occur. Range does not overlap with Project area and suitable habitat not present. Pallid bat Antrozous pallidus * SSC Roosts in rocky outcrops, cliffs, caves, mines, trees (including orchards), bridges, barns, porches, bat boxes, occupied and vacant buildings, and even on or near the ground. Forages over open grasslands, oak savanna grasslands, open pine forests, talus slopes, gravel roads, orchards, and vineyards. Range includes all of California. Moderate. Potential roosting habitat occurs in rocky areas, orchards, and riparian or other trees throughout Project area. Townsend’s big-eared bat Corynorhinus townsendii * Cand Found in a variety of habitats. Roosts in caves, mines, tunnels, and buildings, preferring sites with caves and cavernous features; also roosts in old-growth sycamore. Most common in mesic areas. Found in suitable habitats throughout California. High. Recorded just south of Corral Hollow Road ~3 miles west of Project area. No known maternity or hibernating habitat within or near Project area. Roosting unlikely, but potential for foraging individuals. Western mastiff bat Eumops perotis * SSC Roosts primarily in cliffs high above the ground; may also use crevices in buildings, bridges, or boulders. Most common in broad, open areas in habitats from deserts to woodlands to alpine meadows. Range principally desert southwest regions, but extends through coast ranges to SF Bay and elsewhere in California to the Oregon border. Moderate. Suitable cliff habitat for roosting occurs in two locations in the study area. Western red bat Lasiurus blossevillii * SSC Roosts primarily in foliage of mature trees, especially willows, cottonwoods, sycamores, and walnuts, in edge habitats adjacent to streams, open fields, orchards, and sometimes urban areas. Females riparian-dependent. Prefers edges or habitat mosaics with trees for roosting and open areas for foraging. Found throughout California from Sierra/Cascade foothills west to the coast; absent from northern California. Moderate. Potential habitat in mature riparian forest throughout Project area. Table 3.4-2. Special-Status Wildlife Species and Critical Habitat1 that Occur or May Occur in or Near the San Luis Transmission Project Biological Study Area Scientific Name / Common Name Listing Status Habitat Type and General California Range Potential to Occur Fed2 State3 in Project Area4 San Joaquin kit fox Vulpes macrotis mutica FE ST Dens and forages in grassland, shrubland, alkali meadow, playa, valley oak savanna, and agricultural edges with loose soils. Endemic to Central Valley; current range is San Joaquin Valley and surrounding foothills from southern Kern County north to Contra Costa, Alameda, and San Joaquin Counties. Present. Recorded in Project area, and a carcass was observed in Project area during spring 2014 surveys. Presumed present but rare throughout Project area. 1 - See Appendix C for locations of critical habitat. 2 - Federal Status: FE = Endangered – FESA FT = Threatened – FESA BGEPA = Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act MBTA = Migratory Bird Treaty Act * = no federal status 3 - State Status: SE = Endangered – CESA ST = Threatened – CESA Cand = candidate for listing as threatened or endangered under the CESA SSC = California species of special concern CFP = California fully protected. Fully protected species may not be taken or possessed at any time and no licenses or permits may be issued for their take except for collecting these species for necessary scientific research and relocation of the bird species for the protection of livestock. Cal FGC = species protected by California Fish and Game Code * = no state status 4 - Likelihood of occurrence determined by habitat presence and quality, regional species occurrence records, and geographic range. See Appendix C for additional species considered unlikely to occur, and rationale for each. 5 - Recent genetic work suggests that the former single species, Anniella pulchra, comprises multiple species-level taxa (Papenfuss and Parham, 2013). Likely form that occurs in Project area is A. pulchra, but geographical limits of proposed species are unknown at this time. 6 - Mountain plover was formerly proposed for listing as threatened under the FESA but the proposed rule was withdrawn in May 2011. Wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State Wetlands and waters that are potentially subject to the USACE and Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) jurisdiction under the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), and CDFW jurisdiction under Fish and Game Code Section 1602 were identified throughout the Project study area and are described in detail in Appendix C. A formal jurisdictional delineation is currently in preparation, and will be used by Western to support applicable permitting requirements in compliance with the CWA and other applicable regulations. The following summarizes the potential wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State identified in the study area. Creeks and Drainages. Large perennial or intermittent creeks and drainages include Mountain House Creek, Patterson Run, Corral Hollow Creek, Lone Tree Creek, Hospital Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Salado Creek, Crow Creek, Orestimba Creek, Garzas Creek, Romero Creek, San Luis Creek, Los Banos Creek, and Ortigalita Creek. Corral Hollow Creek, Mountain House Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Lone Tree Creek, and Salado Creek had some water within the channel at the time of Project surveys. These creeks also supported freshwater marsh communities within the channel and a cottonwood-willow riparian tree and shrub community along the banks. Smaller, named intermittent drainages within the study area include Martin Creek, Arkansas Creek, Mustang Creek, Ingram Creek, Ortigalita Creek, and Little Salado Creek. The perennial and intermittent creeks and drainages in the study area are subject to federal and State regulation. Some of the ephemeral drainages may not be jurisdictional under the USACE but would be considered by the State agencies as waters of the State and subject to regulation by the RWQCB and possibly by CDFW. Aqueducts and Irrigation Ditches and Canals. The Project area crosses the Delta-Mendota Canal and the California Aqueduct near the intersection of I-205 and I-580, and crosses the Aqueduct again south of the O’Neill Forebay. These canals are man-made, concrete-lined channels and although water levels may fluctuate seasonally, the channels are never dry. These aqueducts do not support riparian tree and shrub cover or emergent wetland vegetation, and they are strictly open-water channels. The waters of the Delta-Mendota and California Aqueducts are not jurisdictional since they were constructed in uplands and are not natural drainages. The Proposed Project and alternative corridors also cross several irrigation ditches and canals for hay and alfalfa fields. These are either vegetated or unvegetated and some are concrete lined while others are constructed earthen channels. The irrigation ditches and canals are located mostly in the vicinity of Tracy in the northern portion of the Project study area. Although man-made and constructed primarily in uplands, these features could be considered jurisdictional by the USACE if they support wetland vegetation and if they connect hydrologically to a natural creek or navigable waters. The RWQCB could exert jurisdiction over irrigation ditches and canals as waters of the State. However, CDFW likely would not exert jurisdiction as they are not natural channels. Lakes, Ponds, and Impoundments. Lakes in the study area are large and greater than 6 feet (1.8 m) in depth. Ponds are small and less than 6 feet (1.8 m) deep. Ponds that were created as a result of impounding water within a drainage, such as stock ponds and man-made ponding features, are considered impoundments. Three areas were identified as lakes, the O’Neill Forebay, the San Luis Reservoir, and the Los Banos Creek Reservoir; these are located in the southern portion of the study area. These areas lack wetland vegetation and portions of the banks are concrete-lined. Many of the ponds in the study area have some emergent wetland vegetation around the pond edge. Lakes, ponds, and impoundments likely qualify as waters of the U.S. and State and maywould be under the jurisdiction of the USACE, RWQCB, and CDFW. Ponds that are not associated with a natural drainage, and are therefore not hydrologically connected to waters of the U.S., may not have any federal jurisdiction as defined by the USACE. Freshwater Marsh. Freshwater marshes in the study area occur as a fringe of permanently flooded emergent marsh at and below the ordinary high water of Corral Hollow, Mountain House, Lone Pine, and Salado creeks and flooded portions of roadside ditches and in some of the irrigation ditches. There are also some isolated freshwater marsh areas that may be remnant portions of drainages that have been filled. Portions of this habitat may be seasonally or infrequently exposed during low water or in drought years. Freshwater marsh is a wetland type and all wetlands are potentially subject to federal and State regulation. If they are hydrologically isolated then there is no federal jurisdiction, but would still may qualify as waters of the State under the RWQCB’s jurisdiction. Vernal Pools and Swales. These are seasonal wetlands that occur as depressions within grassland habitat and typically have a restrictive layer such as a hard pan or clay pan in the lower soil profile that creates water ponding for a sufficient length of time to support wetland vegetation, and specifically, plant species associated with vernal pools. Vernal pools are a wetland type and all wetlands are potentially subject to federal and State regulation. If they are hydrologically isolated then there is no federal jurisdictionVernal pools and swales adjacent to a jurisdictional tributary or with a significant nexus to a TNW may be federally regulated, but would stilland may qualify as waters of the State under the RWQCB’s jurisdiction. Seasonal Wetlands. Areas identified as seasonal wetlands, but not as vernal pools, occur as shallow to deep depressions, in ditches or intermittent drainages, or above man-made levees, and can include wetlands adjacent to ponds. Some seasonal wetlands were mapped along and within the major creek drainages such as at Patterson Run, Corral Hollow Creek, and Del Puerto Creek. All wetlands are potentially subject to federal and State regulation. Any seasonal wetlands adjacent to a jurisdictional tributary or with a significant nexus to a TNW may be federally regulated, and mayIf they are hydrologically isolated then there is no federal jurisdiction, but would still qualify as waters of the State under the RWQCB’s jurisdiction. Invasive Species Invasive weeds include plants designated as federal noxious weeds by the USDA, species listed by the California Department of Food and Agriculture, and other exotic pest plants designated by the California Invasive Plant Council. Roads, highways, railways, utility corridors, and related construction Projects are some of the principal dispersal pathways for invasive weeds. The introduction and spread of pest plants adversely affect natural plant communities by displacing native plant species that provide shelter and forage for wildlife species. A number of invasive species were observed in the Project area. The primary invasive weeds include giant reed (Arundo donax), perennial pepperweed, Italian thistle (Carduus pycnocephalus), winged thistle (Carduus tenuiflorus), tocalote (Centaurea melitensis), yellow star thistle, bull thistle (Cirsium vulgare), stinkwort (Dittrichia graveolens), and milk thistle. One very invasive grass species, medusahead grass (Elymus caput-medusae), was also observed in some of the non-native grassland areas. Additional lower priority non-native, invasive species were observed as well; see Appendix C for more discussion of invasive weeds in the Project area. Giant reed and perennial pepperweed are associated with wetland areas, and perennial pepperweed was observed in many locations throughout the Project area. Perennial pepperweed was observed in multiple locations including, but not limited to, Corral Hollow, Mountain House, Del Puerto, and Lone Tree Creeks. Giant reed was observed only at Corral Hollow Creek. Wildlife Movement Corridors Wildlife movement includes migration (usually one direction per season), inter-population movement (long-term genetic exchange), and small travel pathways (daily movement corridors within an animal’s territory). While small travel pathways usually facilitate movement for daily home range activities such as foraging or escape from predators, they also provide connection between outlying populations and the main corridor, permitting an increase in gene flow between populations (Zuidema et al., 1997). Linkages between habitat types can extend for miles between primary habitat areas and occur on a large scale throughout California. They facilitate movement between populations located in discrete areas and those located within larger areas. Even where patches of pristine habitat are fragmented, such as occurs with coastal scrub and many other California habitats, movement between wildlife populations is facilitated through habitat linkages, such as migration corridors and movement corridors (Zuidema et al., 1997). The Project study area is primarily open space, and existing barriers to wildlife movement include roads, highways, reservoirs, and canals. The area from the Los Banos Creek Reservoir to the north of San Luis Reservoir is a critical migration corridor for San Joaquin kit fox, and the San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay are substantial barriers to kit fox movement. Busy highways such as State Routes 152 and 33 and I-5, as well as existing urban development, are additional major barriers to movement for this species. Conservation Easements Several conservation easements for biological resources exist within the Project area and the study area, as shown in Table 3.4-3. Table 3.4-3. Conservation Easements Segment Within Project Area (Corridors) Within Study Area (Outside Project Corridors) North Segment Proposed Project . None . Haera Central Segment Proposed Project . Simon Newman Ranch . Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve . CCWD Corral Hollow (pending) . Cubiburu Preserve . USFWS South Preserve . Simon Newman Ranch . Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve . CCWD Corral Hollow (pending) . Cubiburu Preserve . USFWS South Preserve Patterson Pass Road Alternative . Simon Newman Ranch . Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve . Simon Newman Ranch . Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve San Luis Segment (500-kV) Proposed Project . Romero Ranch . San Joaquin kit fox easement . Romero Ranch . San Joaquin kit fox easement . Aqua Fria Phase I Butts Road Alternative . Romero Ranch . Romero Ranch . Aqua Fria Phase I West of Cemetery Alternative . Romero Ranch . Romero Ranch . Aqua Fria Phase I San Luis Segment (70-kV) Proposed Project . None . Aqua Fria Phase I West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative . Romero Ranch . San Joaquin kit fox easement . Romero Ranch . San Joaquin kit fox easement South Segment Proposed Project . None . Aqua Fria Phase I San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative . None . Aqua Fria Phase I Billy Wright Road Alternative . None . Aqua Fria Phase I 3.4.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Biological resources regulations, plans, and standards include the following. See Appendix C for details. . Federal Endangered Species Act (FESA), 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531, et seq. Protects plants and wildlife that are listed as endangered or threatened by the USFWS and NMFS. Section 9 of FESA prohibits the “take” of endangered wildlife, which is defined as “harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, collect, or attempt to engage in such conduct” 16 U.S.C. § 1532(19). For plants, this statute governs removing, possessing, maliciously damaging, or destroying any listed plant on federal land and removing, cutting, digging up, damaging, or destroying any listed plant on non-federal land in knowing violation of State law (16 USC § 1538). Under section 7 of FESA, federal agencies are required to consult with the USFWS if their actions, including permit approvals or funding, could adversely affect a listed species (including plants) or its critical habitat. Through consultation and preparation of a biological opinion, the USFWS may issue an incidental take statement allowing take of the species that is incidental to another authorized activity, provided the action will not jeopardize the continued existence of the species. Section 10 of FESA provides for issuance of incidental take permits to private parties provided a habitat conservation plan is developed. . Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA), 16 U.S.C.§§ 703-712. Under the MBTA it is unlawful to pursue, hunt, take, capture, kill, possess, sell, purchase, barter, import, export, or transport any migratory bird, or any part, nest, or egg or any such bird, unless authorized under a permit issued by the Secretary of the Interior. Some regulatory exceptions apply. Take is defined in regulations as: “pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or attempt to pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect.” The MBTA protects more than 1,000 bird species, more than 800 of which occur in the U.S. . Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251-1387. The objective of the CWA is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters.” 33 U.S.C. § 1251. Section 404 of the CWA prohibits the discharge of dredged or fill material into “waters of the United States” without a permit from the USACE. 33 U.S.C. § 1344. Waters of the U.S. may include rivers, streams, estuaries, territorial seas, ponds, lakes, and wetlands. Wetlands are defined as those areas “that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions” (33 CFR 328.3 7b). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency also may havehas authority over wetlands and may override a USACE permit. Substantial impacts to wetlands may require an individual permit. Projects that only minimally affect wetlands may meet the conditions of one of the existing nationwide permits. A water-quality certification or waiver pursuant to section 401 of the CWA is required for section 404 permit actions; in California this certification or waiver is issued by one of nine RWQCBs. . Plant Protection Act of 2000, 7 U.S.C. §§ 7701, et seq. Prevents importation, exportation, and spread of pests that are injurious to plants, and provides for the certification of plants and the control and eradication of plant pests. The Act consolidates requirements previously contained within multiple federal regulations including the Federal Noxious Weed Act, the Plant Quarantine Act, and the Federal Plant Pest Act. . Executive Order 13112, Invasive Species, 64 Fed. Reg. 6183 (1999). Requires federal agencies to: “prevent the introduction of invasive species”; “detect and respond rapidly to and control populations of such species in a cost-effective and environmentally sound manner”; “monitor invasive species populations accurately and reliably, provide for restoration of native species and habitat conditions in ecosystems that have been invaded”; “conduct research on invasive species and develop technologies to prevent introduction and provide for environmentally sound control of invasive species”; and “promote public education on invasive species and the means to address them.” . Non-Indigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-646, as amended by National Invasive Species Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-332. Establishes a program to prevent the introduction of, and to control the spread of, introduced aquatic nuisance species. . California Endangered Species Act (CESA). Prohibits the take, possession, purchase, sale, import or export of endangered, threatened, or candidate species unless otherwise authorized by permit or in the regulations. Take is defined as to “hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill, or attempt to hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill.” CESA allows for take incidental to otherwise lawful actions. State lead agencies are required to consult with the CDFW to ensure that any action they undertake is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered or threatened species or result in destruction or adverse modification of essential habitat. . California Fish and Game Code sections 3511, 4700, 5050, and 5515 – Fully Protected Species. Species designated as fully protected under California Fish and Game Code may not be taken or possessed at any time. Prohibits any State agency from issuing incidental take permits for fully protected species, except for scientific research. . Native Plant Protection Act (NPPA) of 1977 (California Fish and Game Code sections 1900-1913). Created with the intent to “preserve, protect and enhance rare and endangered plants in this state.” The NPPA is administered by the CDFW. The Fish and Game Commission has the authority to designate native plants as “endangered” or “rare” and to protect endangered and rare plants from take. The CESA provided further protection for rare and endangered plant species, but the NPPA remains part of Fish and Game Code. . California Fish and Game Code Section 1602 – Lake and Streambed Alteration Program. Requires a that streambed alteration application be submitted to the CDFW for “any activity that may substantially divert or obstruct the natural flow or substantially change the bed, channel, or bank of any river, stream, or lake.” Often, Projects that require a streambed alteration agreement also require a permit from the USACE under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. In these instances, the conditions of the section 404 permit and the streambed alteration agreement may overlap. . California Food and Agriculture Code regulations governing noxious weeds. The California Food and Agricultural Code contains several laws related to noxious and invasive weeds. These include laws related to insect pest control, rodent and weed control and seed inspection, weed-free areas and weed eradication areas, a list of noxious weed species, prohibitions on exotic species introductions, plant quarantine and pest control, and laws targeting specific weed species such as tamarisk. 3.4.2 Corridor Alternatives The study area for biological resources includes the Project area (the area within which Project components could be located) and a buffer area, as described in Section 3.1. Plant communities, wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State, and special-status species occurrences were surveyed for and mapped only within the Project area, including alternative corridors, but their potential for occurrence has been extrapolated to the entire study area in this description of existing conditions to account for resources that could occur in adjacent areas and could be indirectly affected by the Project or could move in to the Project area prior to Project implementation. See Appendix C for more details on the biological resources in the alternative corridors. 3.4.2.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative The alternative corridor largely overlaps the Proposed Project, and most of the affected environment for biological resources would be similar. Sensitive habitats and potentially jurisdictional waters in the Patterson Pass Road Alternative include ephemeral creek, intermittent creek, freshwater marsh, pond, vernal pool, wildflower fields, Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest, and seasonal wetlands. There are 2,525 acres of annual grasslands. Three special-status plants were observed during surveys: roundleaved filaree, small-flowered morning glory, and hogwallow starfish. The alternative corridor also has a eucalyptus grove at Lone Tree Creek that supports a variety of nesting birds, and elderberry shrubs that could support the Valley elderberry longhorn beetle. This alternative overlaps designated critical habitat for the California red-legged frog in the northern portion. 3.4.2.2 Butts Road Alternative The alternative corridor lies farther to the west in comparison to the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. Sensitive habitats and potentially jurisdictional waters in the Butts Road Alternative include ephemeral creek, intermittent creek, other drainages and impoundments, irrigation ditches, freshwater marsh, lake, pond, vernal pool, native perennial grasslands, coyote brush scrub, and seasonal wetlands. There are 903 acres of annual grasslands. Tricolored blackbird was observed during surveys. This alternative has potential blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat. 3.4.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more varying terrain. Sensitive habitats and potentially jurisdictional waters in the West of Cemetery Alternative include ephemeral creek, intermittent creek, irrigation ditches, other drainages, freshwater marsh, lake, pond, vernal pool, native perennial grasslands, seasonal wetlands, and coyote brush scrub. There are 995 acres of annual grasslands. This alternative has potential blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat. 3.4.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative A great portion of this alternative corridor overlaps with the Butts Road Alternative and the Proposed Project. Therefore, where they overlap, the existing biological resources would be similar to that described for the Proposed Project and alternative. Sensitive habitats and potentially jurisdictional waters in the West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV alternative include ephemeral creek, irrigation ditches, other drainages and impoundments, freshwater marsh, lake, vernal pool, seasonal wetlands, and coyote brush scrub. There are 472 acres of annual grasslands. Tricolored blackbird was observed during surveys. This alternative has potential habitat for several special-status species, including San Joaquin kit fox, burrowing owl, California tiger salamander, and blunt-nosed leopard lizard. 3.4.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative The alternative corridor largely overlaps with that of the Proposed Project between the San Luis and the Dos Amigos Substations. Therefore, the existing biological resources would be similar to that described for the Proposed Project. However, this alternative corridor has no seasonal wetlands. The alternative corridor has 611 acres of annual grasslands, and San Joaquin kit fox was detected during Project surveys. 3.4.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative The Billy Wright Road Alternative corridor largely overlaps with that of the Proposed Project in the vicinity of the San Luis Substation. The alternative corridor deviates west from the Proposed Project corridor just south of the Los Banos Substation. From that point, the alternative corridor lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more rugged terrain. The alternative corridor rejoins with the Proposed Project corridor approximately 2 miles from the Dos Amigos Substation, and biological resources in this southernmost portion of the alternative would be the same as the Proposed Project. This alternative is a total of 1.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project in the southern segment. Sensitive habitats and potentially jurisdictional waters in the Billy Wright Road Alternative include ephemeral creek, intermittent creek, freshwater marsh, irrigation ditches, other drainages, and vernal pool. In addition, this alternative corridor contains approximately 17.5 acres of wildflower fields, a habitat that can support several special-status plants. The Proposed Project corridor does not contain any mapped wildflower fields in the southern segment. There are approximately 685 acres of annual grasslands mapped in this alternative corridor, and San Joaquin kit fox sign was detected near this corridor during surveys. This alternative has potential habitat for the blunt-nosed leopard lizard. 3.5 Cultural Resources This section describes the existing cultural resources in the study area, which is defined as the Proposed Project and alternative corridors plus a one-quarter-mile buffer surrounding them. The primary focus is on the cultural resources present and potentially encountered within the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. Impacts to cultural resources, including destruction, disturbance, degradation, or other adverse effects to resources, are analyzed in Section 4.5 (Cultural Resources). Cultural resources reflect the history, diversity, and culture of the region and people who created them. They can be natural or built, purposeful or accidental, physical or intangible. They encompass archaeological, traditional, and built-environment resources, including but not necessarily limited to buildings, structures, objects, districts, and sites. Cultural resources include sites of important events, traditional cultural places and sacred sites, and places associated with an important person. This section is primarily based on three documents produced in support of this EIS/EIR and the regulatory responsibility of Western and the Authority: Cultural Resources Background and Field Strategy Report for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California (Holm et al., 2014a), the Cultural Resources Inventory for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California (Holm et al., 2014b), and the Cultural Resources Addendum Inventory for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda and Merced Counties, California (Ballard et al., 2015). The analysis presented here and in Section 4 seeks to fulfill the responsibilities of Western under NEPA and Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), 16 U.S.C. § 470, and the Authority’s responsibilities under CEQA. Under Section 106 of NHPA, Western is responsible for considering the impact of any project on cultural resources that are listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (36 CFR Part 800). To fulfill this responsibility, Western must, in consultation with the California State Historical Preservation Officer (SHPO) and any interested Native American Tribes, identify the area of potential effect of the undertaking, identify any National Register eligible resources within the area of potential effect, and assess the potential effects to the identified resources. To resolve any adverse effects, Western must prepare a MOA or PA with the SHPO setting out the measures that Western will take to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the adverse effects (ACHP, 2013). For further description of Section 106 and the NHPA, refer to Section 3.5.1.2. As the State lead agency, the Authority is tasked with carrying out the environmental impact analysis pursuant to CEQA. This includes identifying the environmental impacts of proposed projects, determining if the impacts will be significant, and identifying alternatives and mitigation measures that will substantially reduce or eliminate significant impacts to the environment. Any cultural resources within a project area must be identified, evaluated for their eligibility for listing on the California Register of Historical Resources, and any impacts to eligible resources must be identified and mitigation designed to reduce those impacts (OHP, 2013). For further description of CEQA, refer to Section 3.5.1.2. Methods Cultural resources specialists conducted a study consisting of a detailed Class I records review and an intensive Class III pedestrian survey. These efforts are detailed in Holm et al., 2014a; Holm et al., 2014b; and Ballard et al., 2015; the following discussion is based on those documents. Records Search and Archival Research The Class I inventory is a summary of literature, records, and other documents that describe the cultural resources within the Project study area. The Class I inventory study area encompassed a one-quartermile buffer surrounding the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. The Proposed Project and alternative corridors are between 300 to 500 feet wide, but reach a maximum width of more than 3,500 feet in some locations. The first inventory was performed in March and April 2014. A second inventory of areas not covered by the first inventory was performed in April 2015 (Ballard et al., 2015; Holm et al., 2014a). Pedestrian Survey Cultural resources surveys of the accessible portions of the Proposed Project and alternative corridors were conducted in May and June 2014 and in April 2015. A total of 2,842 acres of the Proposed Project corridor were subject to intensive, full coverage pedestrian surveys and an additional 441 acres were subject to opportunistic survey (survey conducted to the greatest extent feasible given topographic constraints). Within the alternative corridors, 2,724 acres were subject to full-coverage surveys and an additional 369 acres were subject to opportunistic survey. A total of 3,749 acres were not surveyed due to issues accessing particular parcels within the Proposed Project and alternative corridors. Cultural Resources Categories Four broad types of resources are considered in this EIS/EIR: prehistoric archaeological resources, historic period archaeological resources, built-environmental resources, and ethnographic resources. Two numbering systems for cultural resources are used in California: the trinomial system featuring the State abbreviation followed by a three letter abbreviation of the county and a sequential number (e.g., CA-MER-94) and the P-number system, composed of a P followed by a numerical county indicator and then a sequential number (e.g., P-24-001931). Most archaeological and some built-environment resources have identifiers assigned in both numbering systems. Prehistoric archaeological resources are places that have preserved the signs of Native American life before contact with Europeans and Euro-Americans in the 1770s. The activities preserved in these resources are broad and may include rituals, food acquisition and preparation, quarrying stone, and building shelter. Prehistoric resources can consist of lithic scatters/workshops, groundstone scatters, habitation sites or temporary camps, prehistoric trails, stone quarries, bedrock milling features, rock art, architectural features, and rock features. Additionally, they may contain human remains in the form of burials, cairns, or cremations. Historic period archaeological resources are places that have preserved the signs of the lives and activity of people who lived in America between 1769 AD and 50 years before the present. Like prehistoric archaeological resources, historic period archaeological resources often occur around where people lived, but also include the remains of industrial, agricultural, recreational, and waste management activities. These can be surface features, subsurface features, or the byproducts of activities such as food preparation or mining. Built-environment resources were constructed at least 50 years before the present. The most obvious are historic-era buildings, but also include structures and objects. Ethnographic resources are those places that have importance within a particular culture or are tied to important historical events. Generally these places are of importance to people in the present even though they reflect aspects of local, State, or national history, are tied to particular people, or to the mythology and traditions of particular cultures. One type of ethnographic resource is the Traditional Cultural Property (TCP). They are most commonly associated with Native American cultures but also include areas important to other social groups. Environmental and Cultural Settings Environmental Setting The SLTP study area crosses through several physiographic provinces and biotic communities. The two main provinces are the San Joaquin Valley, a vast alluvial plain that is drained by the San Joaquin River, and the Diablo Range Foothills. This range is the portion of the California Coast Ranges that extends from the Carquinez Strait in the north to Orchard Peak in the south. It is bordered by the San Joaquin Valley to the east and the Santa Clara Valley to the west. The northern end of the San Joaquin Valley contains part of the San Joaquin–Sacramento Delta, a large inland delta formed by the confluence of the San Joaquin and Sacramento Rivers. The portion of the San Joaquin Valley surrounding the SLTP study area is primarily characterized by the Valley grassland vegetation community that consists of an open area covered with bunchgrasses and with occasional oak trees. It also includes limited areas near streams and rivers featuring riparian woodlands and freshwater marshes. Like the adjacent portions of the San Joaquin Valley, the Diablo Range Foothills are dominated by Valley grassland, with occasional riparian woodlands. Prehistoric Setting Prehistoric archaeologists use many different terms to categorize and interpret units of past cultural, technological, or functional diversity. Terms for interpretive units in the prehistoric era are used inconsistently across California and in many cases overlap. Three common terms are used in this analysis to refer to these units of the prehistoric past: period, pattern, and complex. A “period” is a span of time that has a beginning and an end defined by significant changes in the archaeological record (Society for California Archaeology, 2014). A “pattern” is a cultural trait shared by a number of different cultures within a geographic region that exists over an appreciable period of time. It is characterized by the use of similar technologies, economies, and burial practices (Bennyhoff and Fredrickson, 1994). A “complex” is a unit that has distinct types of artifacts and is found within a certain area during a particular time (Society for California Archaeology, 2014). In this document, a complex can be understood to be a local expression or regional variation of a larger pattern. Californian Native Americans within the Central Valley developed a sophisticated material culture, became central figures within an extensive trade system incorporating distant and neighboring regions, and achieved population densities equaled only by agricultural societies in the American Southwest and Southeast. In this area, prehistory is generally broken up into five periods: the Paleo-Indian Period (13,500–10,500 before present [BP]), the Lower Archaic Period (10,500-7,500 BP), the Middle Archaic Period (7,500-2,500 BP), the Upper Archaic Period (2,500-850 BP), and the Emergent Period (850-150 BP). Paleo-Indian Period (13,500–10,500 BP) The best available archaeological evidence indicates that the earliest inhabitants of North America arrived sometime around 13,500 years ago. Evidence for Paleo-Indian occupation of the San Joaquin Valley comes primarily from isolated finds of fluted projectile points, including one point collected from Merced County (CA-MER-215, the Wolfsen Mound) near Newman several miles east outside of the SLTP project area. Evidence for early human occupation within the San Joaquin Valley remains sparse, though recent studies have highlighted the potential to encounter Paleo-Indian sites in buried Late Pleistocene deposits that have been subject to repeated episodes of deposition and erosion. No Paleo- Indian period resources were identified in the SLTP study area. Lower Archaic Period (10,500-7,500 BP) A change in the climate towards wetter, warmer weather at the end of the Pleistocene caused a period of increased runoff and higher water flows from storms and glacial melting. This runoff accelerated erosion in the foothills, producing alluvial fans, cone-shaped depositions of sediment at the base of streams, and floodplains, large accumulations of sediment from streams and river flows in the San Joaquin Valley, beginning around 11,000 BP. These formations resulted in a large amount of soil accumulating over the original ground surfaces of the late Pleistocene and early Holocene. A second episode of fan and floodplain deposition occurred at the beginning of the middle Holocene, around 7500 years B.P., presumably covering the majority of earlier Lower Archaic archaeological resources in the San Joaquin Valley. This made evidence for the Lower Archaic Period occupation of the San Joaquin Valley relatively sparse and mostly represented by isolated finds such as stemmed projectile points, flaked stone crescents, and steep-edged, flaked stone tools found along the shores of Tulare Lake in Tulare County. Although little evidence for milling or plant processing tools has been recovered from Lower Archaic Period valley basin assemblages, investigations in the eastern Diablo Range foothills have revealed extensive signs of early plant processing. Lower Archaic Period sites in the Diablo Range foothills were seasonally occupied and contain abundant groundstone milling tools such as handstones and milling slabs. The distinct foothill and valley basin cultural traditions and adaptations seen in Middle Archaic Period sites emerged during the Lower Archaic Period. No Lower Archaic period resources were identified in the SLTP study area. Middle Archaic Period (7,500-2,500 BP) The Middle Archaic Period was generally a time of warmer, drier climatic conditions and many of the large, rain-fed lakes that hunter-gatherers relied on gradually receded or disappeared. At the same time, alluvial fans and floodplains stabilized, and the extensive wetland habitat of the Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta formed as rising sea levels pushed inland. During the Middle Archaic Period, the patterns of settlement and the reliance on different foods became distinct between foothill and valley floor populations. Foothill sites generally contain abundant groundstone tools for chopping, scraping, and pounding along with plant remains dominated by acorns and pine nuts. Projectile points included notched, stemmed, thick-leaf, and narrow concave base darts with a high degree of local and regional variability. In contrast to the eastern foothills of the Diablo Range, comparatively few Middle Archaic Period sites within the San Joaquin Valley basin have been discovered, largely because of more recent soil deposition and urban and agricultural development. Sites associated with the later part of the Middle Archaic Period (ca. 4,500 BP) are more common. These sites have yielded elaborate and diverse assemblages of artifacts that reflect complex societies focused on resources available along rivers and in marshes, called the Windmiller Pattern. One of the important markers of Windmiller Pattern sites is burials where people are in an extended position facing west. This pattern has been identified near the SLTP study area at sites including the Menjoulet Site (CA-MER-3), located between the Proposed Project and the Billy Wright Road Alternative corridors, in the Los Banos Reservoir. In the area surrounding the SLTP corridors, two cultural complexes have been identified: the Positas Complex (5,250-4,550 BP) and the Pacheco Complex (4,550-1,650 BP). The Positas Complex was distinguished by small mortars and short, cylindrical pestles, as well as millingslabs, perforated flat cobbles, and beads made by removing the tip of the Olivella shell. The beginning of the Pacheco Complex, referred to as Pacheco A (4,550-3,550 BP) is marked by leaf-shaped projectile points, rectangular Haliotis pendants, and thick beads from the wall of Olivella shells. The latter part, Pacheco B (3,550-1,650 BP), was characterized by a large number of Olivella shell beads, bone awls, stemmed and side-notched projectile points; and abundant millingslabs, mortars, and pestles. Both the Positas and the Pacheco complexes were first identified at the Grayson Site (CA-MER-94), located approximately 5 miles west of the SLTP under the San Luis Reservoir. Resources identified within the SLTP study area may date to the Middle Archaic period. Upper Archaic (2,500-850 BP) Climatic conditions became cooler and wetter during the early Upper Archaic Period. The lakes that had receded during the Middle Archaic Period returned to their former levels. Increased soil deposition and formation also occurred, capping many earlier soils and land surfaces. The Upper Archaic Period was complex, with many social and political groups that developed their own variations of burial and artifact styles. These included bone tools and ornaments, widespread manufacture and distribution of Olivella beads and Haliotis ornaments, obsidian stone tool blanks produced from eastern Sierra Nevada Mountain obsidian sources, ceremonial blades, and charmstones. In the Delta and portions of the Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys, mortars and pestles became more common in the archaeological record, indicating a heavier reliance on acorns, while along the valley margins handstones and millingslabs appear in larger numbers, indicating that people were eating a mix of plant foods. Hunting and fishing focused on bulk processing of salmon, shellfish, rabbits, and deer or elk. A new cultural pattern, the Berkeley Pattern, appeared in the Delta and adjacent Diablo Range foothills. The Berkeley Pattern included new projectile point styles, flexed burial positions, and extensive accumulations of habitation debris reflecting longterm occupation of the same villages, built on mounds. In addition to the differences in burials and artifact styles, the people of the Berkeley Pattern appear to have been more focused on eating acorns and terrestrial hunting, compared to the wetland, river, and stream focus of the Windmiller diet. The appearance of the Berkeley Pattern may indicate the arrival of new populations into the area, likely speaking different languages than the Windmiller Pattern populations. In some areas, the Windmiller Pattern was replaced by the Berkeley Pattern, but persisted within the San Joaquin Valley along the western and southern edges of the Delta and along the streams and marshes of Merced County. Representative sites include CA-MER-3 and CA-MER-215, located within several miles of the SLTP in Merced County. The western margins of the San Joaquin Valley appear to have been a transitional area, featuring cemeteries with flexed burials at CA-MER-94 (under the western portion of the San Luis Reservoir) or extended burials at CA-MER-3 (near the San Luis Dam), indicating the area was alternatively occupied by groups originating in the Valley and the Diablo Range. The local Upper Archaic Period sequence in the general area through which the SLTP passes is called the Gonzaga Complex (1,650-950 BP), first identified at the Grayson Site (CA-MER-94), located approximately 5 miles west of the SLTP under the San Luis Reservoir. The Gonzaga Complex is primarily known from funerary sites and was marked by a mix of extended and flexed human burials; bowl mortars; squared and tapered-stem projectile points; grass saws; circular, oval, or teardrop shaped Haliotis ornaments; and thin rectangular, split-punched, and oval Olivella beads. Resources identified within the SLTP study area may date to the Upper Archaic period. The Emergent Period (850-150 BP) The climatic conditions of the Emergent Period were generally similar to those of the present, but there were also periods of flooding, drought, and increased soil deposition. By the Emergent Period, California Native Americans living within the San Joaquin Valley had developed the cultural traditions that would be noted at the time of European contact. These traditions included technological adaptations such as the bow and arrow and the fish weir. Native trade networks also changed during the Emergent Period, as shell beads filled the role of currency throughout much of the region. Large, populous villages developed along river courses to access seasonally abundant salmon runs, while smaller villages and residential communities continued to grow along the many side streams of the foothills and along the river channels and sloughs of the San Joaquin Valley floor. In the region surrounding the SLTP, the Panoche Complex (450-100 BP) is the cultural system associated with the Emergent Period. This complex was first identified at the Grayson Site (CA-MER-94), located approximately 5 miles west of the SLTP under the San Luis Reservoir. Although the Panoche and Gonzaga complexes have been documented through a number of sites, there appears to have been a hiatus of approximately 500 years between them both. That lapse may be due to a period of unfavorable climatic conditions that could not support oaks and the people who depended on acorns for food. The Panoche Complex is linked with the wider Augustine Pattern that appears across much of Northern California in the Emergent Period. This pattern is essentially the way of life observed in the contact period, with people living in a system of large central villages that housed most of the population and local leaders surrounded by smaller villages and areas for particular hunting, gathering, and other activities. Characteristics of the Panoche Complex include the remains of large, circular dance houses; flexed burials and cremations; milling slabs; varied mortar and pestle types; bone awls, saws, whistles, and tubes; side-notched projectile points; clamshell disk beads; Haliotis disk beads; and Olivella lipped, side-ground, and rough disk beads. Early accounts suggest that Pacheco Pass and the area around the San Luis Reservoir had been largely abandoned by local California Native Americans by the early 19th century, likely due to increased Spanish, Mexican, and American use of the pass. Bands of cattle and horse thieves frequently used Pacheco Pass and Spanish military expeditions also made incursions into the area in search of runaway mission neophytes. Collectively, these pressures proved too much for the local Native inhabitants who largely fled the vicinity by the 1840s and early 1850s. Resources identified within the SLTP study area may date to the Emergent period. Ethnographic Setting The SLTP falls within the traditional territory of the Northern Valley Yokuts. The Northern Valley Yokuts generally inhabited the territory extending from the crest of the Diablo Range in the west to the foothills of the Sierra Nevada Mountains in the east and from the San Joaquin River near Mendota in the south to the area midway between the Calaveras and Mokelumne rivers in the north. The San Joaquin Valley contained a population of over 40,000 people at the time of European contact. The Yokuts were hunter-gatherers who divided themselves into kin and language-based groups, known as tribelets. The headman or chief of each tribelet lived in a centrally located village while most of the other members of the tribe lived in smaller, surrounding villages. Most of the Northern Valley Yokuts lived in the center or eastern parts of the San Joaquin Valley, with the SLTP vicinity less densely occupied. Villages were located along watercourses such as Los Banos and Panoche creeks. Settlements consisted of large, semi-subterranean round or oval dwellings with hard-packed floors, typically on high ground or piled earthen mounds constructed along water courses. Ceremonial sweat houses and assembly chambers were present in large central villages. These villages could hold over 200 inhabitants who lived there most of the year, with short periods of seasonal resource collecting trips. The main foods for the Northern Valley Yokuts were local plants and animals typically found near water, as well as acorns and grass seeds. Freshwater fish available year-round and seasonal runs of spawning ocean fish were caught using weirs, nets, basketry fish traps, and bone- and antler-tipped harpoons. Birds following the Pacific Flyway were commonly hunted. Although elk, deer, rabbits, and other mammals were hunted, these animals appear not to have been an important part of the diet. In addition to acorns, an array of seeds, roots, and corms were collected, processed, and consumed or stored. The Yokuts systematically tended the landscapes through routine pruning, brush clearance, and prescribed burns that improved the quality and quantity of plant yields. Although the Northern Valley Yokuts were the predominant group in the region, there was interaction with neighboring hunter-gatherer groups, including Mutsun Ohlone-speaking groups of the Diablo Range and Monterey Bay and the Miwok-speaking groups of the northern Delta and Sierra Nevada foothills. This gave access to materials that do not occur naturally in the region, including shell from the Pacific Coast and obsidian from the Sierra Nevada and North Coast Ranges. The Pacheco Pass and the San Joaquin River were both corridors where this trade and contact regularly happened. During the Mission Period (ca. 1776-1830s), large numbers of Northern Valley Yokuts were removed to Spanish missions in the San Francisco Bay Area, although many actively resisted the missions, fleeing into the tule marshes or raiding mission property. Like most Native Californian communities, Northern Valley Yokuts populations declined dramatically as they were decimated by epidemic diseases and missionization in the late 18th and early 19th century and again by the influx of American settlers in the mid-19th and 20th centuries. Today, however, several Yokuts communities persist and several have been federally recognized as extant, sovereign tribes. Six federally recognized tribes include Yokuts people in their modern membership: the Tule River Indian Tribe, the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the Picayune Rancheria of Chukchansi Indians, the Table Mountain Rancheria, the Tejon Indian Tribe of California, and the Tuolumne Band of Me-Wuk Indians. None of these tribes currently possess land in any of the four counties that SLTP runs through. However, any of them may have members who trace their ancestry back to the area and the Northern Valley Yokuts. Historic Setting Spanish Period (AD 1542-1821) The historic period within Central California began when the Spanish expanded their frontier northward into California. A number of expeditions took place, largely aimed at identifying sites for the establishment of missions. Using a tripartite system of military forts called presidios, Catholic missions, and secular towns called pueblos, the Spanish government rapidly established a network of settlements from San Diego to San Francisco. In 1777, Misión Santa Clara de Asís and El Pueblo de San José were established in the southern San Francisco Bay, the largest Spanish period settlements near the SLTP. Exploration of the northern San Joaquin Valley only began with the Gabriel Moraga expeditions of 1806 and 1808. The 1806 expedition started in San Juan Bautista, explored portions of the San Joaquin River, and headed north, crossing the Merced and Stanislaus rivers before proceeding to the Mokelumne River. The 1808 expedition started from San José, carried out further explorations of the San Joaquin River, and then veered south to the Merced River. In 1811, Father Ramon Abella explored the San Joaquin River north into modern San Joaquin County. Two main north-south travel routes linked Spanish Period missions and settlements. The coastal route, El Camino Real, eventually linked the chain of missions from San Diego to San Francisco. The interior route, El Camino Viejo, ran north from Los Angeles along the western edge of the San Joaquin Valley to the Patterson Pass near the present Tracy before turning west to Oakland. El Camino Viejo was used to transport livestock during the Spanish Period and during the Mexican Period. It passes through all four counties encompassing the SLTP project area. The El Camino Viejo likely paralleled the Proposed Project corridor and may have overlapped with the SLTP study area near the San Luis Reservoir in Merced County. The 1806 Moraga expedition also marked the historic period use of Pacheco Pass, an east-west trending Native Californian trail that became an important historic period transportation route connecting the San Joaquin Valley to the coast via the town of San José. Perhaps 30 land grants were issued to individual settlers during the Spanish Period, mainly located along the coast and in coastal valleys. Settlement within the Central Valley was sparse during the Spanish Period, generally associated with water locations along El Camino Viejo. One of the stopping points for water along El Camino Viejo was at El Arroyo de San Luis Gonzaga at Rancho Centinela just east of what is now the San Luis Reservoir in Merced County. Rancho Panocha de San Juan y los Carrisalitos, located in southwestern Merced County, also may have been occupied during the Spanish Period. Present day San Joaquin County apparently remained unsettled by the Spanish, though several 18th century expeditions documented contact with Native Californian villages. The mild Mediterranean climate, abundant grasslands, and numerous creeks and rivers provided excellent conditions for ranching Spanish breeds of cattle, sheep, and horses. As a result, livestock and the hide and tallow trade became central to the economy of Alta California under Spanish and later Mexican rule. As livestock herds grew, they were parceled out to mission ranches and presidio pastures. Rangelands were not fenced and, as the herds grew, some of the unfenced livestock would scatter and turn feral. Wild herds of cattle and horses spread over large areas of the Diablo Ranges and the San Joaquin Valley. The western edge of the San Joaquin Valley, including those lands in the SLTP vicinity, would have been used mainly as grazing land during the Spanish Period. Mexican Period (1821-1848) Mexico gained independence from Spain in 1822, and Alta California became a part of the Mexican frontier. By the 1830s, the Mexican Government began to colonize their northern frontier. Mission lands were granted as ranchos to citizens of Alta California as a reward for loyal service. Beginning with the Jedediah Smith expedition in 1827, groups of American and British Canadian trappers and explorers began to cross over the Sierra Nevada and Cascade Mountains into the interior Central Valley to explore the region. One of these groups was likely the source of an 1831-1833 disease outbreak that killed over 60,000 Native Californians in the Central Valley. The 1844 Frémont expedition passed close to the SLTP vicinity as they travelled south across the Stanislaus and Merced rivers. American forays into Mexican territory occurred in tandem with livestock raids conducted by Central Valley Miwok and Yokuts tribes during the 1830s and 1840s. These raids led to counter expeditions on the part of Mexican colonists. With increasing raids and territorial unrest, the Mexican Government sought to consolidate their hold over Alta California by granting a string of land grants along the San Joaquin River in present day San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. These land grants included five near the SLTP study area: Orestimba Rancho, Rancho del Puerto, El Pescador, San Luis Gonzaga, and Panocha de San Juan y Los Carrisalitos. These grants represented an effort to increase the Mexican population with the region and thus solidify their hold over a somewhat unstable portion of their territory. The only rancho that intersected SLTP study area was Rancho San Luis Gonzaga, consisting of 48,000 acres surrounding Pacheco Pass that were granted to Juan Pérez Pacheco and José María Mejía in 1843. This rancho was devoted to cattle grazing and, to a lesser extent, agriculture. An adobe and rancho complex was constructed on the property in 1844 near San Luis Creek, now under the reservoir. During the American Period, the ranch became San Luis Ranch and continued to be held by the Pacheco family until 1962. The adobe served as a stage stop, café, and gas station before it was moved and largely destroyed in advance of construction of the San Luis Reservoir in 1962. The Mexican Period economy focused on livestock ranching with little irrigated farming. The Mexican settlers received large land grants and appropriated existing mission irrigated fields, livestock, fences, corrals, irrigation ditches, outbuildings, and other improvements. They tended to plant smaller fields near their adobe homes with subsistence crops, resulting in the decline of large-scale water system features. The emphasis on livestock ranching activities became known as the “hide and tallow trade.” By the 1840s, there were an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 cattle hides exported annually from Alta California. Fences and ditches were used primarily to keep livestock out of rancho vegetable gardens, orchards, and grain fields, but not to mark rancho boundaries. Instead, livestock brands were used to separate herds. Fence types included prickly pear cactus hedges and walls made from stone or adobe. During this period, the western edge of the San Joaquin Valley, including those lands in the SLTP vicinity, continued to be used mainly as grazing land. The Mexican-American War of 1846-1848 ended with the signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, under which the U.S. annexed California and granted full American citizenship to Mexican citizens. American Period (1848–Present) In 1848, James Marshall discovered gold on the American River and the California Gold Rush began. The discovery of gold brought tens of thousands of gold-seekers from around the world, and those prospectors pushed further into the California interior than the Mexican Period settlers who preceded them. The wealth and expanding population of California spurred its speedy ratification as a State in 1850. Due to the rapid influx of settlers into California, legal determination of ownership of lands awarded by Spanish or Mexican authorities was often disputed. The U.S. Government passed the Land Act of 1851, placing the burden of proof-of-ownership on the grantees. As a result, the few California Native Americans who had received grants lost their titles, as did many Hispanic landowners. The Gold Rush also shaped the course of California’s agricultural landscape and settlement patterns. Not only did the Gold Rush almost instantly create a demand for a wide variety of agricultural foodstuffs, but it also set in motion a wave of settlement aimed at producing commercial food products. In the 1850s, intensive settlement occurred first in San Francisco and Sacramento and extended into the hinterlands as miners flocked to the gold fields. Early settlement in the San Joaquin Valley occurred along streams and rivers. Many of California’s American settlers turned to agriculture as a way to profit due to the high demand for fresh foods. As the period progressed, land use along the western edge of the San Joaquin Valley in the SLTP vicinity changed. Ranching continued to be important, but less for hides and more for beef and dairy production. With the construction of water systems, irrigated agriculture became common, first in areas of level land, then expanding into hillier areas with orchard crops. Mining and quarrying, while never major industries, did occur within the Diablo Range. Early Settlements and County Histories. San Joaquin County was one of the initial counties established at statehood. The settlement of Stockton was established in 1847 prior to the Gold Rush and soon became a major transportation hub, serving as a transition point between steamer traffic on the San Joaquin River and mule and wagon traffic to the mines. As grain production within the San Joaquin Valley increased, Stockton became a major shipping hub for farms within the region. Tracy was established (near the SLTP study area) in 1878 when the Southern Pacific Railroad built a branch road to San Francisco by way of Martinez. The road was extended along the west side of Fresno, creating a junction at Tracy. Tracy soon became a terminal railroad point and the laying off place for hundreds of Southern Pacific employees, thus establishing a permanent settlement base. Newman was founded in 1888 around a Southern Pacific railroad station. The other counties that encompass the SLTP study areas — Alameda, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties — were not among the original 27 counties. Alameda County was created in 1853 from portions of Contra Costa and Santa Clara Counties. The area has long been a transportation corridor between the San Francisco Bay and the San Joaquin Valley. By the 1870s, Vallecitos Road followed the Livermore (now Altamont) Pass through the Diablo Range. An 1878 map of Alameda County shows the small community of Altamont about 5 miles west of the SLTP study area along the Livermore Pass as a railroad stopping point for the Western Pacific Railroad connection with the Transcontinental Railroad. Stanislaus County was established in 1854 and early settlement occurred primarily along the Tuolumne, Stanislaus, and San Joaquin rivers to the east of the SLTP study areas. Those early settlements functioned mainly as mining support towns, but evolved into agricultural communities during the 1870s. Merced County was organized in 1855 and early settlement was concentrated along the eastern side of the San Joaquin River then gradually extended to the west, ultimately encompassing the 19th and early 20th century settlements of Los Banos, Volta, and Gustine, all within 10 miles of the SLTP study area. Los Banos originated as an 1858 stage stop and was moved 5 miles to the east to the current location in 1889 to intersect with the railroad. Volta was established in 1890 along the north-south oriented San Pablo and Tulare Extension Railroad. Gustine, located approximately 5 miles east of the SLTP study area, began as a 1906 subdivision that was meant to rival the town of Newman in neighboring Stanislaus County. Development and industry along the SLTP study area mainly spread from these communities. The Rise of Agriculture. Agricultural activity during the American Period was characterized by three types of pursuits: cattle and sheep ranching, grain farming, and irrigation agriculture. Cattle and sheep ranching remained dominant until the 1880s. During the 1850s and 1870s, free-ranging Spanish cattle were replaced by American breeds of livestock and dairy cows. Initially, in the 1850s, fences were built around agricultural fields to protect them from livestock and to define property and field lines. During the 1850s and 1860s, grain farmers gradually became more dominant in numbers and in agricultural politics. In 1866, a “No Fence” Act was passed to force ranchers to enclose their livestock pasturage, and by the early 1870s it became a statewide requirement. During the late19th century, agricultural development in California was pushed by the spread of irrigation, improved transportation, the availability of agricultural labor, and increased mechanization. With the completion of the Transcontinental Railroad in 1869, farmers were able to ship fresh produce to markets in the East, encouraging a shift toward irrigated crops such as fruits, nuts, and vegetables in the 1870s. The transformation in the late 19th century from expansive grain fields and grazing lands to irrigated crops occurred relatively quickly and had profound consequences on the State’s agriculture. The crusade to irrigate much of California played an important role in the expansion of mechanized farming and in the establishment of small farming communities. Agriculture and ranching remained a substantial element of Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties’ economies during the early American Period and into the early 20th century. Largescale viticulture and wine production were established during the late 1870s and 1880s. By 1893, there were 156 vineyards in the Livermore Valley area. On the west side of San Joaquin County, spanning the cities of Tracy and Patterson, farmers developed large-scale grain agriculture. Initially, grain crops were shipped from San Joaquin City, but with the establishment of railroads, trains quickly became the preferred mode of transport. The dairy industry became established in the area in the 1870s. By the 1930s, the production of dairy products had become more focused on cheese, butter, and condensed (rather than liquid) milk. Other major crops grown in the area included flax, peas, celery, and lettuce. Patterson, located roughly 3 miles east of the SLTP study area, was a planned agricultural colony settled by Midwestern Scandinavian farmers who primarily pursued dairying and orchard cultivation of apricots, peaches, and nuts. In Merced County, the San Luis Gonzaga Rancho, held by the Pacheco family since the Mexican Period, transitioned to San Luis Ranch when Juan Perez Pacheco successfully received an American land patent in 1871. By the late 19th century, the largest cattle ranching concern in Merced County was owned by Henry Miller and Charles Lux. Miller and Lux acquired the Rancho Sanjón de Santa Rita grant, which is located just east of the SLTP study areas. They also leased land from Juan Perez Pacheco to the northwest. The Development of Water Conveyance Systems. The aridity of the western San Joaquin Valley began to pose problems for American Period agriculture during the late 19th century. Wells were initially used for irrigation, but as groundwater was depleted, canal projects were undertaken to move water from the San Joaquin River to the west. Henry Miller built a canal in 1871 from the San Joaquin River to the town of Los Banos and extended it to Los Banos Creek and Newman in subsequent years. The canals provided much of the irrigation for Miller’s properties and for local agriculture. In 1887, the California Legislature passed the Wright Act, which formed irrigation districts across California. The Merced Irrigation District was established during the 1870s and 1880s for the eastern side of Merced County and developed many miles of canals. By the 1920s, the depletion of groundwater reservoirs was a widely recognized problem within the western San Joaquin Valley. During the 1930s, the Federal Government began the CVP, a massive irrigation scheme that involved building dams throughout California. By the 1950s, the west side of the Central Valley had become the focus of both the federal CVP and a newly formed SWP. The area along Pacheco Pass in the Diablo Mountains was identified as the ideal site for the San Luis Reservoir. To avoid the unnecessary expense of parallel aqueducts, California agreed to partner with the Federal Government in the creation of the San Luis Unit in 1961. The San Luis Reservoir in the Diablo Range west of Los Banos would be filled with water supplied by the federal Delta-Mendota Canal and the State’s California Aqueduct; both intersect with the SLTP study area. The Delta-Mendota Canal is part of a federal project that was completed in 1951. The Delta-Mendota Canal was built by the Bureau of Reclamation to replace the diverted water with water from the Sacramento River. The canal spans roughly 117 miles in length and ends at the Mendota Pool. In 1963, construction began on the California Aqueduct, a series of canals, tunnels, and pipelines. Construction of the aqueduct’s main line was completed by 1971, with subsequent branches or extensions completed as late at 1997. The SLTP study area begins roughly one mile away from the north end of the California Aqueduct at Clifton Court Forebay. The California Aqueduct weaves in and out of the SLTP study areas in San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. Transportation Development. Driven largely by local topography, several transportation corridors developed within the SLTP vicinity over time. One such corridor ran roughly north-south along the western side of the San Joaquin Valley. This route was originally the Spanish El Camino Viejo; it became the Southern Pacific Railroad in the 19th century and I-5 freeway in the 20th century. Two east-west trending transportation corridors also cross the SLTP study areas and pass through the Diablo Range. The first is the Livermore Pass (now the Altamont Pass), located towards the northern end of the SLTP study areas in Alameda and San Joaquin Counties, and the second is the Pacheco Pass, located near the southern end in Merced County. In Alameda and San Joaquin Counties, several attempts were made to establish a stage line bridging Stockton and Oakland by way of the Livermore Pass. The first short-lived attempt was made by Alonzo McCloud in 1854, a route that would have crossed the SLTP study area somewhere near Tracy. A second stage line that followed roughly the same route was established by Alvin and Samuel Fisher in 1859. Both failed due to competition with steamship lines from Stockton. Pacheco Pass also served as a main transportation corridor connecting the southern San Francisco Bay Area with the San Joaquin Valley. Although the trail was used prehistorically long before the Mexican Period, it eventually took its name from Juan Pérez Pacheco. In 1857, Andrew Firebaugh built a toll road across the pass from San José and by 1858 the San Luis Ranch house was acting as a stage station along Firebaugh’s toll road. Pacheco Pass also served as a part of the route used by the Butterfield Overland Mail Company, which ran stage lines from San Francisco to St. Louis beginning in 1858. This route is being considered by the National Parks System as a National Historic Trail. The route followed the El Camino Viejo corridor to Pacheco Pass, where it crosses the Project area near San Luis Dam. Stage stations in Merced County near the SLTP included the San Luis Ranch near San Luis Dam and Lone Willow Stage Station near Los Banos. The development of railroads transformed transportation in the San Joaquin Valley. Railroad routes in the San Joaquin Valley followed roughly the same transportation corridors that were established during the Spanish and Mexican periods. The two main railroads that competed within the region were the Southern Pacific Company and Western Pacific Railroad. In 1876, the first through train from San Francisco arrived in Los Angeles. By 1900, the Southern Pacific Company had become a major railroad with a rail system. The original Western Pacific Railroad was established in 1862 to construct the westernmost portion of the Transcontinental Railroad between the present day cities of Oakland and Sacramento. The route crossed Niles Canyon to Livermore Pass before proceeding. In 1870, the Western Pacific Railroad was absorbed by the Central Pacific Railroad. In 1903, a second company was founded under the name Western Pacific Railroad. This new company acquired the Alameda and San Joaquin Railroad. Western Pacific constructed a route that ran from Oakland southeast to Niles Canyon before turning northeast towards Carbona and proceeding from there to Sacramento. A 1930 Denver and Rio Grande Western route map also depicted a Tesla branch line extending south from Carbona. Early 20th century topographic maps depicted three rail line segments crossing the SLTP study area. One of those railroad segments was the Niles and Sacramento line of the Southern Pacific Railroad while the second segment was the Tesla branch line of the Western Pacific Railroad. The third railroad segment was the Patterson and Western Railroad Company line that connected to the Southern Pacific main line at Patterson. The main Southern Pacific Railroad line runs parallel to the SLTP study area, but lies outside to the east. The Mining Industry. California has been extensively mined for many different ores and minerals throughout its history. The New Almaden mercury deposits and the Tesla coal deposits are located closest to the SLTP study area, but lie outside of it to the west. The western portions of San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties were never major mining regions. There were several small-scale mines of manganese, mercury, gypsum, and gravel or sand. Nine small-scale mines intersected or were located near the SLTP study area. Most of these were either located outside the SLTP study area or were recent mines. The only historic period mining operation that overlapped the SLTP study area was a gypsum anhydrite and diatomite mine operated between 1946 and 1951. The mine lies roughly one-quarter mile southwest of the southern segment of the Proposed Project corridor. 3.5.1 Proposed Project The following section identifies and describes specific cultural resources that could be affected by the Proposed Project. It describes the cultural resources within the Class I and Class III study areas, as defined above, under “Methods.” Additional subsurface cultural resources may be present that were not identified through surface survey and additional surface resources will likely be present in areas that were not surveyed for this Project. Additionally, future consultation with Native American tribes and other interested groups may identify ethnographic resources such as TCPs and sacred sites. 3.5.1.1 Affected Environment Resources Present During the 2014 and 2015 field inventories, 2,842 acres of the Proposed Project corridor were subject to intensive, full coverage survey and a further 441 acres were subject to opportunistic survey. This survey located a total of 15 cultural resources within the corridors for the Proposed Project. These included portions of three historic period water conveyance systems, three transportation resources, one homestead ranch complex, one utility line resource, and seven livestock related resources. Two previously recorded resources could not be located during the field survey: a bedrock milling feature (P-39-000121) and the buried San Joaquin Pipelines No. 1-3 (P-39-004860) that are present but not observed at the surface. In addition, the route of the proposed Butterfield Overland National Historic Trail passes through the Proposed Project corridor; however, no physical evidence of the trail or associated features have been identified. Six of the resources identified during the field survey had previously been recorded, all of which are historic period infrastructural or agricultural elements. These six resources are: . the California Aqueduct (P-24-001931), . the Delta-Mendota Canal (P-39-000089), . the Byron Bethany Irrigation District Main Canal (No. 9) and associated irrigation ditches (P-01-001445), . Grant Line Road (P-01-010613), . the McCabe Road Bridge (P-24-001934), and . a historic period ranch complex featuring ditches and poured concrete structures (P-50-000427). None of these six resources are listed on the National Register or California Register, but four have been previously recommended as eligible for listing. The Byron Bethany Irrigation District Main Canal and associated irrigation ditches (P-01-001445), was found ineligible for listing through survey evaluation in 2001. The three newly recorded segments of this resource appear to retain integrity of location, and also may retain integrity of design, materials, and workmanship. However, it seems likely that these segments also are ineligible for the National Register and the California Register for the same reasons identified in the previous evaluation. Grant Line Road (P-01-010613) previously was recommended eligible for the California Register; however, the segment examined for this project does not appear to retain integrity of design or workmanship of previously recorded segments. This segment is not recommended as eligible to the National or California registers. The California Aqueduct (P-24-001931) and the Delta-Mendota Canal (P-39-000089) have been recommended as eligible for listing due to their place in the development of California’s water infrastructure. The McCabe Road Bridge (P-24-001934) was recommended as eligible as a contributing element of the California Aqueduct. Field evaluation for the historic ranch complex (P-50-000427) recommended the resource as not eligible for listing on the National or California registers. The buried San Joaquin Pipelines No. 1-3 (P-39-004860) were identified through a records search as being present in the Central Segment of the Proposed Project corridor but were not observed during the 2014 field inventory. All the visible, above surface portions of the pipelines lie outside the SLTP study area. This resource has been recommended as eligible for listing on the National Register and the California Register. The 11 resources newly identified during the survey of the Proposed Project corridor all date to the historic period and represent infrastructure and agricultural activities. Based on field evaluations, none are recommended as eligible for listing on the National Register and the California Register. Table 3.5-1. Resources within Proposed Project and National/California Register Status Corridor Listed on National or California Registers Determined Eligible Determined Not Eligible Recommended Eligible Recommended Not Eligible Not Evaluated North Segment 0 0 0 2 3 0 Central Segment 0 0 0 1 11 0 San Luis Segment 0 0 0 2 1 0 San Luis Segment 70-kV 0 0 0 1 1 0 South Segment 0 0 0 0 0 0 3.5.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Federal Antiquities Act of 1906 (16 U.S.C. §§ 431-433) authorizes the president to designate national monuments historic landmarks, as well as governing permitting for archaeological work and penalties for violations. National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 As Amended (NHPA) (16 U.S.C. § 470) requires each state to appoint a SHPO) created the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP), and established the National Register of Historic Places (National Register). Sections 106 and 110 of this act have specific bearing on federal agency historic preservation activities and the management of historic properties. Section 106 of the NHPA requires federal agencies to take into account the effects of their undertakings on properties eligible for listing on the National Register, referred to as “historic properties,” and to afford the ACHP and SHPO a reasonable opportunity to comment on those undertakings. For the purposes of Section 106, an undertaking collectively refers to all projects, activities, or programs funded in whole or in part under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of a federal agency, including those carried out by or on behalf of a federal agency, those carried out by federal financial assistance, those requiring a federal permit, license, or approval, or those carried out on federal property. Federal agencies must meet their Section 106 responsibilities as set forth in the regulations (36 CFR Part 800). Federal agencies must conduct the necessary studies and consultations to identify cultural resources that may be affected by an undertaking, evaluate cultural resources that may be affected to determine if they are eligible for the National Register (that is, whether identified resources constitute historic properties), and assess whether such historic properties would be adversely affected. Historic properties are resources listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register (36 CFR 800.16[l][1]). A property may be listed in the National Register if it meets criteria provided in the National Register regulations (36 CFR 60.4). Typically such properties must also be 50 years or older (36 CFR 60.4[d]). The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, or association and: A. That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or B. That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or C. That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess artistic value, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or D. That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. Section 110 of the NHPA generally provides that all federal agencies assume responsibility for the preservation and use of historic properties owned or controlled by such agencies. Under Section 110, federal agencies must establish a preservation program for the identification, evaluation, and nomination to the National Register and for protection of historic properties. Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 (16 U.S.C. §§ 470aa-mm) protects archaeological resources on public and Indian lands. This act applies when a project may involve archaeological resources located on federal or tribal land and requires permitting of archaeological excavation and notification of Indian tribes when sites of cultural or religious importance could be harmed. Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 (25 U.S.C. §§ 3001-3013) establishes requirements for the treatment of Native American human remains, associated and unassociated funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural patrimony on federal and tribal land. Executive Order 11593 Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment (1971) established that federal agencies shall provide leadership in preserving, restoring, and maintaining the historic and cultural environment of the nation. Executive Order 13007 Indian Sacred Sites (1996) sets forth that in managing federal lands, executive branch agencies shall accommodate Indian religious practitioners’ access to and ceremonial use of sacred sites. Executive Order 13287 Preserve America (2003) established that agencies shall provide leadership in preserving America’s heritage by actively advancing the protection, enhancement, and contemporary use of the historic properties owned by the Federal Government. Department of Energy Regulations DOE Policy 141.1: Management of Cultural Resources was implemented to ensure that DOE programs and field elements integrate cultural resources management into their missions and activities and to raise the level of awareness and accountability among DOE contractors concerning the importance of the Department’s cultural resource-related legal and trust responsibilities. DOE Order 144.1: American Indian Tribal Government Interactions and Policy provides direction to officials, staff, and contractors regarding fulfillment of trust obligations and other responsibilities arising from Departmental actions which may potentially impact American Indian traditional, cultural, and religious values and practices; natural resources; and treaty rights and other federally recognized and reserved rights. State California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code § 21000, et seq.) (1970). Historical and archaeological resources are afforded consideration and protection by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (14 CCR Section 21083.2, 14 CCR Section 15064). CEQA Guidelines define significant cultural resources under two regulatory designations: historical resources and unique archaeological resources. A historical resource is defined as a “resource listed in, or determined to be eligible by the State Historical Resources Commission, for listing in the CRHR”; or “a resource listed in a local register of historical resources or identified as significant in a historical resource survey meeting the requirements of Section 5024.1(g) of the Public Resources Code”; or “any object, building, structure, site, area, place, record, or manuscript which a lead agency determines to be historically significant or significant in the architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political, military, or cultural annals of California, provided the agency’s determination is supported by substantial evidence in light of the whole record” (14 CCR Section 15064.5[a][3]). While TCPs and cultural landscapes are not directly called out in the State definitions of historical resources, TCPS are places and cultural landscapes are areas, and places and areas are included as types of historical resources. Historical resources that are automatically listed in the California Register include California historical resources listed in or formally determined eligible for the National Register and California Registered Historical Landmarks from No. 770 onward (PRC 5024.1[d]). Locally listed resources are entitled to a presumption of significance unless a preponderance of evidence in the record indicates otherwise. Under CEQA, a resource is generally considered historically significant if it meets the criteria for listing in the California Register. A resource must meet at least one of the following four criteria (PRC 5024.1; 14 CCR Section 15064.5[a][3]): 1. It is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local or regional history, or the cultural heritage of California or the United States; 2. It is associated with the lives of persons important to local, California or national history; 3. It embodies the distinctive characteristics of type, period, region or method of construction, or represents the work of a master or possesses high artistic values; 4. It has yielded or has the potential to yield information important to the prehistory or history of the local area, California or nation. Historical resources must also possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association (14 CCR 4852[c]). An archaeological artifact, object, or site can meet CEQA’s definition of a unique archaeological resource, even if it does not qualify as a historical resource (14 CCR 15064.5[c][3]). An archaeological artifact, object, or site is considered a unique archaeological resource if “it can be clearly demonstrated that, without merely adding to the current body of knowledge, there is a high probability that it meets any of the following criteria (PRC 21083.2[g]): . Contains information needed to answer important scientific research questions and that there is a demonstrable public interest in that information. . Has a special and particular quality such as being the oldest of its type or the best available example of its type. . Is directly associated with a scientifically recognized important prehistoric or historic event or person.” Within California State law, cultural resources are defined as buildings, sites, structures, or objects, each of which may have historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural, and/or scientific importance. All resources nominated for listing in the California Register of Historic Resources (California Register) must have integrity; the authenticity of a historical resource’s physical identity evidenced by the survival of characteristics that existed during the resource’s period of significance. Therefore, resources must retain enough of their historical character or appearance to convey the reasons for their significance. Integrity is evaluated with regard to the retention of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association. It must also be judged with reference to the particular criteria under which a resource is proposed for nomination (Calif. PRC §5024.1). CEQA Guidelines, California Code of Regulations Title 14, Section 15064.5. When an initial study identifies the existence of, or the probable likelihood of, Native American human remains within the project, a lead agency shall work with the appropriate Native Americans as identified by the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC). The applicant may develop an agreement for treating or disposing of, with appropriate dignity, the human remains and any items associated with Native American burials with the appropriate Native Americans identified as the Most Likely Descendant (MLD) by the NAHC. Public Resources Code (PRC), Section 5024, et seq. requires that each State agency develop policies for the preservation and maintenance of all State-owned historical resources or historic properties under its jurisdiction. Each State agency is required to submit updates to their an inventory of all State-owned structures over 50 years of age under its jurisdiction listed in or which may be eligible for inclusion in the National Register or registered or which may be eligible for registration as a State historical landmark. These inventories are used to create a master list maintained by the State Office of Historic Preservation (OHP). Public Resources Code (PRC), Section 5097.9, et seq. (1982) establishes that both public agencies and private entities using, occupying, or operating on State property under public permit, shall not interfere with the free expression or exercise of Native American religion and shall not cause severe or irreparable damage to Native American sacred sites. This section also creates the NAHC, charged with identifying and cataloging places of special religious or social significance to Native Americans, identifying and cataloging known graves and cemeteries on private lands, and performing other duties regarding the preservation and accessibility of sacred sites and burials. This section also includes requirements for landowners to limit further development activity on property where Native American human remains are found until that landowner confers with NAHC-identified most likely descendants to consider treatment options. It enables those descendants, within 48 hours of notification by the NAHC, to inspect the discovery site and recommend to the landowner or the person responsible for the excavation the means to treat or dispose of the human remains and any associate grave goods with dignity. In the absence of most likely descendants, or of a treatment acceptable to all parties, the landowner is required to reinter the remains elsewhere on the property in a location that will not be disturbed. Finally, this section makes it a felony to remove Native American artifacts or human remains from a Native American grave or cairn, as well as to acquire, possess, sell, or dissect Native American remains, funerary objects, or artifacts from a Native American grave or cairn and establishes the repatriation of these remains, funerary objects, and associated grave artifacts as State policy (PRC, Section 5097.9, et seq.). Local Alameda County Alameda County General Plan. The East County Area Plan portion states that it is a goal of the County to protect cultural resources from development and establishes policies and an implementation program to further that goal. This includes identifying cultural resources and avoiding or mitigating impacts to them during development. (Alameda County, 2000). Alameda County’s Historic Preservation Ordinance. This ordinance sets forth Alameda County’s policies and procedures for the identification, protection, and preservation of significant architectural, historic, prehistoric and cultural structures, sites, resources and properties in the County. (Alameda County, 2012). San Joaquin County San Joaquin County General Plan, Volume I, Section IV.H. This section establishes the County’s objective for the protection of the architectural, historical, archaeological, and cultural resources of San Joaquin County. Historic Resource Preservation (San Joaquin County Development Title 9-1053). The intent of this chapter is to establish regulations for the preservation of historic resources, such as cultural, archaeological, architectural, aesthetic, and environmental resources, within San Joaquin County. Stanislaus County Goal Eight of the General Plan sets forth the county’s goal of preserving areas of national, State, regional and local historical importance. To do this, Policy Twenty-Four includes measures that state that the county will use the CEQA process to protect archaeological and historical resources and cooperate with local historical societies and archaeological organizations as well as with the SHPO and OHP. Merced County The Merced 2030 General Plan contains a number of policies that apply to Cultural Resource impacts in conjunction with ultimate build-out of the City in accordance with the General Plan. The specific policies listed below contained in the Sustainable Development of the General Plan are designed to ensure that cultural resource impacts are minimized as development occurs in accordance with the Merced Vision 2030 General Plan. 3.5.2 Corridor Alternatives The following section identifies and describes specific cultural resources that could be affected by the alternatives. It describes the cultural resources within the Class I and Class III study areas, as defined above under Methods. Additional subsurface cultural resources may be present that were not identified through surface survey and additional surface resources will likely be present in areas that were not surveyed for this Project. Additionally, future consultation with Native American tribes and other interested groups may identify ethnographic resources such as TCPs and sacred sites. Some cultural resources are located within multiple corridors, thus the total resources identified during survey are not an additive total of those in the Proposed Project and the alternatives. Table 3.5-2 summarizes the number of resources encountered within the alternatives study area and presents their National/California register eligibility status. Note that these numbers are not additive, as single resources were recorded in multiple alternatives. It was not possible to survey the entire area within the alternative corridors due to issues related to access and topography. Additional detail on these resources is provided in the following sections. Table 3.5-2. Resources within Project Alternatives and National/California Register Status Corridor Listed on National or California Registers Determined Eligible Determined Not Eligible Recommended Eligible Recommended Not Eligible Not Evaluated Patterson Pass Road 0 0 0 1 9 2 Butts Road Alternative 0 0 0 1 0 0 West of Cemetery 0 0 0 0 0 0 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV 0 0 0 2 0 0 San Luis to Dos Amigos 0 0 0 0 0 0 Billy Wright Road 0 0 0 0 1 0 3.5.2.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative The affected environment for the Patterson Pass Road Alternative is similar to that of the Proposed Project. It differs only in the resources present. As of September 2014, one resource eligible for listing on the National Register and California Register has been identified as present in the Patterson Pass Road Alternative corridor: the San Joaquin Pipelines No. 1-3 (P-39-004860). This resource was not observed on the surface, but is known to be present. Two resources have not been evaluated for eligibility to the National Register and California Register: a multicomponent site consisting of both prehistoric and historic period elements and a prehistoric site. An additional nine cultural resources were newly identified by surveys within the Patterson Pass Road corridor and were recommended not eligible for the National Register and California Register based on field evaluation. Within this alternative corridor, a total of 2046.3 acres was surveyed for SLTP for the presence of cultural resources, or 72 percent of the total 2858.8 acres. 3.5.2.2 Butts Road Alternative The affected environment for the Butts Road Alternative is similar to that of the Proposed Project. It differs only in the resources present. As of September 2014, one resource eligible for listing on the National Register and California Register has been identified: the California Aqueduct (P-24-001931). This resource was also present in the Proposed Project corridor. Within this alternative corridor, a total of 477.9 acres was surveyed for SLTP for the presence of cultural resources, or 43 percent of the total 1006.8 acres. 3.5.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The affected environment for the West of Cemetery Alternative is similar to that of the Proposed Project. It differs only in the resources present. As of September 2014, no resources have been identified in the West of Cemetery Alternative corridor. Within this alternative corridor, a total of 424.8 acres was surveyed for SLTP for the presence of cultural resources, or 36 percent of the total 1166.2 acres. 3.5.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Corridor Alternative The affected environment for the West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative is similar to that of the Proposed Project. It differs only in the resources present. As of September 2014, two resources eligible for listing on the National Register and California Register have been identified as present in the San Luis to O’Neill 70-kV Alternative corridor: the California Aqueduct (P-24-001931) and the McCabe Road (P-24-001934). Within this alternative corridor, a total of 271.5 acres was surveyed for SLTP for the presence of cultural resources, or 51 percent of the total 536.1 acres. 3.5.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative The affected environment for the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative is similar to that of the Proposed Project. It differs only in the resources present. As of September 2014, no resources were identified in the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative. Within this alternative corridor, a total of 394.1 acres was surveyed for SLTP for the presence of cultural resources, or 55 percent of the total 710.0 acres. 3.5.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative The affected environment for the Billy Wright Road Alternative is similar to that of the Proposed Project. It differs only in the resources present. As of April 2015, two cultural resources were newly identified by surveys within the Billy Wright Road corridor and were recommended not eligible for the National Register and California Register based on field evaluation. Within this alternative corridor, a total of 159.0 acres have been surveyed for the presence of cultural resources, or 40 percent of the total 394.3 acres. 3.6 Environmental Justice This section describes the minority and low-income populations in the study area and the regulatory environment pertinent to environmental justice. Environmental Justice impacts (i.e., the disproportionate distribution of impacts on minority and low-income populations) are analyzed in Section 4.6 (Environmental Justice). 3.6.1 Proposed Project 3.6.1.1 Afected Environment On February 11, 1994, President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 12898 titled “Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations” (59 Fed. Reg. 7629). This Executive Order 12898 was designed to focus attention on environmental and human health conditions in areas of high-minority populations and low-income communities and to promote nondiscrimination in programs and projects substantially affecting human health and the environment. Executive Order 12898 requires agencies to identify and address disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of their programs, policies, and activities on minority and/or low-income populations. In response to Executive Order 12898, DOE prepared and issued its Environmental Justice Strategy in 1995. Since then, the agency has conducted a series of activities to implement the Strategy. Both the Executive Order and the Strategy require that DOE establish and maintain an integrated approach for identifying, tracking, and monitoring environmental justice. DOE defines environmental justice as “fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people, regardless of race, ethnicity, culture, income, or education level with respect to development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies. Fair treatment means that racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic groups should not bear a disproportionate share of negative environmental consequences resulting from industrial, municipal, and commercial operations, or from the execution of federal, State, and local laws, regulations, and policies” (DOE, 2008). According to the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Environmental Justice Guidance Under the National Environmental Policy Act (CEQ, 1997), “minority populations should be identified where either: (a) the minority population of the affected region exceeds 50 percent or (b) the minority population percentage of the affected region is meaningfully greater than the minority population percentage in the general population or other appropriate unit of geographic analysis.” The same document advises the use of Census poverty thresholds to identify low-income populations. Additionally, the CEQ (CEQ, 1997) guidance advises that “In order to determine whether a proposed action is likely to have disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects on low-income populations, minority populations, or Indian tribes, agencies should identify a geographic scale, obtain demographic information on the potential impact area, and determine if there is a disproportionately high and adverse effect to these populations. Agencies may use demographic data available from the Bureau of the Census to identify the composition of the potentially affected population.” Environmental Justice Overview in the Study Area The study area for the Environmental Justice analysis includes census block groups traversed by the Proposed Project corridor. Census block groups are statistical divisions of census tracts, and are generally defined to contain between 600 and 3,000 people. On average, the population density within the study area is low. Therefore, the census block groups included in the analysis tend to cover larger areas in comparison to surrounding higher population density areas. Minority Populations For the purposes of this analysis, 2007-2012 American Community Survey (U.S. Census Bureau) minority population data are presented by census block groups to characterize the ethnic makeup of the study area. The U.S. Census Bureau defines minorities as individuals who are members of the following population groups: American Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian or Pacific Islander, Black not of Hispanic origin, or Hispanic. Table 3.6-1 provides population percentages for the minority populations within the census block groups presented in Figure 3.6-1. Table 3.6-1. Study Area Minority Population Profile by Census Block Group Figure 3.6-1 Identifier # Census Block Group Total Population Minority Population Percent Minority 1 304002-1 1,241 177 14.3 2 451101-3 983 11 1.1 3 5206-3 10,542 6,316 59.9 4 5207-1 2,258 671 29.7 5 5502-1 886 355 40.1 6 3300-2 2,439 248 10.2 7 3400-1 1,162 472 40.6 8 2000-2 1,727 258 14.9 9 2100-3 999 182 18.2 10 2100-1 1,445 153 10.6 11 2100-2 1,105 169 15.3 Totals 24,787 9,012 36.4 Note: Population data are based on the number of census survey takers who provided their race. Therefore, the total population presented in this table does not equal the actual total population. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2012 American Community Survey One census block group, located on the east side between the Tracy Substation and Patterson Pass Road, contains a minority population greater than 50 percent. Two census block groups fall between 40 and 50 percent minority population. Overall, the study area has a 36.4 percent minority population. On average, the study area tends to have a similar minority population distribution compared to the region as a whole. Low-Income Populations The U.S. Census Bureau defines low-income populations by comparing the household income of a given area to that same area’s weighted poverty thresholds established by the U.S. Department of Finance (U.S. Census, 2010). Table 3.6-2 presents the low-income population profile for the census block groups presented in Figure 3.6-2. None of the study area census block groups contain a majority low-income population. One census block group contains a low-income population slightly greater than 35 percent; however, the remainder of the census block groups fall below 25 percent. In total, the study area has a 9.2 percent low-income population. On average, the study area tends to have a lower percentage of low-income population in comparison to the region as a whole. 3.6.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards The introduction to Section 3.6.1.1 above describes the regulations, plans, and standards applicable to environmental justice. Figure 3.6-1, titled “Minority Population Distribution,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") ") ") Tracy East Los Banos West 2 10 6 7 5 8 4 9 3 11 1 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy ¨§.5 ¨§.580 ¨§.205 ¨§.5 £.101 ST152 ST152 Merced County Stanislaus County Santa Clara County San Joaquin County Alameda County San Benito County Contra Costa County Santa Cruz County Monterey County Tuolumne County Ceres Keyes Ripon Tracy Delhi Newman Salida Denair Empire Gilroy Hughson Turlock Grayson Hickman Westley Modesto Del RioBystrom Oakdale Lathrop Manteca Escalon Gustine Patterson Waterford Riverbank Los Banos Bret Harte San Martin Livingston Morgan Hill East Oakdale Hilmar-Irwin Riverdale Park South Dos Palos Figure 3.6-1 Minority Population Distribution 0 5.5 11Miles I San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, California Dept. of Community Surveys (US Census Bureau 2012) March 2016 3-64 ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Percent of Minority Population Less than 25% 25 - 50% Greater than 50% # Census Block Group Identifier # Figure 3.6-2, titled “Low-Income Population Distribution,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") ") ") Tracy East Los Banos West ¨§.5 ¨§.580 ¨§.5 ¨§.205 £.101 ST152 2 10 6 7 5 8 4 9 3 11 1 O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy Merced County Stanislaus County Santa Clara County San Joaquin County Alameda County San Benito County Fresno County Contra Costa County Santa Cruz County Tuolumne County Ceres Keyes Ripon Tracy Delhi Newman Salida Denair Empire Gilroy Hughson Turlock Grayson Hickman Westley Modesto Del RioBystrom Oakdale Lathrop Manteca Escalon Gustine Patterson Waterford Riverbank Los Banos Bret Harte San Martin Livingston Morgan Hill East Oakdale Hilmar-Irwin Riverdale Park Figure 3.6-2 Low-Income Population Distribution 0 5.5 11MilesI San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source:: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, California Dept. of Community Surveys (US Census Bureau 2012) March 2016 3-65 ")Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Percent of Population Below Poverty Level Less than - 25% 25% - 50% Greater than 50% # Census Block Group Identifier # Table 3.6-2. Study Area Low-Income Population Profile by Census Block Figure 3.6-2 Identifier # Census Block Group Total Population Low-Income Population Percent Low-Income 1 304002-1 1,142 138 12.1 2 451101-3 981 11 1.1 3 5206-3 10,522 557 5.3 4 5207-1 2,258 166 7.4 5 5502-1 886 14 1.6 6 3300-2 2,351 454 19.4 7 3400-1 1,128 227 20.1 8 2000-2 1,727 297 17.2 9 2100-3 999 352 35.2 10 2100-1 1,445 97 6.7 11 2100-2 1,105 164 14.8 Totals 24,544 2477 10.1 Note: Population data are based on the number of census survey takers who provided their income status. Therefore, the total population presented in this table does not equal the actual total population. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2012 American Community Survey 3.6.2 Coridor Alternatives 3.6.2.1 Paterson Pas Road Alternative The study area for this alternative overlaps the Proposed Project study area between Patterson Pass Road and Butts Road. The alternative study area does not cross additional census block groups. Similar to the Proposed Project in this segment, this alternative does not contain any census block groups with a minority or low-income population greater than 50 percent. 3.6.2.2 Buts Road Alternative The study area for this alternative is west of the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. The alternative study area does not cross additional census block groups and does not contain any census block groups with a minority or low-income population greater than 50 percent. 3.6.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The study area for this alternative is west of the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. The alternative study area does not traverse any additional census block groups and does not contain census block groups with a minority or low-income population greater than 50 percent. 3.6.2.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative Much of the alternative study area overlaps the Proposed Project with the exception of a portion on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay, which follows the Butts Road and West of Cemetery Alternatives. The alternative study area does not cross additional census block groups. Similar to the Proposed Project in this segment, the alternative study area does not contain census block groups with a minority or lowincome population greater than 50 percent. 3.6.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative The study area for this alternative overlaps the Proposed Project study area between the San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation. The alternative study area does not cross additional census block groups and does not contain census block group with a minority or low-income population greater than 50 percent. 3.6.2.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative Much of the study area for this alternative lies west of the Proposed Project between the San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation. The alternative study area does not cross additional census block groups and does not contain census block groups with a minority or low-income population greater than 50 percent. 3.7 Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources This section describes the geology, soils, and mineral resources in the study area, which is defined in Section 3.1. Impacts to geology, soils, and mineral resources, including adverse effects from unstable or eroded soils, damage to soils, or loss of minerals, are analyzed in Section 4.7 (Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources). 3.7.1 Proposed Project 3.7.1.1 Affected Environment Geology Most of the study area is situated in an alluvial valley underlain by Quaternary Deposits. In the southern portion of the study area, along the foothills of the Diablo Range, the underlying geology includes Mesozoic Sedimentary and Metasedimentary Rocks, and Tertiary Sedimentary Rocks (USGS, 2005). Figures 3.7-1a through 3.7-1d depict the underlying geology within the study area. Six geologic units underlie the Proposed Project study area: . Q, Alluvium (mostly Holocene) found near the Tracy Substation; Quaternary nonmarine and marine. This unit underlies most of the area around the Tracy Substation, I-5, and portions of the Proposed Project as it travels close to the Interstate. . QPc, Plio-Pleistocene nonmarine; Pliocene nonmarine; Pliocene and/or Pleistocene sandstone, shale, and gravel deposits; in part Miocene. . Ku, Upper Cretaceous marine, which are thick, extensive sequences of shale, siltstone, sandstone, and conglomerate primarily of deep-marine (turbidite) facies. . E, Eocene marine, consisting of shale, sandstone, conglomerate, and minor limestone; in part Oligocene and Paleocene. . Ep, Paleocene marine, consisting of sandstone, shale, and conglomerate; mostly well consolidated. . M, – Moderately to well-consolidated Miocene marine sedimentary rocks, including sandstone, shale, siltstone, conglomerate, and breccia. Seismicity The study area crosses numerous Quaternary and Late Quaternary faults. None of these fault zones are considered to be active. Several active earthquake fault zones parallel the study area to the west, along the foothills of the Diablo Range, but the Project would not cross these active earthquake fault zones. In addition, there are no mapped landslide or liquefaction zones within the study area (CGS, 2014). Soils The southern portion of the study area is dominated by alfisols, entisols, and mollisols soil types. Inceptisols are dominant on the western side of the San Luis Reservoir. The northern portion of the study area contains mainly inceptisols and vertisols on the valley floor, with entisols and mollisols along the foothills of the Diablo Range (NRCS, 2014). Figures 3.7-2a through 3.7.2d depict the soil resources within the Proposed Project study area.  Figure 3.7-1a, titled “Geologic Formations,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") Tracy Tracy East 0 1.5 3Miles I Figure 3.7-1a Geologic Formations ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Waterbody Geologic Formation EEp Ku MQQPc Water San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-69 Figure 3.7-1b, titled “Geologic Formations,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.0 1.5 3Miles I ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Waterbody Geologic Formation EEp Ku MQQPc Water Figure 3.7-1b Geologic Formations San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-70 Figure 3.7-1c, titled “Geologic Formations,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.0 1.5 3Miles I ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Waterbody Geologic Formation EEp Ku MQQPc Water Figure 3.7-1c Geologic Formations San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-71 Figure 3.7-1d, titled “Geologic Formations,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") Dos Amigos Los Banos San Luis O'Neill Los Banos West 0 1.5 3Miles I ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Waterbody Geologic Formation EEp Ku MQQPc Water Figure 3.7-1d Geologic Formations San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-72 Figure 3.7-2a, titled “Soil Orders,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") Tracy Tracy East 0 1.5 3Miles I Figure 3.7-2a Soil Orders San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Soil Order Water Alfisols Entisols Inceptisols Mollisols Vertisols Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-73 Figure 3.7-2b, titled “Soil Orders,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.0 1.5 3Miles I San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Soil Order Water Alfisols Entisols Inceptisols Mollisols Vertisols Figure 3.7-2b Soil Orders Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-74 Figure 3.7-2c, titled “Soil Orders,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.0 1.5 3Miles I San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Soil Order Water Alfisols Entisols Inceptisols Mollisols Vertisols Figure 3.7-2c Soil Orders Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-75 Figure 3.7-2d, titled “Soil Orders,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") Los Banos West O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos 0 1.5 3Miles I San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area Soil Order Water Alfisols Entisols Inceptisols Mollisols Vertisols Figure 3.7-2d Soil Orders Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-76 Mineral Resources Most of the study area contains sand and gravel that can be used by the construction industry. Additionally, salt and gypsum are mined in Alameda County. There are several small deposits of minerals of regional significance (classified by CGS as MRZ-2) within the study area. All of these regionally significant mineral deposits contain concrete aggregate that is important to the construction industry. Two areas are found in the Central Segment, one near the intersection of I-5 and I-580 (south of the City of Tracy), and the second in the southwestern part of Stanislaus County, west of the City of Newman. Another area of concrete aggregate deposits is found in the South Segment, along Los Banos Creek and its alluvial fan. (CGS, 1993, 1999, 2012; USGS, 2009) 3.7.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards . The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 693-2005: “Recommended Practices for Seismic Design of Substations.” IEEE Std 693 is designed as an integrated set of requirements for the seismic qualification of electrical power equipment. . Alquist–Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act of 1972 and the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act of 1990. The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act of 1972 was developed to minimize the likelihood that structures used for human occupancy would be built over active faults by requiring a geological investigation for new development within designated active earthquake fault zones. . The California Building Code (CBC, 2001) is based on the 1997 Uniform Building Code, with the addition of more extensive structural seismic provisions. The purpose of the California Building Code is to establish minimum requirements to protect life or limb, health, and property by regulating and controlling the design, construction, and quality of materials for all structural components of the built environment. . The California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA). SMARA encourages the production, conservation, and protection of the State’s mineral resources. 3.7.2 Corridor Alternatives 3.7.2.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative The alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project and traverses the exact same soil orders and geologic formations. Therefore, the existing conditions in this segment will be nearly identical to those described above for the Proposed Project. 3.7.2.2 Butts Road Alternative The alternative study area lies farther to the west in comparison to the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. The affected environment for this alternative is very similar to the Proposed Project. The alternative study area traverses mainly alfisols and mollisols, as well as small areas of entisols and vertisols. The underlying geology for this alternative is composed of Upper Cretaceous marine sequences of shale, siltstone, sandstone, and conglomerate as well as Holocene alluvium and a small area of Pliocene and/or Pleistocene sandstone, shale, and gravel. In comparison to the Proposed Project, there are no new geologic hazards or changes to the mineral resources along this alternative. 3.7.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The alternative study area overlaps with that of the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. However, much of the alternative study area lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more varying terrain. This alternative traverses primarily alfisols and mollisols, along with a small area of entisols. The underlying geology is composed almost entirely of Upper Cretaceous marine sequences of shale, siltstone, sandstone, and conglomerate, as well as small areas of Holocene alluvium and Pliocene and/or Pleistocene sandstone, shale, and gravel. In comparison to the Proposed Project, there are no new geologic hazards or changes to the mineral resources along this alternative. 3.7.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative The alternative study area runs from San Luis Substation to O’Neill Substation along the west and north sides of the O’Neill Forebay, and traverses primarily mollisols, along with small areas of alfisols and entisols. The underlying geology is composed almost entirely of Upper Cretaceous marine sequences of shale, siltstone, sandstone, and conglomerate and Holocene alluvium, as well as a very small area of Pliocene and/or Pleistocene sandstone, shale, and gravel. In comparison to the Proposed Project, there are no new geologic hazards or changes to the mineral resources along this alternative. 3.7.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative The alternative study area largely overlaps with that of the Proposed Project between the San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation and traverses the exact same soil orders and geologic formations. Therefore, the existing conditions in this segment will be nearly identical to those described for the Proposed Project. In comparison to the Proposed Project, there are no new geologic hazards or changes to the mineral resources along this alternative. 3.7.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative In the vicinity of the San Luis and Los Banos Substation, the alternative study area largely overlaps with that of the Proposed Project. Therefore, the existing geology will be similar to that described for the Proposed Project. South of the Los Banos Substation, the alternative study area lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more rugged terrain. This alternative traverses primarily entisols and mollisols, as well as small areas of alfisols, inceptisols, and vertisols. The underlying geology is composed entirely of Upper Cretaceous marine sequences of shale, siltstone, sandstone, and conglomerate and Pliocene and/or Pleistocene sandstone, shale, and gravel. In comparison to the Proposed Project, there are no new geologic hazards or changes to the mineral resources along this alternative. 3.8 Land Use This section describes the land uses in the study area, which is defined in Section 3.1. Land use impacts, including conflict with or conversion of existing land uses as well as any associated nuisance impacts, are analyzed in Section 4.8 (Land Use). 3.8.1 Proposed Project 3.8.1.1 Affected Environment Western’s Tracy Substation is located immediately to the east of the C.W. “Bill” Jones Pumping Plant. Western also owns a triangular shaped lot approximately 180 acres in size immediately to the north of the substation. The substation area is otherwise surrounded by agricultural fields. From the substation, the Proposed Project corridor heads south through open agricultural fields, paralleling an existing transmission corridor. It passes within 0.4 mile of the Mountain House Elementary School District, which is a single-site school district serving kindergarten through 8th grade, with an average annual enrollment of approximately 50 students (mtnhouse.k12.ca.us, 2014). The corridor crosses the Delta Mendota Canal near one of many wind farms located to the west, then turns southeast and crosses the canal again; a cluster of residences are located approximately 0.5 mile to the northeast here, and the San Joaquin Delta College South Campus at Mountain House is located approximately 0.25 mile to the east-northeast. As it crosses into San Joaquin County, the Proposed Project corridor turns south again, crossing I-205 near the west edge of the City of Tracy, where it crosses the Delta-Mendota Canal, the California Aqueduct, and I-580. The corridor here crosses a large parking lot at the west end of a large industrial park that is covered by the City of Tracy’s Cordes Ranch Specific Plan, and then a narrow strip of agricultural land, between the Aqueduct and I-580. A small portion of the project corridor is within the City Limits of the City of Tracy, to the south and east of where I-205 crosses over the Delta-Mendota Canal. The corridor is within the City’s Sphere of Influence between the Delta-Mendota Canal and I-580. From I-580, the landscape becomes rural, consisting of rolling hills used primarily for grazing, though several existing transmission lines and a Shell Oil pipeline station are nearby. Zoning for this area is AG-160, extending to the Stanislaus County border. There are several conservation easements managed by the San Joaquin Council of Governments within the study area just west of I-580, including the Tracy Business Park Preserve. In addition, a proposed conservation easement covers 3,000 acres of land near Corral Hollow Road that was purchased by the Contra Costa Water District as part of mitigation for impacts to endangered species related to the expansion of the Los Vaqueros Reservoir (CWCB, 2012). A 2.65-mile segment of the Proposed Project would cross these lands to the southeast of Corral Hollow Road. This easement as proposed would prohibit almost all types of ground disturbance, including offroad vehicle use, vegetation removal, excavation, or construction of any structure. The Biological Opinion for the reservoir expansion project specifies cattle grazing as the primary means for managing the conservation value of the property, and it is currently under lease for grazing by Cubiburu Livestock, Inc. (CCWD, 2015). As the Proposed Project corridor turns southeast, it passes within 0.2 mile of the northeast corner of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s 7,000-acre Site 300 testing center. From this point all the way to the O’Neill Forebay, the corridor passes through the rolling hills of the Diablo Range. Livestock grazing is the dominant land use throughout this segment, although the corridor also traverses active agricultural fields at Oak Flat Road and near Davis Road in Stanislaus County, and near Sullivan Road at the Stanislaus/Merced County border. Two large ranches near the study area at the Stanislaus/Merced County border are also under conservation easement: the Simon Newman Ranch and the Romero Ranch. The Simon Newman Ranch is administered by the Nature Conservancy. It would be crossed by the Proposed Project and the Patterson Pass Road Alternative. The Romero Ranch is under easement to a private conservation organization. The Romero Ranch would be crossed by the Proposed Project and all alternative routes in the San Luis Segment. The Simon Newman Ranch easement restricts many types of development, with the objective to protect the rare sycamore alluvial woodland, oak woodlands, and grasslands on the ranch, which are important foraging and nesting areas for many species of birds. Transmission line development is not listed as a prohibited land use on the ranch. The Romero Ranch is under a similar easement with similar restrictions. The ranches were placed in conservancy in part with funding by Reclamation as part of an effort to protect habitat values to mitigate impacts related to the delivery of CVP water (BOR, 2010b). From the Butts Road crossing in western Merced County, the Proposed Project corridor is located on the east side of O’Neill Forebay before interconnecting at Los Banos Substation and then to San Luis Substation. The Project would travel adjacent to the approved but not yet constructed Quinto Solar Project near McCabe Road, then cross land on the eastern side of O’Neill Forebay that is under conservation easement administered by the CDFW for the protection of San Joaquin kit fox. Between San Luis and Dos Amigos Substations, the Proposed Project corridor crosses private ranchlands up to the crossing of I-5, where it would interconnect into the Dos Amigos Substation. It would also cross through the proposed but not yet approved Wright Solar Park just north of the Los Banos Reservoir. Short segments within lands administered by the California Department of Parks and Recreation on either end of Los Banos Creek Reservoir, and an area to the north of the reservoir administered by DWR, are also crossed. Another area administered by DWR is just to the east of the Dos Amigos Substation. 3.8.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Alameda County The portions of the Proposed Project in Alameda County are covered by the East County Specific Plan (ECSP), which states that the county shall preserve the applicable area for intensive agricultural use. The plan also includes guidelines that incorporate the setbacks recommended by the California Department of Education for the siting of new schools near high-voltage electrical transmission lines for all sensitive land uses. San Joaquin County The Proposed Project and Patterson Pass Road Alternative routes travel through the same zoning areas in San Joaquin County. Near the border with Alameda County, the Project area is zoned AG-40 (Agricultural, with a minimum parcel size of 40 acres). The Proposed Project Route crosses a parcel zoned as I-L (Limited Industrial) and a small strip of AG-40 land in a large parcel south of I-205 between the Delta- Mendota Canal and the California Aqueduct. From I-580 all the way to the Stanislaus County border, the land is zoned as AG-160 (Agricultural, with a minimum parcel size of 160 acres). San Joaquin County’s General Plan contains several objectives and policies addressing development of energy-related infrastructure, including to “protect the scenic values of the County landscape from inappropriately located overhead utility lines (SJC, 1992). It calls for siting new transmission lines adjacent to existing lines, except in the case of 500-kV transmission lines, which “for safety reasons shall be separate from existing corridors by at least 500 yards.” It also calls for developing the joint use of utility corridors for recreation and trail uses, and to coordinate development of transmission lines so they do not interfere with agricultural operations. Stanislaus County The entire Proposed Project corridor in Stanislaus County runs through just two agricultural zones: A-2-160 and A-2-40. The latter numbers (160 and 40) refer to the minimum size for a subdivided parcel; otherwise, the two zones are identical in land use and requirements. The first approximately 3.5 miles of the study area starting from the San Joaquin County border is A-2-160, with the remainder A-2-40. Public utility facilities are allowed in these zones with a conditional use permit. The General Plan Policy Two states that lands designated as Agriculture “shall be restricted to uses that are compatible with agricultural practices, including natural resources management, open space, outdoor recreation and enjoyment of scenic beauty.” Section 201.08.020(C) of the County’s zoning ordinance requires that the routes of all proposed electric transmission lines be submitted to the County Planning Commission for review and recommendation prior to acquisition of right-of-way when the lines are not within the right-of-way for public streets and highways. Merced County In Merced County, the Proposed Project would pass through several general zones. In the rural areas, all lands are either Agricultural (A), or Foothill Pasture (FP) zones. The FP designation provides for noncultivated agricultural practices that typically require larger areas of land due to poor soil quality, limited water availability, and steeper slopes. It is typically applied to areas in the Diablo Range on the west side of the County. The A designation provides for cultivated agricultural practices that rely on good soil quality, adequate water availability, and minimal slopes. This is the largest County land use designation by area in the County and is typically applied to areas on the valley floor. Both these zones allow for energy production and transmission facilities in rural parts of the County. The County has prepared a Community Plan for the Villages of Laguna San Luis near the intersection of SR 33 and SR 152. The Proposed Project would cross through two designated areas within the community planning area. The Open Space (OS) area, which includes the Los Banos Substation, applies to lands that contain opportunities for biological conservation, reflect an agricultural heritage, provide recreational opportunities, promote general public education, have an important scenic or utility value, or provide critical open space linkages within the community. Starting approximately one mile south of SR 152, the Project would enter an Urban Reserve (UR) area, which are lands “considered appropriate for intensive urban land use activities at some future date.” This UR area is considered to be a logical location for infill development, as it is surrounded on three sides by urban designated uses. Specific uses may be proposed and approved within the UR area concurrent with an amendment to the Villages Community Plan, which typically requires an assessment of existing community vacant land availability. All areas within the community plan area that would be affected by the Proposed Project are currently zoned as A-2, for large agricultural operations, and the plan notes that, “The Villages CP does not propose any changes to the Agricultural Zoning designations.” Merced County’s General Plan includes several polices addressing transmission projects: . LU-1.11, Infrastructure Equity: Ensure that new development does not erode current levels of County service and that demands on public facilities and services from new development do not result in an unreasonable and inequitable burden on existing residents and property owners. . LU-1.12, Hillside Development Standards: Prepare and adopt hillside development standards and illustrated design guidelines addressing viewshed protection for all hillside development. . CIR-4.6, Multi-Use Trails: Encourage the development of multi-use corridors (such as hiking, equestrian, and mountain biking) in open space areas, along power line transmission corridors, utility easements, rivers, creeks, abandoned railways, and irrigation canals. . CIR-6.8, Transmission Tower and Lines: Review all proposed radio, television, power, or related transmission towers and lines for appropriate location and possible air travel conflicts during the discretionary application process. . PFS-5.3, New Transmission and Distribution Lines: Encourage new transmission and distribution lines to be sited within existing utility easements and rights-of-way or utilize joint-use of easements among different utilities to avoid impacting existing communities. . PFS-5.4, Electrical Interference: Require mitigation of electrical interference to adjacent land uses in the placement of electrical and other transmission facilities. . PFS-5.6, Underground Power Transmission: Require power transmission and distribution facilities to be located underground within urban communities and residential centers. . PFS-5.7, Utility System Expansion: Coordinate with local gas and electric utility companies in the design and location, and appropriate expansion of gas and electric systems, while minimizing impacts to agriculture and minimizing noise, electromagnetic, visual, and other impacts on residents. San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan and General Plan The San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan and General Plan (SLRSRA RMP/GP) provides goals and guidelines for management of the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area and adjacent lands. The Plan Area consists of two geographically separate areas totaling over 27,000 acres in the vicinity of Los Banos, California. The Plan Area includes the water surfaces of San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir, as well as adjacent recreation lands. Refer to Section 3.12 (Recreation) for additional information on the SLRSRA. State Water Project Encroachment Permit Process The California Department of Water Resources, in coordination with Reclamation, administers the State’s process for issuing encroachment permits for activities at the joint use facilities as described in the joint Guidelines for Handling Right-of-Way Applications for Use of San Luis Rights-of-Way (1979). 3.8.2 Corridor Alternatives 3.8.2.1 Patterson Pass Alternative This alternative route travels adjacent to the Proposed Project route in San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. The land use designations and planning documents for this alternative are the same as those portions of the Proposed Project. 3.8.2.2 Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would travel around O’Neill Forebay on the west, including through portions of the SLRSRA, though lands are zoned by the County as either Agricultural or Foothill Pasture. The Proposed Project corridor runs on the east side of the Forebay, also through Agricultural and Foothill Pasture lands, with small differences in the amounts of each. Therefore, the land use designations and planning documents for this alternative are the same as the Proposed Project, described above. 3.8.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative travels entirely through lands zoned as Foothill Pasture. This route travels near the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and the recreation areas along the western side of O’Neill Forebay. All of which are within the FP zone in Merced County. 3.8.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative travels in the same corridor as the Butts Road Alternative corridor from the San Luis Substation to McCabe Road, then travels in the Proposed Project corridor from McCabe Road to the O’Neill Substation. Zoning for the entire corridor is either Foothill Pasture or Agricultural, as described above. This route travels near the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and the recreation areas along the western side of O’Neill Forebay, and near the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area and Santa Nella Village in the eastern side of the Forebay. The entire route is within the FP or A zones, but it is adjacent to lands zoned for light density urban development near Santa Nella Village and the Villages at Laguna San Luis. 3.8.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative route would be adjacent to the Proposed Project route between the Los Banos and Dos Amigos Substations in Merced County. The land use designations and planning documents for this alternative are the same as that segment of the Proposed Project. 3.8.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be west of the Proposed Project between the Los Banos and Dos Amigos Substations. It would travel through an A2 zone (Exclusive Agriculture) within the Villages at Laguna San Luis for about one mile near the Los Banos Substation; this area is currently designated as open space, but also as Urban Reserve, meaning that Merced County could expand residential or commercial uses into this area in the future by changing the zoning of the area, though no changes are currently proposed. It otherwise would travel through private lands zoned as Foothill Pasture, including over the western end of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, which is within the SLRSRA. 3.9 Noise and Vibration This section describes existing conditions as they relate to potential noise and vibration impacts. Noise and vibration impacts, including excessive increases or conflict with noise regulations or guidelines, are analyzed in Section 4.9 (Noise and Vibration). 3.9.1 Proposed Project 3.9.1.1 Afected Environment This section describes existing conditions as they relate to potential noise impacts of the Proposed Project corridor. Noise is generally described as unwanted sound that rises to the level of annoyance. Sound is mechanical radiant energy that is transmitted by longitudinal pressure waves in a material medium, such as air, to a receiver. Noise can interfere with hearing, and therefore communication. At high levels, it can damage hearing temporarily or permanently. Noise perception depends on the nature and intensity of the sound, relative location, meteorological conditions, terrain, and background noise levels. The sound of a waterfall, for instance, is generally considered more pleasant than that of a jackhammer at the same sound intensity. Sound can have physical effects, such as interfering with sleep or damaging the eardrum at high levels, and also psychological effects, which can be cumulative over time. A sound that is tolerable when in a relaxed state can become intolerable when the recipient is under pressure, such as when needing to perform a complex task in a given time frame. Sound is measured in decibels (dB) based on the amplitude of the pressure wave as it strikes the detecting microphone. The human ear can hear sounds between 20 hertz (Hz) and 20,000 Hz, although the ability to hear very low and very high frequencies falls off with age and with hearing damage caused by exposure to high noise levels. Humans are more sensitive to certain frequencies than others, and therefore, a weighted level measurement (dBA) is used to characterize the effect of noise on humans. Table 3.9-1 provides definitions for the terms commonly used to describe and measure noise. Table 3.9-1. Summary of Acoustical Terms Term Definition Decibel (dB) A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). A-Weighted Sound Level (dBA) The sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A weighted filter network. The A-weighted filter de-emphasizes the very low and very high frequency components of the sound in a manner similar to the frequency response of the human ear and correlates well with subjective reactions to noise. All sound levels in this report are A-weighted. Ambient Noise Level The composite noise from all sources resulting in the normal, existing level of environmental noise at a given location. The Leq, as defined below, typically defines the ambient level. Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) A measurement used to characterize average noise levels over a 24-hour period, with weighting factors included for evening and nighttime noise levels. Leq values for the evening period (7:00 p.m.–10:00 p.m.) are increased by 5 dB, while Leq values for the nighttime period (10:00 p.m.– 7:00 a.m.) are increased by 10 dB. Equivalent Noise Level (Leq) The average A-weighted dB level, on an equal energy basis, during the measurement period. Maximum Noise Level (Lmax) The maximum noise level during a sound measurement period. Minimum Noise Level (Lmin) The minimum noise level during a sound measurement period. Peak Level The peak is not the same as the Lmax. The peak level is the maximum value reached by the sound pressure. There is no time-constant applied. Acoustical Use Factor The percentage of time per hour that the equipment typically would be operated at maximum power. Hazards of exposure to noise can include hearing loss, which can occur with exposure as low as 85 dBA for 8 hours per day (Berglund, 1995), and sleep disruption. These can cause depression, impaired speech discrimination, impaired school and job performance, limited job opportunities, and a sense of isolation (Suter, 1991). Figure 3.9-1 lists the sound level in dBA for common outdoor noise sources. Ground-borne vibration generated by construction vehicles, equipment, and related activities may also affect people living or working near construction areas. Some construction activities such as blasting, piledriving, and operating heavy earth-moving equipment can cause ground-borne vibration that results in perceptible movement of building floors, rattling of windows, shaking of items on shelves or hanging on walls, and rumbling sounds. Typically, ground-borne vibration attenuates rapidly with distance from the source of vibration. Man-made vibration issues are therefore usually confined to short distances (i.e., 500 feet or less) from the source (FTA, 1995). Noise Environment in the Project Area Noise-sensitive land uses include residences, schools, hospitals, and workplaces. The people within these places are often called “sensitive receptors.” The region surrounding the Proposed Project corridor is largely rural, with some isolated farmhouses, occasional groups of residences, and a few commercial businesses. Groups of residences and other noise-sensitive areas located within one mile of the Proposed Project corridor are listed below with distance of receptor to the corridor edge in parentheses: North Segment . The community of Mountain House (0.5 mile) . Mountain House Elementary School (0.5 mile) . A group of residences near the intersection of W. Grantline Road and S. Central Parkway south of Mountain House (0.2 mile) . The San Joaquin Delta College South Campus at Mountain House (0.2 mile) . A group of residences near the intersection of W. Patterson Pass Road and Midway Road (0.25 mile) Central Segment . A group of residences off the southern end of S. Tracy Boulevard (0.2 mile) . A group of residences off Vernalis Road near the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission’s Tesla Water Treatment Facility (0.3 mile) . A single residence approximately 1 mile west of South Bird Road (0.2 mile) . A single residence at the end of Gaffery Road (0.3 mile) . A single residence on Khalsa Road (0.2 mile) . Two residences at the end of Ingram Creek Road (0.1 mile) . A single residence adjacent to southbound I-5 near Sperry Avenue (0.9 mile) . One to two residences on Oak Flat Road, one of which may have been converted to another use (0.7 to 1 mile) . A single residence off the end of Fink Road (0.3 mile) . Two residences at Sullivan Road (0.1 mile) Figure 3.9-1, titled “Typical Range of Common Sounds Heard in the Environment," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. Chain Saw Snowmobile (including wind effects) Diesel Locomotive at 50 Ft. Heavy Truck at 50 Ft. Motorcycle Power Lawnmower Subway (including screech noise) Pleasure Motorboat Train Passenger Food Disposer Automobile at 50 Ft. Automobile Passenger Home Shop Tools Food Blender Vacuum Cleaner Air Conditioner (window units) Clothes Dryer Washing Machine Refrigerator 40 Source: USEPA, 1978. Protective Noise Levels Condensed Version of EPA Levels Document MEASUREMENT LOCATION In Home Outdoors Operator/Passenger 50 60 70 Maximum A-Weighted Sound Level in dB 80 90 100 110 Figure 3.9-1 Typical Range of Common Sounds Heard in the Environment Final EIS/EIR 3-86 San Luis Segment . Two residences at Butts Road (0.1 and 0.9 mile, respectively) . A group of residences and the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery at McCabe Road (0.1 mile) . Recreation areas located at San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir, including campgrounds and picnic areas (0.2 mile to the San Luis Creek Campground) . A group of residences and a commercial campground east of the Los Banos Substation (0.1 mile) South Segment . A group of residences near Billy Wright Road (0.07 mile) . A single residence near Canyon Road (0.1 mile) . A group of residences off Arburua Road (0.1 mile) Existing Noise Sources Existing sources of ambient noise in the study area include the following: . traffic on I-5, I-580, I-205, SR 152, SR 33 and local roadways; . machinery at industrial and commercial facilities along the route, including the pumping/generating facilities at the Tracy (C.W. “Bill” Jones), San Luis (William R. Gianelli), and O’Neill facilities; . wind turbines of the wind farms along the Diablo Range; and . occasional farm machinery. 3.9.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Federal and State Standards The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the California Noise Control Act (California Health and Safety Code Sections 46000-46080) regulate the generation of and exposure to noise. County and local governments also set noise regulations to protect communities against nuisance noises. The EPA has published an outdoor noise level guideline of 55 dBA averaged over 24 hours. Table 3.9-2 shows California guidelines for evaluating the compatibility of various land uses as a function of noise exposure.  Table 3.9-2. Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Environment LAND USE CATEGORY COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE – Ldn or CNEL (db) 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 Residential – Low Density Single Family, Duplex, Mobile Home Residential – Multi-Family Transient Lodging – Motels, Hotels Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes Auditorium, Concert Hall, Amphitheaters Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries Office Buildings, Business Commercial and Professional Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture Normally Acceptable. Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements. Conditionally Acceptable. New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features are included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice. Normally Unacceptable. New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Clearly Unacceptable. New construction or development should generally not be undertaken. Source: OPR, 2003 Local Noise Ordinances and Policies Each local government aims to protect its residents from intrusive noise. Most communities specifically restrict disturbing noises at night. Table 3.9-3 shows the noise standards that the counties in the Proposed Project area consider compatible with residential land uses. Table 3.9-3. Residential Noise Limits by County County Day (7 am to 10 pm) Night (10 pm to 7 am) Lmax Alameda 50-70 dBA, depending on duration 45-65 dBA, depending on duration NA Merced background plus 10 dBA, or 55 dBA L50 background plus 5 dBA, not to exceed 65 dBA Ldn or 50 dBA L50 75 dBA day 79 dBA night San Joaquin 55 dBA Leq (at the property line of the receiving land use) 45 dBA Leq 70 dBA day 65 dBA night Stanislaus 50 dBA Lmax 45 dBA Lmax NA Alameda County’s East County Area Plan has several policies addressing noise impacts, including Policy 289 which states that “The County shall limit or appropriately mitigate new noise-sensitive development in areas exposed to projected noise levels exceeding 60 dBA based on the California Office of Noise Control Land Use Compatibility Guidelines.” Policy 290 requires noise studies for projects located “adjacent to existing residential or other sensitive land uses,” and that when noise exceeds the State’s guidelines, developers must contribute to the cost of noise mitigation measures. The San Joaquin County General Plan Noise Element states that traffic is the prevalent noise source in the county. The Noise Element focuses on measures to reduce noise, including proper planning (to avoid impacts) and architectural design, use of shielding, and acoustical construction. The Stanislaus County General Plan Noise Element focuses on areas that exceed current noise guidelines, and notes that “New development of industrial, commercial or other noise generating land uses will not be permitted if the resulting noise levels will exceed 60 Ldn (or CNEL) in noise-sensitive areas.” Merced County requires that all new developments meet the standards noted in Table 3.9-3 through design or other noise mitigation techniques, and limit construction activities to daytime hours. 3.9.2 Coridor Alternatives 3.9.2.1 Paterson Pas Alternative This corridor is adjacent and parallel to the Proposed Project corridor from Patterson Pass Road to Butts Road in San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, and has the same noise characteristics and sensitivity as the Proposed Project for that segment. This alternative has roughly the same number of sensitive receptors as the Proposed Project corridor for the Central Segment, described above; it would be farther away from the residences on the east side of the Proposed Project corridor, but closer to the five residences off of McCabe Road north of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. 3.9.2.2 Buts Road Alternative The noise characteristics and sensitivity for this alternative are similar to that of the Proposed Project, as it is parallel and adjacent to the Proposed Project corridor up to McCabe Road, where it splits and goes around the west side of O’Neill Forebay rather than the east side. It would travel closer to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, the developed recreation areas on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay, and several residences off of McCabe Road near the point where the Proposed Project and this alternative corridor cross the road. 3.9.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The noise characteristics and sensitivity for this alternative would be less than the Proposed Project corridor because it is farther away from the group of homes off McCabe Road, and further away from the San Luis Creek Campground on O’Neill Forebay. However, this alternative is closer to and just west of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, considered a sensitive noise area. 3.9.2.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative travels in the same corridor as the Butts Road Alternative corridor from the San Luis Substation to McCabe Road, then travels in the Proposed Project corridor from McCabe Road to the O’Neill Substation. The noise characteristics and sensitivity of this alternative would be the same as those segments described above. 3.9.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative travels adjacent to the Proposed Project, on the west side of the existing transmission lines, rather than on the east, until it meets and joins the Proposed Project at Los Banos Creek Reservoir. The noise characteristics and sensitivity along this corridor would be the same as for the Proposed Project corridor. 3.9.2.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative This alternative lies to the west of the Proposed Project south of the Los Banos Substation. This alternative corridor would travel on the west side of Los Banos Creek Reservoir, and would avoid the group of homes at Arburua Road. Noise characteristics would be similar to the Proposed Project corridor, but sensitivity would be lower due to the fewer residences along the corridor. 3.10 Paleontological Resources This section describes the paleontological resources in the study area, which is defined in Section 3.1. The information presented in this section is summarized from the Paleontological Resource Overview of the San Luis Transmission Project, Appendix G of this EIS/EIR. Refer to that document for more detailed information on the affected environment for the Proposed Project and alternatives. Impacts to paleontological resources, including loss of or inaccessibility to paleontological resources, are analyzed in Section 4.10 (Paleontological Resources). 3.10.1 Proposed Project 3.10.1.1 Afected Environment Paleontological resources are defined in law as fossilized remains or imprints of multi-cellular animals and plants. A fossil is the remnant or trace of an organism of the past, such as a skeleton or leaf imprint. The importance of paleontological resources is subjectively ranked based on the current scientific value of the fossil or imprint. Vertebrate fossils, which include all animals with skeletal backbones such as mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes, are typically less abundant than invertebrate fossils, such as insects and snails. Vertebrates are therefore generally rated more important. However, wellpreserved, soft-bodied organisms, including worms, insects, spiders, or rare invertebrate fossils, may be considered highly important. Soils and Paleontological Resources Paleontological resources are defined by the geologic units in which they are found. Fossils are found in sedimentary rocks, which are typically classified into lithostratigraphic units based on lithology (the physical characteristics of the rocks as an outcrop) rather than biologic characteristics or age. The Diablo Range is underlain by uplifted and intensely deformed Upper Jurassic (150 million years old) and younger rocks of the Franciscan ophiolite complex and the Salinian metamorphic and granitic complex. The Coast Ranges were created by the movements of the major faults in the area, including the nearby San Andreas Fault. They are characterized by elongated topographic and lithologic strips underlain by discrete basement blocks separated by major structural discontinuities (Wakabayashi, 1994). Refer to Section 3.7 (Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources) for a discussion of the geologic units in the study area, and the Paleontological Resource Report in Appendix G for details on the rock formations found in the study area. Paleontological Resources in the Study Area Significant fossil-bearing deposits occur in the Diablo Range along the west side of the San Joaquin Valley. The San Joaquin Valley was part of the Pacific Ocean as recently as 65 million years ago, and the Coast Ranges were a series of islands that isolated whole groups of organisms. These island residents included many rare and unique animals of the Cretaceous Period and of the Oligocene and Miocene Epochs of the Tertiary Period. Some of the fossils recovered from and/or documented in the Diablo Range include mollusks, sharks, bony fish, turtles, sea lions, coral, deer, oysters, horses, weasels, whales, rhinoceros, sponges, bears, and dinosaurs. Section 3.7 identifies six geologic units along the Proposed Project (see Figures 3.7-1a through 3.7-1d). The portions of the Proposed Project that are underlain by the Q, Alluvium Geological Unit have low paleontological sensitivity, which are in general highly disturbed agricultural or developed areas. All other geographic units underlying the Proposed Project have moderate to high paleontological sensitivity (E, Eocene marine, high; Ep, Paleocene marine, moderate; Ku, Upper Cretaceous Marine, high; M, Miocene marine sedimentary rocks, high; and QPc, Plio-Pleistocene nonmarine, high). 3.10.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Activities affecting paleontological resources on federal lands are subject to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. §§ 1701, et seq.), which requires public lands to be managed in a manner that protects “scientific qualities” and other values of resources. The Antiquities Act of 1906 (16 U.S.C. §§ 431-433) also requires federal protection for significant paleontological resources on federally owned lands. Additionally, the Paleontological Resources Preservation Act (PRPA) (16 U.S.C. §§ 470aaa, et seq.) was recently enacted as a result of the passage of the Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009. The PRPA requires federal land management agencies to manage and protect paleontological resources and affirms the authority of existing policies already in place. Portions of the Proposed Project area traverse lands managed by Reclamation and other federal agencies; therefore, federal laws will apply. Treatment of paleontological resources under CEQA requires evaluation of resources in the Project area; assessment of potential impacts on significant or unique resources; and development of mitigation measures for potentially significant impacts, which may include avoidance, monitoring, or data recovery excavation. Additionally, Public Resource Code (PRC) Section 5097.5 affirms that no person shall willingly or knowingly excavate, remove, or otherwise destroy a vertebrate paleontological site or paleontological feature without the express permission of the overseeing public land agency. The code further states under PRC Section 30244 that any development that would adversely impact paleontological resources shall require reasonable mitigation. These regulations apply to projects located on land owned by or under the jurisdiction of the State or any city, county, district, or other public agency. 3.10.2 Coridor Alternatives 3.10.2.1 Paterson Pas Alternative The geology of this alternative is nearly identical to that of the Proposed Project, passing through M, Ku, and QPc units, and would have the same moderate to high paleontological sensitivity, depending on the level of past disturbance. 3.10.2.2 Buts Road Alternative The portions of this alternative within the Ku Upper Cretaceous marine unit have high paleontological sensitivity. 3.10.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The portions of this alternative within the Ku Upper Cretaceous marine unit have high paleontological sensitivity. 3.10.2.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative The portions of this alternative within the Ku Upper Cretaceous marine and QPc, Plio-Pleistocene nonmarine units have high paleontological sensitivity. 3.10.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative parallels the Proposed Project route from the Los Banos Substation to Los Banos Creek Reservoir. The portions of this alternative within the Ku Upper Cretaceous marine and QPc, Plio- Pleistocene nonmarine units have high paleontological sensitivity. 3.10.2.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative The entire length of this alternative route is underlain by Upper Cretaceous marine rocks, and therefore, would have a high paleontological sensitivity. 3.11 Public Health and Safety 3.11.1 Proposed Project This section describes the Public Health and Safety conditions within the study area, which is defined in Section 3.1. Potential hazards to Public Health and Safety that could be caused by the Project include accidents such as worker falls, intentional acts of destruction, wildfires, electrical contact (burns and electrocutions), and Valley Fever (a fungal infection caused by inhaling coccidioides organisms present in the soil). Also addressed in this section are electromagnetic fields (EMF), emergency response, spills, or mishandling of hazardous materials or hazardous waste, and use of herbicides. Impacts to public health and safety resulting from these hazards are analyzed in Section 4.11 (Public Health and Safety). 3.11.1.1 Affected Environment The Proposed Project corridor is located primarily in open space with limited public access. Where appropriate, structures would be on hilltops or ridges, with the conductors spanning the gullies below. Access to most of the Project is limited to private roads, either within the easement of existing transmission corridors, or on adjacent private farm and ranchlands. In Alameda and San Joaquin Counties, there are generally no access roads within existing transmission line easements on farmland because the entire widths of all the existing transmission line easements are actively farmed. From a point approximately 2 miles south of Kelso Road, the Proposed Project corridor enters grazing lands, which have very limited access for the entire remainder of its route. This is also the case for the alternative routes farther south. Access roads from the few public paved roads that cross the study area (see Section 3.14, Traffic and Transportation) are generally gated and locked, and often marked with no trespassing signs. Where public roads cross the Proposed Project corridors, adjoining lots are generally fenced to contain grazing animals. Access is restricted into the substations that are interconnected by the Project, and to the portions of the Project that are on State-owned or managed lands near the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, San Luis Reservoir, and O’Neill Forebay. The public, in general, would not be expected to travel within the Project area at any time. Hazards to health and safety would primarily affect workers within the transmission line easement, and people who live, work, or recreate near the Project area. Hazards to the general public include dust from Project construction or maintenance activities; handling of hazardous materials and waste; wildfires; and congestion or road closures due to construction-related traffic, which could, for example, block emergency vehicle travel. Also discussed in this section are intentional acts of destruction and potential exposure to electric and magnetic fields. Hazards to workers include all those applicable to the public, plus falls, burns, electrocutions, and other accidents. Emergency Response Emergency response access is discussed in Traffic and Transportation (sections 3.14 and 4.14). Fires in the Project vicinity would be responded to by local, regional, and State firefighting units, many of which are also equipped to provide emergency medical assistance. Local, regional, and State fire stations near the Project area are listed below by county in Table 3.11-1. Medical and police facilities near the Project are located in Tracy, Livermore, Patterson, Gustine, and Los Banos. The public roads in the area are patrolled by the applicable county sheriff and the California Highway Patrol. Table 3.11-1. Fire Stations in the Project Area Fire Station Straight-line Distance from Project Area Alameda County Alameda County Fire Department Station 20, Livermore 12 miles Livermore – Pleasanton Fire Department Station 8, Livermore 12 miles Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Fire Department, Livermore 8.6 miles San Joaquin County Cal Fire Castle Rock Station (Station 26), Tracy 2 miles City of Tracy Fire Department Station 94 (adjacent to the Cal Fire Station 26), Tracy 2 miles Stanislaus County: West Stanislaus County Fire Protection District Station 4, Vernalis 4.4 miles West Stanislaus County Fire Protection District Station 3, Westley 3.3 miles West Stanislaus County Fire Protection District Station 7, Diablo Grande 4.8 miles West Stanislaus County Fire Protection District Stations 1 and 2, Patterson 3.6 miles West Stanislaus County Fire Protection District Station 6, Crows Landing 4.9 miles West Stanislaus County Fire Protection District Station 5, Newman 6.2 miles Cal Fire Del Puerto Station, Patterson 2 miles Merced County: Gustine Volunteer Fire Department, Gustine 6.3 miles Cal Fire Station 72, Santa Nella 0.5 miles Cal Fire Seasonal Station, Los Banos 1 mile Cal Fire Station 71, Los Banos 8.5 miles Los Banos Fire Department Station 2, Los Banos 10 miles Wildfires The Project area is naturally susceptible to wildfire as a result of the dominant vegetation types and climatic conditions. Fires in the region are generally started either by lightning strikes, accidental ignition such as from campfires, or vandalism. Very few trees exist near the existing or proposed transmission facilities in the Project area, so wildfire would generally burn dried grasses. Grassfires tend to be less intense than forest fires, but they can still generate enormous amounts of radiant heat. Within the Project area, typical fire hazards include ignition of nearby fuel sources (primarily vegetation) caused by sparks from vehicles, tools, or personnel during construction or maintenance activities. Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste Hazardous materials hazards could arise from spills of gasoline, diesel fuel, oil, solvents, herbicides, or other materials from containers or vehicles. Spills could contaminate soils or leach into ground or surface water, and could be toxic, caustic, or acidic. Known storage locations include existing substations (Tracy, San Luis, O’Neill, Los Banos, and Dos Amigos). California-designated hazardous waste has been stored at the Tracy Substation. The other substations may store hazardous waste for short periods as allowed by regulations. Western and PG&E apply herbicides along their existing transmission line easements in the region where vegetation threatens the safe operation of the transmission line and related facilities. Herbicide misuse, over-spray, or drift could adversely affect humans, wildlife, vegetation, or water. Electrical Hazards Electrical hazards could include vegetation or equipment fires, electrical burns, or electrocutions to humans or animals. Electrical hazards could occur anywhere near energized conductors or facilities. These hazards are primarily a concern for construction and maintenance workers. Fall Hazards Fall hazards could affect individuals working at heights. Elevated work is essential for assembly of transmission structures and for line stringing. Workers typically perform this work from bucket trucks or by climbing structures. Acts of Intentional Destruction Electric power transmission facilities are part of the nation’s critical infrastructure and are considered to be possible targets of intentional acts of destruction. If targeted, potential threats to the Project could include bombs, aircraft collisions, sabotage of electrical systems by gunshot or other methods, attacks on personnel, or cyber-attack of the facilities’ control system. EMF Electric power consists of two components: voltage and current. Current, which is a flow of electrical charge measured in amperes, creates a magnetic field. Voltage, which is the force or pressure that causes the current to flow and is measured in units of volts or kV, creates an electric field. Electric fields and magnetic fields considered together are referred to as “EMF.” Both fields occur together whenever electricity flows, hence the general practice of considering both as EMF exposure. Transmission lines, like all electrical devices and equipment, produce EMFs. Electric field strength is usually constant with a given voltage, while magnetic field strength can vary depending on the electrical load, design of the transmission line, and configuration and height of conductors. Both the magnetic field and the electric field decrease rapidly, or attenuate, with distance from the source. Over the past 25 years, research has not proven that power frequency EMF exposure causes adverse health effects (NIEHS, 2002). However, some non-governmental organizations have set advisory limits as a precautionary measure, based on the knowledge that high field levels (more than 1,000 times the EMF found in typical environments) may induce currents in cells or nerve stimulation. The International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection has established a continuous, magnetic field exposure limit of 0.833 Gauss (or 833 milliGauss [mG]) and a continuous electric field exposure limit of 4.2 kilovolts per meter (kV/m) for members of the general public. The American Council of Governmental Industrial Hygienists publishes Threshold Limit Values (TLVs) for various physical agents. The TLV for occupational exposure to 60-Hertz (Hz) magnetic fields has been set as 10 Gauss (10,000 mG) and 25 kV/m for electric fields. Transmission and distribution lines in the United States operate at a frequency of 60 Hz, as do household wiring and appliances. In the home, EMF exposure comes from circuit breaker and meter boxes, electrical appliances, electric blankets, and any cord or wire that carries electricity. The fields are greatest closest to the surface of the cord or appliance and drop rapidly in just a short distance. Table 3.11-2 shows typical magnetic fields from common household electrical devices. Sources of existing EMF in the vicinity of the Project area include existing transmission and distribution lines, distribution feeds to homes and businesses, commercial wiring and equipment, and common household wiring and appliances for residences and communities in the area. EMF levels in homes and businesses vary widely with wiring configurations, the types of equipment and appliances in use, and proximity to these sources. 3.11.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 Under authority granted in the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, the OSHA assures safe and healthful working conditions by setting and enforcing standards and by providing training, outreach, education, and assistance. OSHA has set standards for all facets of work conditions, including for safetyrelated personnel protective equipment, heat exposure, toxic chemical handling and exposure, noise exposure, and working at heights. The California Department of Industrial Relations administers the California State Plan, commonly referred to as Cal/OSHA, which is identical tohas adopted many of the Federal OSHA regulations. Cal/OSHA regulations apply to all public and private sector places of employment in the State with the exception of Federal Government employees, private-sector workers on federal enclavesgovernment and Native American lands, and employers that require federal security clearances. Cal/OSHA would not be applicable to work done by Western employeeswithin a Western easement, but would be applicable for work done by non-federal employees at facilities of investorowned utilities in California. Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR), Section 171.8 Transportation, handling, storage and cleanup of hazardous materials is covered under Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR), Section 171.8. Any substance or material that is capable of causing an unreasonable risk to human health or safety or the environment when transported by vehicle, used incorrectly, or not properly stored or contained, is a hazardous material. Examples include explosives, flammables, corrosives, radioactive materials, and poisons. Regulations pertaining to transportation of such materials are enforced by the CHP and DOT. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act Federal regulations governing handling, storage, disposal, and cleanup of hazardous wastes are primarily authorized by Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) 42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq. The hazardous waste program, under RCRA Subtitle C, establishes a system for controlling hazardous waste from the time it is generated until its ultimate disposal. EPA has delegated enforcement of hazardous waste laws in California to the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC), which regulates the handling, storage, disposal, and cleanup of hazardous wastes; DTSC in turn has delegated this authority to local Certified Unified Planning Agencies. Table 3.11-2. Typical 60 Hertz Magnetic Field Values from Common Electrical Devices Appliance Magnetic Field 6 Inches from Device (mG) Magnetic Field 2 Feet from Device (mG) Washing machine 20 1 Vacuum cleaner 300 10 Electric oven 9 — Dishwasher 20 4 Microwave oven 200 10 Hair dryer 300 — Computer desktop 14 2 Fluorescent light 40 2 Source: NIEHS 2002 Hazardous Waste Control Law, California Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et seq./22 CCR) DTSC has primary regulatory responsibility, with delegation of enforcement to local jurisdictions that enter into agreements with the State agency, for the generation, transport, and disposal of hazardous wastes under the authority of the Hazardous Waste Control Law (HWCL). Regulations implementing the HWCL list 791 hazardous chemicals and 20 or 30 more common substances that may be hazardous; establish criteria for identifying, packaging and labeling hazardous substances; prescribe management of hazardous substances; establish permit requirements for hazardous waste treatment, storage, disposal, and transportation; and identify hazardous wastes that cannot be deposited in landfills. HWCL requires that the generator of a hazardous waste must complete a manifest that accompanies the waste from the point of generation to the ultimate treatment, storage, or disposal location. The manifest describes the waste, its intended destination, and other regulatory information about the waste. Copies must be filed with the DTSC. Generators must also match copies of waste manifests with receipts from the treatment, storage, or disposal facility to which it sends waste. EMF Standards No federal regulations have established environmental limits on the strengths of fields from power lines. However, the Federal Government continues to conduct and encourage research on the EMF issue. The State of California Department of Education enacted regulations that require minimum distances between a new school and the edge of a transmission line easement. The setback distances are 100 feet from the edge of the transmission line easement for 50-kV to 133-kV lines, 150 feet from the edge of the transmission line easement for 220-kV to 230-kV lines, and 350 feet from the edge of the transmission line easement for 500-kV to 550-kV lines. These distances were not based on specific biological evidence, but on the known fact that fields from power lines drop to near background levels at those distances. Western follows field-reducing guidelines for designing new and upgraded transmission lines. California has no other rules governing EMF. 3.11.2 Corridor Alternatives All corridor alternatives have the same affected environment as the Proposed Project. 3.12 Recreation This section describes existing recreational resources and the regulatory environment pertinent to this resource. Impacts to recreation, including conflicts with or adverse changes to recreation areas or activities are analyzed in Section 4.12 (Recreation). 3.12.1 Proposed Project 3.12.1.1 Affected Environment Overview The recreation study area includes the Project study area (see definition of Project study area in Section 3.1) as well as any established recreation areas adjacent to the Project study area. The recreation study area includes primarily unincorporated areas within Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties with the exception of federal and State land surrounding the O’Neill Forebay, San Luis Reservoir, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir. The study area lies to the west of I-5. Several secondary roads extend from the I-5 corridor and provide primary access points to recreation areas located in the foothills to the west of the Proposed Project. Recreation areas accessed from the I-5 corridor include the Frank Raines Off-Highway Vehicle (OHV) Park, Carnegie State Vehicular Recreation Area, and Corral Hollow Ecological Preserve. Dispersed recreational activities may occur on private land or local jurisdiction lands within the study area. However, there are no county or other local jurisdiction designated recreation areas located within the study area. Most recreation use in the study area occurs on federal and State land as discussed below. Federal and State recreation areas within the study area are the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area (SRA) (including facilities at San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir) and CDFW wildlife areas (the Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area and the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area). There are no federally or State-designated wilderness areas within the study area. Figure 3.12-1 was adapted from the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan and General Plan (SLRSRA RMP/GP) and provides an overview of the study area and recreation resources on federal and State land. San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area The San Luis Reservoir SRA is the largest recreation area within the study area. The SRA consists of two geographically separate areas, one surrounding San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay, and the other around Los Banos Creek Reservoir (see Figure 3.12-1). The total area is over 27,000 acres, of which 15,395 acres are surface waters of the San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir. Reclamation owns most of the land within the SRA. However, these lands are managed by the CDPR, CDFW, and DWR. The O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area and San Luis Wildlife Area were set aside by Reclamation for wildlife preservation and mitigation. These wildlife areas are on Reclamation land and fall within the SRA boundary, but are managed by CDFW. The designated recreation areas within the SRA are under the management of CDPR and discussed below. Figure 3.12-1 illustrates land management and ownership.  Figure 3.12-1, titled “Recreation Study Area," cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265. San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Source: WAPA SNR, A spen EG, CDFW, California State Parks March 2016 3-99 Miles Final EIS/EIR Dinosaur Point Use Area 152 San Lui Upper Cottonwood Wildlife Area San Luis Reservoir Wildlife Area Basalt Use Area San Luis Creek Use Area Los Banos Creek Use Area Medeiros Use Area Jasper Sears OHV Use Area "Path of the Padres" Trail 152 Volta Henry Miller Canyon Pioneer Gonzaga Jasper Sears 5 33 33 s Reservoir O'Neill Forebay Los Banos Creek Reservoir Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area Figure 3.12-1 Recreation Study Area 0 1 2 Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Proposed Project Study Area Alternatives Study Area San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Pacheco State Park Waterbody CDFW Owned and Operated Lands Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area O'Neill Forebay Wildlife Area San Luis Reservoir Wildlife Area The SLRSRA RMP/GP was prepared by CDPR and Reclamation in June 2013. The RMP/GP anticipates increased future visitation to the SLRSRA by providing for physical additions and visitor use modifications concentrated in and around existing developed areas. Campsites would be added in Basalt, San Luis Creek, Medeiros, and Los Banos Creek use areas, and the variety of camping opportunities would be increased. Campsites would also be added at the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area and Dinosaur Point (where none currently exist). The RMP/GP also identifies new trails and trailside facilities that would accommodate a greater variety of recreational opportunities. Most recreation visits to the SRA occur between April and September of each year. The average attendance between fiscal year 2005-2006 and fiscal year 2010-2011 was just over 327,000 people. The highest frequency of visitors occurs on weekends and holidays between April and September, during which public use areas often reach their maximum capacity (BOR, 2013). The existing SRA provides recreational opportunities including but not limited to fishing, boating, camping, hiking, OHV use, windsurfing, horseback riding, day use, and guided tours. Fishing is the most popular recreation activity within the SRA. Water-based recreation is allowed on all three waterbodies within the SRA in accordance with speed limits and access restrictions. Boating is permitted from 6 a.m. to sunset. Land-based recreation is provided in five waterside use areas: San Luis Creek, Medeiros, Basalt, Dinosaur Point, and Los Banos Creek. A sixth use area, the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area, is designated for OHV use. San Luis Creek and Basalt are the most popular use areas. There are up to 40,000 visitors a month to the San Luis Creek Use Area during peak use (California State Parks, 2004). Table 3.12-1 lists the primary recreational opportunities within each use area designated within the San Luis Reservoir SRA. Locations of the recreational use areas listed below are shown in Figure 3.12-1. Table 3.12-1. Designated Use Areas Within the San Luis Reservoir SRA Use Area Primary Activities San Luis Creek Use Area Fishing, windsurfing, swimming, boating, camping, day use, group activities Medeiros Use Area Fishing, windsurfing, camping, day use Basalt Use Area Fishing, camping, hiking, boating, day use Los Banos Creek Use Area Fishing, boating, camping, hiking, horseback riding Dinosaur Point Use Area Fishing, boating, day use Jasper Sears OHV Use Area OHV use Source: San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan, 2013 Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. The Jasper Sears OHV Use Area is located south of SR 152 and the Medeiros Use Area, adjacent to the Los Banos Substation. The OHV Use Area is an open, flat, partially vegetated 150-acre parcel with several OHV tracks consisting of unpaved trails. The use area also has two picnic tables with shade ramadas, a parking lot with two vehicle loading ramps, and chemical toilets. In accordance with emission standards regulations for OHVs, Red Sticker OHVs (non-compliant vehicles designated by the California Air Resources Board) are seasonally restricted at the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. The main entrance to the OHV Use Area is off of Jasper Sears Road and includes an open, unpaved parking area. With fairly flat terrain in comparison to other nearby OHV areas, this track provides an ideal location for beginner riders. Therefore, the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area provides a unique, regionally important resource. Visitors are typically from the San Joaquin Valley or from the greater San Francisco Bay Area. The SLRSRA GP/RMP provides for minor additions to existing facilities such as shade ramadas, vault toilets, and minor infrastructure at the OHV Use Area. The GP/RMP also provides for the potential for future expansion of the OHV Use Area yet notes a current lack of available land for expansion. Medeiros Use Area. The Medeiros Use Area is located on the southeastern shore of O’Neill Forebay. The area provides 50 campsites with shade ramadas, picnic tables, and barbecues; approximately 300 informal parking spaces; and approximately 350 primitive campsites for tents and RVs. The day use and camping areas have potable water from four portable water tanks, and chemical toilets. The boat launch at the Medeiros Use Area was closed in 2001 for security reasons. Although security is no longer a concern, the boat launch remains closed because shallow water in the area prevents year-round launching. However, the SLRSRA RMP/GP provides for possible enhancements to allow reopening/ relocating the boat ramp as well as adding a parking lot and restrooms near the boat launch. An additional 200 new tent and RV sites and 100 primitive campsites would be added to the campground as well as and a restroom shelter with parking. The RMP/GP also provides for a conversion of the existing recreation zoning designation to accommodate additional visitation to this use area. Access Points. SR 152 and SR 33 are the main access roads into the SRA in the area around the San Luis Reservoir and the O’Neill Forebay. Canyon Road, which extends from the I-5 corridor, is the main access road into the SRA in the area around the Los Banos Reservoir. Four vehicular access points, including gated entrance stations, are located at the edge of the Basalt, Los Banos Creek, Medeiros, and San Luis Creek use areas. Entrance stations are staffed during the peak season when funding is available. Selfregistration is used to collect fees at other times. Visitor Center. A visitor center at the Romero Overlook provides educational information on the local reservoirs and dams, and statewide water projects through audio-visual and printed materials. The Romero Visitor Center is administered by DWR and is located on joint DWR and CDPR managed land within the SLRSRA. Campgrounds. The SLRSRA has four developed campgrounds open year-round for public use. Table 3.12-2 provides the name, location, and characteristics of each developed campground. Table 3.12-2. Developed Campgrounds Within the San Luis Reservoir SRA Campground Location (Use Area) Number of Campsites Amenities Basalt Campground Basalt Use Area 79 developed sites . Restrooms . Fire Ring . Picnic Table San Luis Creek Campground San Luis Creek Use Area 53 developed sites . Restrooms . Electric and Water Hookup . Level Pad . Fire Ring . Picnic Table . Waste Disposal Medeiros Campground Medeiros Use Area 50 developed sites 350 primitive sites . Potable water . Chemical Toilets . Boat Launch Los Banos Creek Campground Los Banos Creek Use Area 20 primitive sites . Barbeque . Picnic Table . Boat Launch Source: http://www.parks.ca.gov/ Path of the Padres. The Path of the Padres is a popular trail along Los Banos Creek above the Los Banos Creek Reservoir. CDPR staff conducts guided hikes during weekends in March and April. The boat tour and 5-mile hike retraces part of the trail taken by Spanish missionaries in the early 1800s to travel between the Central Valley and the mission San Juan Bautista. The route follows a lakeshore trail that runs around Salt Springs Cove at the northeast end of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir and follows the edge of the Reservoir. Due to its recreational and cultural significance, the Path of the Padres has been established as a locally important resource attracting numerous visitors every year. Other Designated Trails. The Lone Oak Bay Trail is a 3-mile trail that follows the southeastern edge of the San Luis Reservoir in the Basalt Use Area. It is a popular trail that provides year-round opportunity for sight-seeing, bird-watching, and nature study. In the spring and summer months the trail is often used for wildflower viewing. The Basalt Campground Trail is a 1.5-mile loop trail that begins and ends at the Basalt Campground. The trail provides access to a viewpoint that overlooks the San Luis Reservoir, San Joaquin Valley, and Basalt Hill. An interpretive exhibit displays a map that points out the highlights visible from the viewpoint. CDFW Wildlife Areas There are two CDFW-managed wildlife areas within the study area. The wildlife areas are primarily designated for wildlife management although they also provide a variety of year-round recreational opportunities (described below). Access to these areas is limited to foot travel. Special restrictions on recreation use within the wildlife areas are subject to change and published in CDFW’s annual informational memorandum, Hunting and Other Public Uses on State and Federal Lands. The locations of the wildlife areas are shown in Figure 3.12-1. O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area. The O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area consists of 700 acres along the east side of the O’Neill Forebay. The wildlife area is accessible from a parking area off SR 33. Recreation activities in this area include hunting, nature study, and hiking. Hunting is limited to waterfowl, pheasants, quail, doves, rabbits, and crows. Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area. The Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area consists of 2,000 acres located on the north side of SR 152 adjacent to the SLRSRA. The main access point to the wildlife area is from SR 152 through the San Luis Creek Use Area. Year-round recreational activities include bird-watching, sightseeing, picnicking, and nature study. Hunting is permitted during daylight hours from the start of the deer season, designated by CDFW and subject to change based on current conditions, through the last Sunday in January. Outside of the designated hunting season, all firearms are prohibited. Camping is prohibited within the Wildlife Area. 3.12.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Regulations, plans, and standards include the following: . San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan and General Plan (June 2013) provides goals and guidelines for management of the SLRSRA and adjacent lands. The Plan Area consists of two geographically separate areas totaling over 27,000 acres in the vicinity of Los Banos, California. The Plan Area includes the water surfaces of San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir, as well as adjacent recreation lands. . California Outdoor Recreation Plan (CORP) 2008 is the statewide master plan for parks, outdoor recreation, and open space for California. The CORP is also the primary tool for prioritizing Land and Water Conservation Fund grant allocations to local governments. 3.12.2 Corridor Alternatives 3.12.2.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative The recreation resources within this study area will be similar to that of the Central Segment of the Proposed Project. There are no federal or State designated recreation areas in this area. 3.12.2.2 Butts Road Alternative Major recreation areas in this alternative study area are the SLRSRA and the Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area as described in 3.12.1.1. 3.12.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The major recreation areas in this alternative study area are the SLRSRA and the Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area as described in 3.12.1.1. 3.12.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Recreation areas within this alternative study area are the SLRSRA and the Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area as described in 3.12.1.1. 3.12.2.5 Los Banos to Dos Amigos Alternative Recreation areas within this alternative study area are the SLRSRA, as described in Section 3.12.1.1. 3.12.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative Recreation areas within this alternative study area are the SLRSRA, including the Path of the Padres Trail, as described in Section 3.12.1.1. 3.13 Socioeconomics This section describes the demographics of the study area as they pertain to socioeconomics. Socioeconomic impacts, including displacement of residences or businesses, loss of work, housing shortages, increases in need for services and infrastructure, and economic benefits, are analyzed in Section 4.13 (Socioeconomics). 3.13.1 Proposed Project 3.13.1.1 Affected Environment Study Area Socioeconomic analysis is considered on a county level to reflect regional social and economic trends. The study area for socioeconomics consists of counties traversed by the Proposed Project corridor including Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced. The Proposed Project corridor primarily traverses sparsely populated, unincorporated areas of the four counties with the exception of moderate density development in the North Segment of the Proposed Project near the Tracy Substation and a small area northeast of the O’Neill Substation. Overview Alameda County. The Project area covers about 4 linear miles within Alameda County along its northeasternmost edge. This portion of Alameda County falls within the San Joaquin Valley and is geographically separated by the Diablo Range and Altamont Pass from the more densely populated western portion of the county. As a result, the socioeconomic characteristics of this portion of Alameda County are more similar to San Joaquin County than to the remainder of Alameda County. Overall, Alameda County includes 14 incorporated cities and six unincorporated communities and rural areas throughout its 813 square miles. The incorporated cities are Alameda, Albany, Berkeley, Dublin, Emeryville, Fremont, Hayward, Livermore, Newark, Oakland, Piedmont, Pleasanton, San Leandro, and Union City, located primarily in western Alameda County. The unincorporated communities are Ashland, Castro Valley, Cherryland, Fairview, San Lorenzo, and Sunol. San Joaquin County. The Proposed Project corridor crosses central San Joaquin County. San Joaquin County covers 1,400 square miles and has seven incorporated cities: Escalon, Lathrop, Lodi, Manteca, Ripon, Stockton, and Tracy. Census data indicate that 146,146 people live in unincorporated communities within San Joaquin County. Stockton is the largest city, with a population of 300,899. Stanislaus County. Stanislaus County covers 1,494 square miles and has nine incorporated cities: Ceres, Hughson, Modesto, Newman, Oakdale, Patterson, Riverbank, Turlock, and Waterford. Additionally, 13 unincorporated communities are within Stanislaus County. Modesto is the largest city, with a population of 211,536. Merced County. Merced County covers 1,980 square miles and includes six incorporated cities: Atwater, Livingston, Los Banos, Merced, Gustine, and Dos Palos; and 11 unincorporated communities: Castle, Delhi, Franklin/Beachwood, Fox Hills, Hilmar, Le Grand, Planada, Santa Nella, University, the Villages of Laguna San Luis, and Winton. Merced is the largest city, with a population of 80,793. Characterization Population, housing, labor force, and employment characteristics within the study area are described below to provide a baseline for determining the impacts of the temporary workforce associated with the Proposed Project on the regional socioeconomic conditions. Population. Table 3.13-1 presents the total population and demographic make-up of each county in the study area based on the U.S. Census Survey from 2000 and 2010. Alameda County has the highest population; however as noted above, much of the population is concentrated in the western portion of the County, distant from the Proposed Project corridor. Overall, Merced County has the smallest population, but it has had the highest percent increase in population between 2000 and 2010. The percent increase in population of San Joaquin County and Stanislaus County is also well above that of the State of California. Table 3.13-1. Population Characteristics Geography California Alameda County San Joaquin County Stanislaus County Merced County Total Population (2000) 33,871,653 1,443,741 563,598 446,997 210,554 Total Population (2010) 37,253,956 1,510,271 685,306 514,453 255,793 Population Change 10.0% 4.6% 21.6% 15.1% 21.5% Source: U.S. Census Bureau Housing. Table 3.13-2 presents housing unit and vacancy rate data from the 2010 U.S. Census for Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. Merced County has the lowest number of housing units and the highest vacancy rate. Alameda County has the highest number of housing units and the lowest vacancy rate. Table 3.13-2. Housing Characteristics County 2010 Housing Units 2010 Occupied Housing Units Vacancy Rate Persons Per Household Alameda 588,948 551,150 6.4% 2.78 San Joaquin 236,943 217,956 8.0% 3.20 Stanislaus 180,165 165,790 8.0% 3.14 Merced 84,298 76,190 9.6% 3.39 Source: California Department of Finance, 2010 Labor Force. Table 3.13-3 presents the labor force characteristics within Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties including the civilian labor force and unemployment rate obtained from the California Employment Development Department (EDD). The terms in Table 3.13-3 are defined as follows by the California EDD: . Civilian Labor Force: The sum of civilian employment and civilian unemployment. . Civilian Employment: All individuals who worked during the week including the 12th of the month. . Civilian Unemployment: Individuals who were not working but were able, available, and actively looking for work. . Unemployment Rate: The percent of those unemployed out of the total labor force. Table 3.13-3. Employment Characteristics Labor Force Alameda County San Joaquin County Stanislaus County Merced County Civilian Labor Force 778,300 299,900 239,000 111,400 Civilian Employment 708,600 254,900 208,700 95,400 Civilian Unemployment 69,700 45,100 30,300 16,000 Civilian Unemployment Rate 9.0% 15.0% 12.7% 14.4% Note: Individuals who have more than one job are counted only once. Source: California Employment Development Department, 2013 As shown in Table 3.13-3, Alameda County has the largest civilian workforce along with the lowest unemployment rate (9.0 percent). In contrast, San Joaquin County has the second largest civilian workforce and the highest unemployment rate (15.0 percent). 3.13.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards NEPA requires that potential socioeconomic impacts be identified for projects that have a federal component (i.e., either a Federal Agency action or funding). 3.13.2 Corridor Alternatives 3.13.2.1 Patterson Pass Road Alternative This study area includes Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. The regional trends and characteristics in terms of population, housing, and employment are similar to that described for the Proposed Project. 3.13.2.2 Butts Road Alternative This alternative is located in Merced County. Existing conditions for this alternative reflect only the socioeconomic characteristics described for Merced County. 3.13.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative is located in Merced County and does not cross Alameda, Stanislaus, or San Joaquin Counties. Therefore, the existing conditions for this alternative reflect only the socioeconomic characteristics described for Merced County. 3.13.2.4 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative is located in Merced County and does not cross Alameda, Stanislaus, or San Joaquin Counties. Therefore, the existing conditions for this alternative reflect only the socioeconomic characteristics described for Merced County. 3.13.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative is located in Merced County and does not cross Alameda, Stanislaus, or San Joaquin Counties. Therefore, the existing conditions for this alternative reflect only the socioeconomic characteristics described for Merced County. 3.13.2.6 Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative is located in Merced County and does not cross Alameda, Stanislaus, or San Joaquin Counties. Therefore, the existing conditions for this alternative reflect only the socioeconomic characteristics described for Merced County. 3.14 Trafic and Transportation This section describes existing traffic and transportation and the regulatory environment pertinent to this resource. Impacts to traffic and transportation, including increased traffic, disruptions, hazards to motorists or pedestrians, and conflicts with plans pertinent to this resource, are analyzed in Section 4.14 (Traffic and Transportation). 3.14.1 Proposed Project 3.14.1.1 Afected Environment The Proposed Project corridor is located primarily in open space with limited access. The corridor roughly parallels segments of two interstate highways, I-580 and I-5, which generally border the eastern edge of the study area (refer to Section 3.1 for a definition of the study area). I-5 runs the entire length of the State, from Oregon border to the Mexico border, and I-580 provides a major interconnection from I-5 into the greater San Francisco Bay region. Several county roads run east-west through the Proposed Project study area, as does SR 152, which connects the San Joaquin Valley region with the South San Francisco Bay and Monterey Bay regions. From east to west, SR 152 travels from SR 99 through Los Banos, intersecting with I-5 near the O’Neill Forebay, and then on to intersect with U.S. 101 in Gilroy, and Highway 1 in Watsonville. SR 152 provides access to important recreation areas in the Coast Ranges, and interconnects Fresno, Modesto, Hollister, Monterey, Santa Cruz, Castroville, and surrounding areas. SR 33 (Santa Nella Road) is a well-used road that provides a shorter route for southbound I-5 travelers onto westbound SR 152. SR 152 crosses over O’Neill Forebay at the O’Neill Dam. The Proposed Project corridor would cross over several major highways and many smaller roads, as shown in Figures 3.14-1a through 3.14-1d. From the Tracy Substation, the corridor would parallel two major existing transmission lines, and the Delta Mendota Canal and California Aqueduct. It would cross over Kelso, Mountain House, and W. Grant Line roads, which are the only roads crossed in Alameda County. In San Joaquin County, the corridors cross I-205 and I-580 near the intersection of those two highways, then West Patterson Pass Road, the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, Corral Hollow Road (County Highway J2), and numerous private access roads to area wind farms and cattle ranches, such as South Bird Road. In Stanislaus County, the Proposed Project would cross Ingram Creek Road, Del Puerto Canyon Road, Diablo Grande Parkway, Oak Flat Road, Orestimba Road, Pete Miller Road, Sullivan Road, Butts Road, McCabe Road (which provides access to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery), and several private ranch access roads. The Proposed Project corridor traverses the east side of O’Neill Forebay, and crosses the access road to the O’Neill Pumping-Generating Plant and Substation. It then turns eastward for a short distance paralleling the Delta-Mendota Canal, and then turns south, paralleling Santa Nella Road (SR 33) in a corridor about 300 feet to the west of the road. It then crosses SR 152 and enters the Los Banos Substation area. The Proposed Project corridor then runs to the west, crossing Jasper Sears Road, Los Banos CDF Road, Basalt Road, two roads used to access the various facilities located between the O’Neill Forebay and the San Luis Reservoir, and into the San Luis Substation. The proposed corridor then goes back to a point near the Los Banos Substation, and then turns southeast towards the Dos Amigos Substation. It crosses Billy Wright Road and twice crosses Canyon Road (which is used to access the Los Banos Creek Reservoir recreation areas), continues southeast for another 7 miles and then turns northeast to cross I-5 into the Dos Amigos Substation. The condition of the paved public roadways that the Proposed Project would cross is shown in Table 3.14-1. Figure 3.14-1a, titled “Regional Transportation Network,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.14-1b, titled “Regional Transportation Network,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.14-1c, titled “Regional Transportation Network,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.14-1d, titled “Regional Transportation Network,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Table 3.14-1. Public Paved Roads Crossed by the Proposed Project Roadway Number of Lanes Shoulders Existing Road Condition1 North Segment Kelso Road 2 Yes Good Mountain House Road 2 Yes Excellent W. Grant Line Road 2 Yes Good/Excellent Interstate 205 4–6 Yes Excellent Interstate 580 8 Yes Excellent W. Patterson Pass Road 2 No Good Central Segment Corral Hollow Road (Rte. J2) 2 No Good Del Puerto Canyon Road 2 No Good Diablo Grande Parkway 2 Yes Excellent Oak Flat Road 2 No Fair San Luis Segment McCabe Road 2 No Good SR 152 4 Yes Excellent Gonzaga Road 2 No Good Basalt Road 2 No Good South Segment Canyon Road 2 No Good Arburua Road 2 No Good Interstate 5 6–10 Yes Excellent Poleline Road 2 No Good 1 - Roadway Condition Ratings: Excellent – pavement in good condition, exhibits good geometrics (i.e., the road is straight and it has large curves to allow cars to maintain their speed while going around the curves), and it has good shoulders. Good – pavement in pretty good shape, some patching of the roadway, shoulders not well maintained, road able to handle project traffic. Fair – very patched road is starting to deteriorate, could potentially be affected by the project. Poor – many visible potholes and would definitely be adversely affected by the project. Many if not all these roads would be used to access the corridors for preconstruction, construction, and maintenance activities. An encroachment permit would be needed where proposed power lines cross interstate, State, and county highways, and easements may be needed for use of private roads. Existing Roadway Conditions Existing and potential future deficiencies in a regional road network are defined in terms of Level of Service (LOS) ranked from A through F. LOS describes existing or predicted traffic flow conditions at a given location in relation to the capacity of the roadway in terms of speed and travel time, volume and capacity, traffic interruptions, and safety. LOS A designates a segment where traffic flows completely unimpaired, and LOS F designates areas with persistent traffic jams. Caltrans sets the LOS standard for individual State and interstate highways roads throughout the State, while counties and cities set LOS standards for local roads in any given region. Because of their importance in connecting the major commerce centers of the State, I-5 and I-580 are both part of the State’s Interregional Road System. Caltrans generally sets acceptable LOS levels for interstate highways as LOS D for rural areas and LOS E for urban areas. But for Interregional Road System highways, Caltrans sets LOS C as the standard or “concept” LOS for rural areas, and LOS D for urban areas. Caltrans has set the thresholds at LOS C for SR 152 and LOS D for SR 33. No State or interstate highways in Alameda County would be affected by the Proposed Project corridor. The State and interstate highways in the other three counties are administered by Caltrans Region 10. Region 10 has designated several segments of I-5 in the study area as deficient, including portions in the northern part of Stanislaus and Merced Counties, and has predicted that future LOS for all but one rural segment will exceed the concept LOS by 2030. Portions of I-580 are currently deficient, and all portions are predicted to get worse without improvements. However, planned improvements are predicted to improve or at least stabilize present LOS levels in 2035 (SJCOG, 2011b). Existing LOS data for SR 152 and SR 33 near the study area are not available. According to the Route 152 Trade Corridor Study Summary Report, SR 152 east of Gilroy and on the eastbound ascent to Pacheco Pass is nearing capacity and will exceed capacity by 2015 (VTA, 2010). The Merced County Association of Governments forecasts in its 2011 Regional Transportation Plan that by 2035, both SR 152 and SR 33 in the study area vicinity will operate at LOS F (MCAG, 2011). Existing Rail Conditions Near Patterson Pass Road, the Union Pacific tracks handle 8 to 10 freight trains per day and accommodate the Altamont Corridor Express (ACE), which currently runs eight commuter trains per day (four each way) between Tracy and Livermore through Altamont Pass. An additional rail corridor in this area is under consideration by the San Joaquin Regional Rail Commission, which owns and manages the ACE, for construction of a high-speed rail spur to connect the San Francisco Bay Area with the Central Valley high-speed rail line. Another high-speed rail spur corridor is under consideration through Pacheco Pass, passing through the study area just to the north of O’Neill Forebay. See Figures 3.14-1a through 3.14-1d for the alignment of the high-speed rail spurs. Air Transportation Conditions There are several active airports in the Proposed Project vicinity. The Byron Airport is a general aviation airport owned by Contra Costa County located approximately 3 miles northwest of the Tracy Substation and 3 miles south of the Town of Byron. It is located on a 1,307-acre plot, 814 acres of which are currently under a conservation easement for the preservation and enhancement of the San Joaquin kit fox. It offers two runways, one 4,500 feet long and the other 3,000 feet, and is a popular base for skydivers, gliders, and other recreational flight activities. Approximately 116 aircrafts are based at the airport, which averaged 164 flights per day in 2013. The Tracy Municipal Airport is located on 310 acres approximately 2.5 miles from the Proposed Project area near the intersection of I-580 and Corral Hallow Road. The airport operates two runways for private aircraft, including single and twin-engine, propeller-driven airplanes, business jets, crop dusters, helicopters, ultra-light aircraft, and hot air balloons. The facility does not allow pesticide loading on crop dusters at the airport, and does not store jet fuel for refueling jet aircrafts. The City of Tracy produced an airport management plan and EIR in 1998 for a planned expansion. At that time the airport consistently had more than 50,000 operations per year, averaging approximately 140 operations per day in the 1990s. About 110 aircrafts were based at the airport at that time, with 200 predicted by 2016. The New Jerusalem Airport, also owned by the City of Tracy, is a single, 3,500-foot runway on a 394-acre site approximately 6.5 miles northeast of the closest location of the Proposed Project, near the intersection of South Kasson Road and Durham Ferry Road. It is used for transient aircraft operations and averaged 77 flights per week in 2013. The City of Gustine operates a single runway airport on a 45-acre site next to Highway 140 about 1.5 miles east of the City, approximately 8 miles from the Proposed Project corridor. The City owns 15 hangers, and an additional four hangers are privately owned. It can handle turbo-prop and small jet aircrafts, though only during daylight hours, and jet fuel is not offered for sale. It averages approximately 22 operations per day, with 19 aircrafts based at the field (airnav.com, 2014b). The Los Banos Municipal Airport operates a single runway on a 101-acre site on the west side of the City of Los Banos for general aviation, including small jets. The airport is open to the general public and offers jet fuel for refueling, but does not allow pesticide handling for crop dusters. It averages 44 operations per day, with 17 planes based on site (airnav.com, 2014a). The closest point from the airport to the Proposed Project is approximately 5.8 miles to the southwest, near the Los Banos Creek Reservoir. Also in the Project vicinity are several small, private airfields, including crop dusting operations near Westley that is 3 miles from the Proposed Project, and there is another airfield near the intersection of I-5 and I-205 that is approximately 8 miles from the Proposed Project. In addition, there are fields supporting an aircraft museum near Firebaugh, about 8 miles southeast of the Dos Amigos Substation. Seaplane operations are also allowed on San Luis Reservoir, though overnight moorage is not allowed and all landings must be at least 500 feet from shore; only 25 landings on the reservoir were recorded in 2013 (airnav.com, 2014a). There is also an inactive airport about 3 miles from the Proposed Project corridor at its closest point near the community of Crows Landing that was used for training by the Navy in WWII, and by other branches of the military in the 1970s and 1980s. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Ames Research Center, located at Moffett Field, took over operation of the facility in 1994 and ceased operations in 1997. Stanislaus County has pursued potential development of an industrial park at the airport, and re-opening the airport for private aircrafts, leading to development of the Crows Landing Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan in June 2013. The County has not yet produced an airport master plan for the facility, and no construction has occurred at the abandoned field since NASA transferred ownership of the facility to the County in 2004. However, the County has made improvements to one of the runways at the Crows Landing facility, which is now suitable for limited aircraft operations such as air ambulance service. It has also removed some blighted structures and is continuing remediation of contaminated soils. Another closed airport, formerly used for crop duster operations, is located near the City of Patterson. Bicycle Lanes Because it is a low-volume road with 4-foot-wide shoulders, West Patterson Pass Road in Alameda and San Joaquin Counties within the Proposed Project study area are currently designated as Class III bikeways. Class III bikeways are those with shared use of lanes with pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic, typically at the right edge of the traveled way without a bike lane stripe. The shoulder of the road in both directions is marked off with a white stripe, but otherwise has no signage or other way to indicate it is an official bikeway. This bikeway is on San Joaquin County’s South East Livermore Bicycle Improvement Project List, with an estimate of $2.9 million in improvements planned for a 5-mile section of the road that includes the crossing of the Proposed Project route. Patterson Pass Road is used yearly for an organized bicycle race held in August. The California Aqueduct at one time was open to bicyclists for its entire length, and there are conflicting reports on whether it is still open. The California Department of Parks and Recreation reports on its web site that the entire 70-mile length of the aqueduct is open to bicyclists (CDPR, 2014). However, while not prohibiting bicycles on the aqueduct maintenance roads, the Department of Water Resources has stated that such use is not encouraged for safety and security reasons. No existing bikeways are in the Proposed Project study area in Stanislaus County, but the Stanislaus Council of Governments has identified Del Puerto Canyon Road as a Proposed Class II Bikeway in its 2013 Non-Motorized Transportation Master Plan (SCOG, 2013). There are no existing or proposed bikeways in the study area within Merced County. 3.14.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards There are no specific regulations, plans, or standards directly related to the effect of the Project on Traffic and Transportation. Caltrans requires a permit for electric transmission lines that cross any Caltrans right-of-way, and specifies setbacks and height requirements for the support towers and conductors. Support structures are not allowed within the right-of-way of State and interstate highways, but lines are allowed to cross over (supported by towers) outside the Caltrans right-of-way. Local jurisdictions also require permits for utility crossing of roads, and have similar setback requirements. Each of the four counties affected by the Project has organizations that plan improvements to the local transportation network, including roads, railways, bikeways and pedestrian paths. Each produces a long-range Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) that establishes the county’s transportation goals, objectives, and policies; identifies appropriate transportation projects; and describes funding strategies and options. The RTPs in the Project Area are: . Merced County Association of Governments Regional Transportation Plan . San Joaquin Council of Governments 2014-2040 Regional Transportation Plan and Sustainable Communities Strategy . Stanislaus Council of Governments 2011 Regional Transportation Plan . Alameda County Wide Transportation Plan 2012 3.14.2 Coridor Alternatives 3.14.2.1 Paterson Pas Road Alternative This corridor parallels the Proposed Project between Patterson Pass Road and Butts Road in San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. The local and regional roadway conditions for this alternative are described for the Proposed Project above for this segment. 3.14.2.2 Buts Road Alternative This alternative corridor splits off from the Proposed Project corridor at McCabe Road, very near where a high-speed rail line is under study, and travels on the west side of O’Neill Forebay. This alternative crosses no roads between McCabe Road and the intersection with the West of Cemetery Alternative corridor, though a private agricultural access road is inside the corridor for approximately one mile. From there this corridor would cross several roads used to access the recreation facilities on the west side of O’Neill Forebay, SR 152, then interconnect with the Los Banos and San Luis Substations. 3.14.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The West of Cemetery alternative corridor splits at Butts Road, going around the cemetery to the west, crossing and then paralleling McCabe Road and Horseshoe Road, and the planned high-speed rail route. From there this corridor would cross several roads used to access the recreation facilities on the west side of O’Neill Forebay, SR 152, and then interconnect with the Los Banos and San Luis Substations. 3.14.2.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative would cross access roads to facilities within the State Recreation Area, local farm and ranch access roads, McCabe Road, and possibly access roads to the facilities near the O’Neill Substation. 3.14.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This corridor is adjacent to a segment of the Proposed Project between the San Luis Substation and Los Banos Creek Reservoir in Merced County. It would have similar local and regional roadway conditions as those described above for the Proposed Project for this segment. 3.14.2.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor crosses Billy Wright Road approximately 3 miles south of Los Banos Substation. The corridor then crosses Arburua Road approximately 2.8 miles west of Highway 5 and the Proposed Project corridor. This alternative corridor would travel on the west side of Los Banos Creek Reservoir, largely through an unpopulated region accessed by foot, horse, or off-highway vehicles. Trails are used primarily for ranch access and are generally closed to the public. 3.15 Visual Resources The study area for visual resources is defined in Section 3.1 and also includes areas from which the study area would be visible. Impacts to visual resources are analyzed in Section 4.15 (Visual Resources). The analysis of visual resources uses the following terms: . Key Observation Point (KOP): One or a series of points on a transportation corridor or at a public/ private use area, where the view of a proposed activity would be most revealing or sensitive. . Viewshed: The landscape that can be directly seen under favorable atmospheric conditions, from a KOP or along a transportation corridor. – Foreground View: 0–1 mile. – Middleground View: 1–3 miles. – Background View: 3–5 miles. . Visual Quality: The relative worth of the overall impression or appeal of an area created by the physical features of the landscape, such as natural features (landforms, vegetation, water, color, adjacent scenery, and scarcity), and built features (roads, buildings, railroads, agricultural patterns, and utility lines). These features create the distinguishable form, line, color, and texture of the landscape composition that can be judged for scenic quality using criteria such as contrast. Within this analysis, visual quality at KOPs and viewsheds are discussed and qualitatively rated as follows: – High: Where the valued natural landscape character is intact with only minute, if any, visual deviations. The existing natural landscape character is expressed at the highest possible level. – Moderate: Where the valued natural landscape character appears slightly altered. Noticeable deviations must remain visually subordinate to the natural landscape character being viewed. – Low: Where the valued natural landscape character appears moderately to heavily altered. Visual deviations (human-made structures) primarily dominate the valued landscape character being viewed with their attributes such as size, shape, color, edge effect, and pattern having overwhelmed the natural landscape being viewed. . Visual Sensitivity: the concern by viewers toward change to visual quality. Visual sensitivity is generally higher in natural or unmodified landscapes than those with structures of high architectural value. . Visual Contrast: Opposition or unlikeness of different forms, lines, colors, or textures in a landscape. Generally, increased visual contrast within foreground distances would be more noticeable to viewers than increased visual contrast within middle-ground and background view distances. 3.15.1 Proposed Project 3.15.1.1 Afected Environment This section identifies the level of visual quality and sensitivity of valued views in the region surrounding the Proposed Project corridor. Visual quality is generally defined as the degree of contrast and variety within a landscape. Assessment of visual quality includes analysis of contrast, colors, textures, and composition of the view, and is generally an estimate of the degree to which humans enjoy an existing view. Pleasant landscapes generally have high visual quality. Natural landscapes of high visual quality may contain distinctive landforms, vegetation patterns, and/or water forms, whereas high visual quality views with human-made elements generally consist of structures of high architectural value, such as the Golden Gate Bridge or the Transamerica Pyramid. Visual sensitivity is the concern by viewers toward change to visual quality. Visual sensitivity is generally higher in natural or unmodified landscapes than those with structures of high architectural value. The Proposed Project could obstruct or modify present views in the landscape. The importance of viewpoints, the places from which people value the aesthetics of a landscape, is related to the visual quality of the view, the number of people who regularly experience and appreciate the view, and whether the experience is short- or long-term. Views from residences and recreation areas, for example, are often considered more important than views from a moving car, since the latter is a short-term experience. Similarly, recreation areas and established scenic overlooks are generally considered more important viewpoints than places with similar quality but more limited access, and therefore fewer viewers. Approximately half of the Proposed Project area is located on private lands in remote areas of the Diablo Range. These areas are not accessible by the general public; therefore, very few people would see the Proposed Project structures in these areas. However, a large portion of the Project area is viewable from residences, recreation areas, and local roads and highways. This includes: . residents and travelers in the area from the Tracy Substation to the crossing over I-580; . travelers along a 10-mile segment of I-5 starting at the border of San Joaquin/Stanislaus County border extending south; . residents, travelers, and visitors in the area surrounding the San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay and Los Banos Creek Reservoir; and . travelers along a 5-mile segment of I-5 in Merced County. Views from these places towards the Diablo Range generally are open, scenic vistas of undeveloped land with several waterways and waterbodies, though man-made structures such as windmills and transmission line towers can be seen from some viewpoints as well. The Diablo Range is a distinctive landform in itself, though it is similar to the hills in many other areas of the State, and therefore is not rare. Views to the east from I-5 often include the California Aqueduct, Delta Mendota Canal, and green farmlands beyond. Visual quality of accessible views throughout the Proposed Project study area is moderate to very high, as shown in Table 3.15-1. Visual sensitivity is moderate in agricultural areas, such as near the Tracy Substation, in areas where man-made structures are visible, such as along I-580 from I-205 to the crossing of the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) tracks at Hanson Road, and in the areas surrounding the substations. Otherwise, visual quality in the study area is high to very high, especially towards the open areas to the west, which offer expansive views of the Diablo Range, with interesting landscapes in the foreground, middleground, and background; and a variety in textures, colors, and features. Evidence supporting this assessment includes the official designation as scenic highways of I-5 from SR 152 to I-580, and all of I-580 within San Joaquin County. This is also true for SR 152 from I-5 to the Santa Clara County line. Figure 3.15-1 illustrates the Scenic Highway segments in the study area. Viewer sensitivity along these highway segments is moderate to high, depending on the viewpoint and the ability to access longer-term viewpoints along the way. Table 3.15-1. Visual Quality and Sensitivity of the Proposed Project Segment Location Quality Sensitivity North Tracy Substation to Patterson Pass Road Moderate due to disturbed agricultural fields, wind farms, transmission line structures, substation, pumping plant, highways and canals. Moderate to High due to presence of many residences and a college campus. Central Patterson Pass Road to Butts Road High due to natural landscape of the Diablo Range, marked by rolling hills with steep canyons Moderate on private lands with no public access, high on portions visible from I-5 San Luis San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area High due to natural landscapes in the background with San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay in the foreground High to Very High in the recreation areas around O’Neill Forebay, moderate near the three substations in the area South Los Banos to Dos Amigos Substation High due to natural landscape of the Diablo Range, marked by rolling hills with steep canyons Moderate on private lands with no public access, High on portions visible from I-5, and from recreation areas at Los Banos Creek Reservoir Areas farther away from the highways have similar aesthetics as the hills seen from the scenic highway segments. They would also be characterized as high to very high visual quality, with the exception of the few areas with views of past or present mining operations, or views of man-made structures, such as the existing transmission lines, which have poor to moderate view quality. These areas are not generally accessible and have very few visitors beyond the landowners and their employees and guests. Roadless areas generally have more reduced viewer sensitivity than other areas of the same quality because of the lack of access. Exceptions to this are places that are difficult to access but are highly valued for their scenic and other values. The portions of the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area within the Los Banos Creek canyon upstream from Los Banos Creek Reservoir, for example, offer valued experiences for visitors. They are valued because of the scenic resources of the canyon and the historical significance as part of the “Path of the Padres” used by Spanish priests and others for traveling between mission San Juan Bautista and the Central Valley. The recreation area organizes a very popular Path of the Padres Hike on several weekends every spring. The sell-out experience includes a 5-mile boat ride and another 5-mile hike along the creek. Because access without a boat means a 10-mile hike, few people experience the canyon through much of the year; yet because of its historical and scenic values, viewer sensitivity is very high. The other units of the San Luis Reservoir Recreation Area also have very high viewer sensitivity and very high visual quality in the area because of the views across the three waterbodies in the area to the landscapes beyond. 3.15.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards Regulations, plans, and standards for visual resources would be reflected in the goals, objectives, policies, and implementation strategies of State and local adopted plans. Caltrans’ Scenic Highway program is authorized by State Streets and Highway Code (Sections 260 through 263) to establish special conservation treatment to protect and enhance the natural scenic beauty of California highways and adjacent corridors. Any city or county may propose adding routes with outstanding scenic elements to the list of eligible State highways, but additions are made through legislative action. Once designated, the city or county also must adopt a Corridor Protection Program consisting of ordinances, zoning, and/or planning policies to preserve the scenic quality of the corridor, or document such regulations that already exist in various portions of local codes. Figure 3.15-1, titled “Scenic Resources,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") ") ") ST33 ST140 ST165 ST132 ST25 San Joaquin County Tracy East Los Banos West Merced County Stanislaus County Santa Clara County Alameda County San Benito County Contra Costa County Fresno County Santa Cruz County Monterey County O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy Henry Miller Volta ¨§.5 ¨§.580 ¨§.205 ¨§.5 £.101 ST152 Ceres Keyes Ripon Tracy Delhi Newman Salida Denair Empire Gilroy Aromas Pajaro Hughson Turlock Grayson Hickman Westley Modesto Del RioBystrom Oakdale Lathrop Manteca Escalon Gustine Patterson Waterford Riverbank Hollister Los Banos Bret Harte San Martin Livingston Morgan Hill West Modesto East Oakdale Hilmar-Irwin Riverdale Park Figure 3.15-1 Scenic Resources 0 5 10I ") Substation ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Scenic Highway Segments San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, California State Parks March 2016 3-121 Miles Final EIS/EIRThe local jurisdictions responsible for planning in the study area include Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. The consistency of the Project with the adopted plans and policies of these jurisdictions is discussed in Section 3.8 (Land Use). Alameda County’s East County Specific Plan includes a goal of preserving unique visual resources and protecting sensitive viewsheds, and a policy (Policy 120) stating that the County “shall require that utility lines be placed underground whenever feasible. When located above ground, utility lines and supporting structures shall be sited to minimize their visual impact.” San Joaquin County’s General Plan lists transmission line development as a “concern” due to the potential visual or aesthetics effects related to the “appearance of areas with transmission lines.” In the Infrastructure Element the County lists a primary objective of protecting “the scenic value of the County landscape from inappropriately located overhead utility lines.” The primary goal stated in the Stanislaus County General Plan Conservation/Open Space Element is to “Encourage the protection and preservation of natural and scenic areas throughout the County.” One of the stated purposes of the element is to preserve “open space lands for outdoor recreation including scenic, historic and cultural areas.” Merced County’s General Plan has a Scenic Resources element with a goal of protecting scenic resources and vistas through preservation of agricultural land, ranch land, and other open space areas. It also includes a policy (NR-4.2) to “Coordinate with Caltrans, during the review of proposed structures and activities located adjacent to State-designated scenic highways, to ensure that scenic vistas and local scenic values are not significantly degraded.” Reclamation, in conjunction with the CDPR, developed a Resource Management Plan and General Plan (RMP/GP) for the San Luis State Recreation Area that includes several provisions applicable to visual resources. The RMP/GP, which was approved in 2013, includes a goal to “ensure that large expanses of open space are left in their natural state, and that existing open vistas are uninterrupted,” and another to “Preserve scenic vistas that overlook open land and water through the identification and definition of significant viewpoints and viewsheds.” The RMP/GP also includes a guideline that, “Where feasible, avoid placement of new structures or other obstructions near identified scenic vista points and along uninterrupted shorelines and landscapes.” (USBOR, 2013). 3.15.2 Coridor Alternatives 3.15.2.1 Paterson Pas Road Alternative This alternative corridor would parallel the Proposed Project on the west side of the existing transmission circuits, rather than on the east side. Visual quality is high for this alternative because of its location on private grazing lands in the Diablo Range, marked by rolling hills and steep canyons. Visual sensitivity is low for much of the corridor because it is not accessible by the general public. Visual sensitivity is high from the portions of this segment visible from I-5. 3.15.2.2 Buts Road Alternative This alternative corridor study area would be between Butts Road and the Los Banos Substation. Visual quality in this area is moderate because the terrain is relatively flat and is dominated by the existing transmission circuit towers that the route would parallel. However, the rolling hills of the Diablo Range can be seen in the background from many viewpoints. Visual sensitivity is high from the recreation facilities around O’Neill Forebay, but is lower from the roads in the region due to the dominating presence of the existing transmission lines. 3.15.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor study area is on the west side of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery from Butts Road to the Los Banos Substation. There are no existing structures on the western side of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. Therefore, visual quality is very high for this alternative due to its location in the rolling hills of the Diablo Range, the lack of any artificial structures in most of the viewshed, and the relatively high architectural value of the landscaping and buildings at the cemetery. The study area south of the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery would be moderate because the terrain is relatively flat and is dominated by the existing transmission circuit towers that the corridor would parallel near the Los Banos and San Luis Substations. 3.15.2.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative travels in the same corridor as the Butts Road Alternative corridor from the San Luis Substation to McCabe Road, and then travels in the Proposed Project corridor from McCabe Road to the O’Neill Substation. Visual quality is moderate in those areas dominated by existing transmission lines, and high for the recreation facilities near O’Neill Forebay. 3.15.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative corridor is adjacent to the Proposed Project, on the west side of the existing transmission lines rather than on the east. Visual quality is similar to the Proposed Project (refer to Table 3.15-1). Though the new line would be farther from viewers driving along I-5, the new line in combination with the existing line would look very nearly identical from the highway. Visual sensitivity is similar to that of the Proposed Project (refer to Table 3.15-1). 3.15.2.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative This alternative lies to the west of the Proposed Project south of the Los Banos Substation. This alternative would travel over the west end of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, near the trailhead of the Path of the Padres hiking trail that heads westward upstream of the reservoir. Visual quality is moderate to high due to the presence of existing transmission lines in the region, contrasted against the rolling hills and steep ravines of the Diablo Range. Visual sensitivity is moderate for most of this alternative due to the lack of public access to private grazing lands, though sensitivity is high to very high along the Path of the Padres trail. 3.16 Water Resources and Flodplains 3.16.1 Proposed Project This section describes the existing hydrology and water resources that could be affected by the Proposed Project. The study area for this analysis is defined in Section 3.1 and includes all surface and groundwater resources, with the exception of wetlands, which are addressed in Section 3.4, Biological Resources. Additionally, due to the potential for downstream or down-gradient transport of pollutants, sensitive downstream receiving waters outside of the study area are included in this analysis. Impacts are analyzed in Section 4.16 (Water Resources and Floodplains). 3.16.1.1 Afected Environment Baseline data were collected from several sources, including: ESRI, U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board (CVRWQCB), State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), DWR, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), USACE, and Western. Water Resources Overview The Proposed Project runs generally from north to south on private land along the foothills of the Diablo Range section of the Coast Range Mountains to the west of the San Joaquin Valley, roughly parallel to I-5 and the California Aqueduct. Notable areas of public land include the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area and the land surrounding the Los Banos Creek Reservoir. The study area begins roughly 6 miles northwest of the City of Tracy and ends roughly 8 miles south of the City of Los Banos. The study area is located within the San Joaquin River Hydrologic Region (HR), one of ten hydrologic regions in California established by the DWR for management purposes. The Proposed Project is subject to the objectives and limits of the Basin Plan for the Sacramento River and San Joaquin River Basins, under the jurisdiction of the CVRWQCB (USGS, 2014; USACE, 2008). Climate in the region is temperate, with mild winters and hot, dry summers. Average temperatures near the City of Patterson (located roughly at the mid-point of the study area) include winter lows in the mid-30 degrees Fahrenheit to summer highs in the mid-90 degrees Fahrenheit. Rainfall is greatest during the months of November through March, with an average annual precipitation total of 11.45 inches (city-data.com, 2014; idcide.com, 2014; USACE, 2008). Hydrologic Regions Hydrologic regions are divided into watersheds, which are areas of land within which all water drains to one point. The National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) defines nested hydrologic units, beginning with Regions that are subdivided into subregions, basins, subbasins, and watersheds. The study area is underlain by the San Joaquin Subregion. Within that Subregion, the study area traverses three Subbasins: the San Joaquin Delta, the Lower San Joaquin River, and the Middle San Joaquin–Lower Chowchilla. Within these Subbasins, the study area intersects 13 Watersheds, including: Corral Hollow Creek, Crow Creek– San Joaquin River, Del Puerto Creek, Ingram Creek–San Joaquin River, Lone Tree Creek–San Joaquin River, Lower Los Banos Creek, Mud Slough, Mud Slough–San Joaquin River, Old River, Orestimba Creek, Salado Creek–San Joaquin River, San Luis Creek, and Upper Los Banos Creek. Figure 3.16-1 shows the NHDdefined hydrologic units traversed by the study area.  Figure 3.16-1, titled “Hydrologic Subbasins and Watersheds,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Numerous small, unnamed streams flow down from the Diablo Range, across the study area, and towards the San Joaquin River and valley floor. Named streams that cross or run immediately downstream of the study area include: Arkansas Creek, Corral Hollow Creek, Crow Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Garzas Creek, Hospital Creek, Ingram Creek, Little Salado Creek, Lone Tree Creek, Los Banos Creek, Martin Creek, Mountain House Creek, Mustang Creek, Orestimba Creek, Ortigalita Creek, Patterson Run, Quinto Creek, Salado Creek, Salt Creek, and San Luis Creek. In addition to the named streams listed above, named surface water features within the study area include the Delta-Mendota Canal, the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct, the Los Banos Creek Reservoir, the O’Neill Forebay, the San Luis Reservoir, and the San Luis Wasteway. With the exception of the canals, most streams that cross the study area are ephemeral and run from the southwest to the northeast as they leave the foothills and terminate in alluvial fans that flow into the San Joaquin Valley. Surface water features within the study area are shown on Figures 3.16-2a through 3.16-2d (USGS, 2014; USACE, 2008). Surface Water Quality The CVRWQCB defines beneficial uses for all surface and groundwater within the study area. Beneficial uses are protected or enhanced through water quality objectives, which are defined as “…the limits or levels of water quality constituents or characteristics which are established for the reasonable protection of beneficial uses of water or the prevention of nuisance within a specific area.” (CVRWQCB, 2011) Table 3.16-1 lists the beneficial uses for surface water within the study area. Each beneficial use is accompanied by a water quality objective as defined in the Basin Plan. In addition to water quality objectives, the Basin Plan defines total maximum daily load (TMDL) requirements to protect water quality from nonpoint source pollution. Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act requires the identification of waterbodies that do not meet, or are not expected to meet, water quality standards. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(d). These impaired waterbodies are prioritized in the 303(d) list and the development of a TMDL is required. No TMDLs have been developed within the study area. However, several waterbodies within the study area do not meet water quality standards and a TMDL is required but not yet complete. These impaired waterbodies include: Delta Waterways (near the northern boundary of the study area), Hospital Creek, Los Banos Creek, Mountain House Creek, O’Neill Forebay, Salado Creek, and San Luis Creek Reservoir (SWRCB, 2010). Floodplains The study area for the Proposed Project is almost entirely devoid of flood hazard areas. Detailed studies identify only two very small 100-year floodplains within the study area: a floodplain associated with the Delta-Mendota Canal at the northern boundary of the study area, and a floodplain associated with Corral Hollow Creek, approximately 5 miles south of Patterson Pass Road. Additionally, three very small 100-year floodplains (Zone A designated) that are not based on detailed studies lie within the study area: one at the northern boundary, one associated with Del Puerto Creek, and one associated with Orestimba Creek. Extensive 100-year floodplains exist along the valley floor to the north and east of the Proposed Project, but they lie outside of the study area (FEMA, 2014).  Figure 3.16-2a, titled “Waterbodies in the Study Area,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.16-2b, titled “Waterbodies in the Study Area,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.16-2c, titled “Waterbodies in the Study Area,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Figure 3.16-2d, titled “Waterbodies in the Study Area,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Table 3.16-1. Designated Beneficial Uses for Surface Waters in the Proposed Project Study Area Beneficial Use* Waterbody MUN AGR PRO IND POW REC-1 REC-2 WARM COLD SPWN WILD San Luis Reservoir E E E E E E E E O’Neill Reservoir E E E E E Other Lakes and Reservoirs in San Joaquin River Basin E E E E E E E E California Aqueduct E E E E E E E E Delta-Mendota Canal E E E E E *Key to Symbols: E Existing Beneficial Use MUN Municipal and Domestic Supply – Uses of water for community, military, or individual water supply systems including, but not limited to, drinking water supply. AGR Agricultural Supply – Uses of water for farming, horticulture, or ranching including, but not limited to, irrigation (including leaching of salts), stock watering, or support of vegetation for range grazing. PRO Industrial Process Supply – Uses of water for industrial activities that depend primarily on water quality. IND Industrial Service Supply – Uses of water for industrial activities that do not depend primarily on water quality including, but not limited to, mining, cooling water supply, hydraulic conveyance, gravel washing, fire protection, or oil well repressurization. POW Hydropower Generation – Uses of water for hydropower generation. REC-1 Water Contact Recreation – Uses of water for recreational activities involving body contact with water, where ingestion of water is reasonably possible. These uses include, but are not limited to, swimming, wading, water-skiing, skin and scuba diving, surfing, white water activities, fishing, or use of natural hot springs. REC-2 Non-contact Water Recreation – Uses of water for recreational activities involving proximity to water but where there is generally no body contact with water, nor any likelihood of ingestion of water. These uses include, but are not limited to, picnicking, sunbathing, hiking, beachcombing, camping, boating, tidepool and marine life study, hunting, sightseeing, or aesthetic enjoyment in conjunction with the above activities. WARM Warm Freshwater Habitat – Uses of water that support warm water ecosystems including, but not limited to, preservation or enhancement of aquatic habitats, vegetation, fish, or wildlife, including invertebrates. COLD Cold Freshwater Habitat – Uses of water that support cold water ecosystems including, but not limited to, preservation or enhancement of aquatic habitats, vegetation, fish, or wildlife, including invertebrates. SPWN Spawning, Reproduction, and/or Early Development – Uses of water that support high quality aquatic habitats suitable for reproduction and early development of fish. WILD Wildlife Habitat – Uses of water that support terrestrial or wetland ecosystems including, but not limited to, preservation and enhancement of terrestrial habitats or wetlands, vegetation, wildlife (e.g., mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates), or wildlife water and food sources. Groundwater The study area for the Proposed Project runs along the western border of the very large San Joaquin Valley Groundwater Basin. This basin is subdivided into numerous subbasins, two of which lie beneath the study area: the Delta-Mendota Subbasin and the Tracy Subbasin. Figure 3.16-3 identifies the groundwater basins in the study area. The Delta-Mendota Subbasin is bounded on the west by the Tertiary and older marine sediments of the Coast Ranges. Groundwater in the Delta-Mendota Subbasin occurs in three water-bearing zones. These include the lower zone, which contains confined fresh water in the lower section of the Tulare Formation, an upper zone which contains confined, semi-confined, and unconfined water in the upper section of the Tulare Formation and younger deposits, and a shallow zone which contains unconfined water within about 25 feet of the land surface. The total storage capacity of this subbasin is estimated to be 30,400,000 acre-feet (af) to a depth of 300 feet and 81,800,000 af to the base of fresh groundwater. The groundwater in this subbasin is characterized by mixed sulfate to bicarbonate types in the northern and central portion with areas of sodium chloride and sodium sulfate waters in the central and southern portion. Total dissolved solids (TDS) values range from 400 to 1,600 milligram per liter (mg/L) in the northern portion of the subbasin. Shallow, saline groundwater occurs within about 10 feet of the ground surface over a large portion of the subbasin. There are also localized areas of high iron, fluoride, nitrate, and boron in the subbasin (DWR, 2003). Figure 3.16-3, titled “Groundwater Basins,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.") ") ") ") ") ") ") LIVERMORE VALLEY Tracy East Los Banos West O'Neill San Luis Los Banos Dos Amigos Tracy DELTA-MENDOTA TURLOCK TRACY MODESTO MERCED EASTERN SAN JOAQUIN HOLLISTER AREA 0 5 10Miles I Figure 3.16-3 ") Substation Groundwater Basins ") Proposed New Substations Proposed Project Corridor Corridor Alternatives Waterbody SANTA CLARA LLAGAS AREA LOS BANOS CREEK VALLEY BOLSA AREA PAJARO VALLEY SAN JUAN BAUTISTA AREA San Luis Transmission Project 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT Final EIS/EIR Source: WAPA SNR, Aspen EG, US Geological Survey March 2016 3-132 The Tracy Subbasin is defined by the extent of unconsolidated to semiconsolidated sedimentary deposits that are bounded by the Diablo Range on the west; the Mokelumne and San Joaquin Rivers on the north; the San Joaquin River to the east; and the San Joaquin–Stanislaus County line on the south. The Tracy Subbasin is comprised of continental deposits of Late Tertiary to Quaternary age. The cumulative thickness of these deposits increases from a few hundred feet near the Coast Range foothills on the west to about 3,000 feet along the eastern margin of the basin. The storage capacity of the southern portion of the currently defined Tracy Subbasin is approximately 1,300,000 af. The southern part of the subbasin is characterized by calcium-sodium type water. TDS ranges from 210 to 7,800 mg/L and averages about 1,190 mg/L. Areas of poor water quality exist throughout the subbasin. Areas of elevated chloride occur in several areas including: along the western side of the subbasin; in the vicinity of the City of Tracy; and along the San Joaquin River. Areas of elevated nitrate occur in the northwestern part of the subbasin and in the vicinity of the City of Tracy. Areas of elevated boron occur over a large portion of the subbasin from a point south of Tracy and extending to the northwest side of the subbasin (DWR, 2003). 3.16.1.2 Regulations, Plans, and Standards . The Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq., establishes the basic structure for regulating discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States and regulating quality standards for surface waters. . The Oil Pollution Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 2701, et seq., streamlined and strengthened the EPA’s ability to prevent and respond to catastrophic oil spills. This Act requires oil storage facilities and vessels to submit to the Federal Government plans detailing how they will respond to large discharges. . The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP offers flood insurance to homeowners, renters, and business owners if their community participates in the NFIP. Participating communities agree to adopt and enforce ordinances that meet or exceed FEMA requirements to reduce the risk of flooding. . U.S. Safe Drinking Water Act Section, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f-300j. The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) is the main federal law that ensures the quality of Americans’ drinking water. Under SDWA, EPA sets standards for drinking water quality and oversees the states, localities, and water suppliers who implement those standards. . The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. This act established the State Water Resources Control Board and nine Regional Water Quality Control Boards, assigning these agencies the responsibility for regulating water quality in California. This act created a water quality policy, enforced standards for water quality, and regulated the discharge of pollutants from point and non-point sources. . The California Fish and Game Code Section 1602. This Section requires an entity to notify CDFW of any proposed activity that may substantially modify a river, stream, or lake. This includes ephemeral streams, desert washes, and watercourses with a subsurface flow. . The California Water Code Section 13260. This Section requires notification of the appropriate Regional Board for any discharge of waste that could affect the quality of waters of the State. 3.16.2 Coridor Alternatives 3.16.2.1 Paterson Pas Road Alternative The alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project. The existing conditions in this segment will be similar to those described above for the Proposed Project. This study area intersects 10 Watersheds, including: Corral Hollow Creek, Crow Creek–San Joaquin River, Del Puerto Creek, Ingram Creek–San Joaquin River, Lone Tree Creek–San Joaquin River, Lower Los Banos Creek, Mud Slough–San Joaquin River, Old River, Orestimba Creek, and Salado Creek–San Joaquin River. Numerous small, unnamed streams flow down from the Diablo Range, across this alternative study area, and towards the San Joaquin River and valley floor. Named streams that cross or run immediately downstream of the study area include: Arkansas Creek, Corral Hollow Creek, Crow Creek, Del Puerto Creek, Garzas Creek, Hospital Creek, Ingram Creek, Little Salado Creek, Lone Tree Creek, Martin Creek, Mustang Creek, Orestimba Creek, Quinto Creek, and Salado Creek. In addition to the named streams listed above, named surface water features within the study area include the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct and the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct. This alternative study area is underlain by both the Tracy and Delta-Mendota groundwater Subbasins. 3.16.2.2 Buts Road Alternative The alternative study area lies farther to the west between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation in comparison to the Proposed Project. The affected environment for this alternative is very similar to the Proposed Project. This study area intersects two Watersheds, including: Lower Los Banos Creek and San Luis Creek. This alternative study area is crossed by one named stream and three canals: Quinto Creek, the Delta-Mendota Canal, the San Luis Wasteway, and the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct. This alternative study area is underlain by the Delta-Mendota groundwater Subbasin, and does not cross any 100-year floodplains. 3.16.2.3 West of Cemetery Alternative The alternative study area overlaps the Proposed Project between Butts Road and the San Luis Substation. However, much of the alternative study area lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more varying terrain. This study area intersects two Watersheds, including: Lower Los Banos Creek and San Luis Creek. This alternative study area is crossed by two named streams and three canals: Quinto Creek, Romero Creek, San Luis Wasteway, the Delta-Mendota Canal and the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct. This alternative study area is underlain by the Delta-Mendota Groundwater Subbasin, and does not cross any 100-year floodplains. 3.16.2.4 West of O’Neil Forebay 70-kV Alternative The alternative study area lies within the San Luis Creek Watershed. This alternative study area is crossed by three canals: the Delta-Mendota Canal, the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct, and the San Luis Wasteway. This alternative study area is underlain by the Delta-Mendota Groundwater Subbasin, and does not cross any 100-year floodplains. 3.16.2.5 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative The alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project between the San Luis Substation and the Dos Amigos Substation. This study area intersects two Watersheds, including: Lower Los Banos Creek and Upper Los Banos Creek. This alternative study area is crossed by three named streams and two canals: Los Banos Creek, Ortigalita Creek, Salt Creek, the Delta-Mendota Canal, and the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct. This alternative study area is underlain by the Delta-Mendota Groundwater Subbasin, and does not cross any 100-year floodplains. 3.16.2.6 Bily Wright Road Alternative In the vicinity of the Los Banos Substation, the alternative study area largely overlaps the Proposed Project study area. South of the Los Banos Substation, the alternative study area lies farther west of the Proposed Project and traverses more rugged terrain. This study area intersects four Watersheds, including: Lower Los Banos Creek, Mud Sough, San Luis Creek, and Upper Los Banos Creek. This alternative study area is crossed by three named streams and two canals, including: Los Banos Creek, Ortigalita Creek, Salt Creek, the Delta-Mendota Canal, and the Governor Edmund G. Brown California Aqueduct. This alternative study area is underlain by the Delta-Mendota Groundwater Subbasin, and does not cross any 100-year floodplains. Chapter 4 Environmental Consequences 4.1 Introduction This chapter examines the potential direct, indirect, and cumulative environmental effects of the Proposed Project and the alternatives retained for analysis. Each section includes the criteria used to determine CEQA significance, a list of EPMs applicable to that issue area that are considered part of the Project, a discussion of potential impacts for each segment of the Proposed Project and alternatives, and where applicable, mitigation measures that would lessen or avoid impacts. 4.1.1 Environmental Consequences Aproach Impact Clasification The Proposed Project is subject to applicable federal and State environmental review requirements. Project documentation, therefore, has been prepared in compliance with both NEPA and CEQA. One of the primary differences between NEPA and CEQA is the way significance is determined. Under NEPA, significance is used to determine whether an EIS, or a lower level of documentation, will be required. NEPA requires that an EIS be prepared when the proposed federal action (project) as a whole has the potential to “significantly affect the quality of the human environment.” The determination of significance is based on context and intensity (see definitions below). Some impacts determined to be significant under CEQA may not be of sufficient magnitude to be determined significant under NEPA. Under NEPA, once a decision is made regarding the need for an EIS, it is the magnitude of the impact that is evaluated and no judgment of its individual significance is deemed important for the text. NEPA does not require that a determination of significant impacts be stated in the environmental documents. CEQA, on the other hand, does requires the Authority to identify each “significant effect on the environment” resulting from the project and ways to mitigate each significant effect. If the project may have a significant effect on any environmental resource, then an EIR must be prepared. Each and every significant effect on the environment must be disclosed in the EIR and mitigated if feasible. In addition, the CEQA Guidelines list a number of mandatory findings of significance, which also require the preparation of an EIR. There are no types of actions under NEPA that parallel the findings of mandatory significance of CEQA. The standards for determining significant impacts under CEQA are unique to each issue area; however, the classification of the impacts was uniformly applied in accordance with the following definitions: . Significant; cannot be mitigated to a level that is less than significant (Class I) . Significant; can be mitigated to a level that is less than significant (Class II) . Less than significant; no mitigation required (Class III) Under NEPA, beneficial impacts of a proposed action are also relevant considerations in the environmental analysis. Definition of Terms The potential impacts of the Proposed Project and alternatives are described in terms of their type, context, duration, and intensity. These terms are defined as follows: . Type describes the impact as beneficial or adverse, direct or indirect. – Beneficial: A positive change in the condition or appearance of the resource or a change that moves the resource toward a desired condition. – Adverse: A change that moves the resource away from a desired condition or detracts from its appearance or condition. – Direct: An effect on a resource by an action at the same place and time. For example, soil compaction from construction traffic is a direct impact on soils. – Indirect: An effect from an action that occurs later or perhaps at a different place and often to a different resource, but is still reasonably foreseeable. – Cumulative: Impacts to resources that are added to impacts from other past, present, or foreseeable actions. . Context describes the area (site-specific) or location (local or regional) in which the impact will occur. . Duration is the length of time an effect will occur. – Short-term impacts generally occur during construction or for a limited time thereafter, generally less than two years, by the end of which the resources recover from their preconstruction conditions. – Long-term or permanent impacts last beyond the construction period, and the resources may not regain their preconstruction conditions for a longer period of time or not at all. . Intensity reflects the amount of impact on each resource as a result of the Proposed Project. The levels of intensity are defined as follows: – Negligible: Impact at the lowest levels of detection with barely measurable consequences. – Minor: Impact is measurable or perceptible, with little loss of resource integrity and changes are small, localized, and of little consequence. – Moderate: Impact is measurable and perceptible and would alter the resource but not modify overall resource integrity, or the impact could be mitigated successfully in the short-term. – Major: Impacts would be substantial, highly noticeable, and long-term. Project Area Segments To facilitate a fair and equal comparison of impacts between the Proposed Project and alternatives, the Project area was divided into the following four segments, as shown in Figures 2-6a through 2-6e: . North Segment: between the Tracy Substation and Patterson Pass Road . Central Segment: between Patterson Pass Road and Butts Road . San Luis Segment: between Butts Road and the Los Banos Substation, including the 70-kV routes to San Luis Substation . South Segment: between Los Banos and Dos Amigos Substations, including the 230-kV routes from San Luis Substation The Proposed Project and alternatives were compared within each segment to identify the Environmentally Preferred Corridor Alternative as described in Section 2.4. Disturbance Asumptions Final design and engineering details, such as exact locations and quantities of Project components (e.g., structures, access roads, staging areas) are not yet known. The impact analysis therefore used various conservative assumptions regarding the amount of disturbance, as described in Appendix E. Operation Voltage Options Depending on the participation in the Project by an eligible customer, Western and the Authority may decide a lower voltage for the 500-kV segment of the SLTP is warranted. The operation voltage options are: (1) to construct the proposed 500-kV segment, but operate it at 230-kV, or (2) to construct and operate the proposed 500-kV segment as 230-kV (refer to Section 2.1.1.4 for additional information). As described below, the operation voltage options would have reduced impacts for some resource areas in comparison to the proposed 500-kV segment. These differences would be negligible to minor. Therefore, the impact analysis of the Proposed Project, which includes the 500-kV segment, in Section 4.2 through 4.16 represents the reasonable worst-case scenario with regard to impacts. 500-kV Transmission Line operated at 230-kV This operation voltage option would have less operational corona noise and EMF exposure in comparison to the proposed 500-kV segment (refer to Sections 4.9 (Noise) and 4.11 (Public Health and Safety) for information on noise impacts and EMF exposure from the Proposed Project. 230-kV Transmission Line This operation voltage option would require approximately 33 percent less temporary disturbance area than the 500-kV segment as the temporary disturbance area required for structure footings is smaller (0.6 acre for a 230-kV tower versus 0.9 acre for a 500-kV tower; see Appendix E); permanent disturbance area for tower footings would be the same. Towers would be slightly shorter so there would be a negligible reduction in aesthetic impacts (refer to Figures 2-2 and 2-3 to compare 230-kV and 500-kV structures). Additionally, the easement for a 230-kV transmission line would be narrower than a 500-kV transmission line (125 to 175 feet wide for a 230-kV transmission line and 200 to 250 feet wide for a 500-kV transmission line), so there would be a negligible reduction in agriculture and land use and impacts associated with encroachment. Refer to sections 4.2 (Agriculture) and 4.8 (Land Use) for information on agricultural operations with transmission line easements and conflicts with existing land uses within transmission line easements. If a 230-kV transmission line is constructed instead of the proposed 500-kV segment, the proposed Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations would not be needed. This would eliminate any impacts associated with substation construction.  4.2 Agriculture 4.2.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on agriculture if any activity associated with their construction, operation, or maintenance would: . Conflict with existing zoning for agricultural use, or a Williamson Act contract (Impact AG-1); . Result in the conversion of Important Farmlands to non-agricultural use (Impact AG-2); . Result in changes to the existing environment that, due to their location or nature, would impair the use of agricultural land (Impact AG-3); or . Result in uncompensated loss of crop production or the foreclosure of future land uses (Impact AG-4). 4.2.2 Environmental Protection Measures . On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads would be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. . During construction, movement would be limited (to the greatest extent feasible) to the access roads and within a designated area in the easement to minimize damage to agricultural land. . Damaged fences and gates would be repaired or replaced to restore them to their preconstruction condition. . Post proper signage in areas within the easement that will require temporary closure or limited access to accommodate certain land uses. Where feasible, construction activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If this is not feasible and damage occurs, the landowner may be compensated. 4.2.3 Proposed Project Impact AG-1 Conflict with existing zoning for agricultural use, or a Williamson Act contract The purpose of the Williamson Act is to preserve agricultural and open space lands by discouraging premature and unnecessary conversion to urban uses. As described in California Government Code Section 51238, utility corridors are accepted as a compatible use under Williamson Act contracts. The East County Area Plan under the Alameda General Plan identifies a portion of the Proposed Project corridor in the North Segment for expansion as Large Parcel Agriculture (defined in Section 3.2.1.2). This designation includes utility corridors as a permitted compatible use. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not conflict with any local zoning for agricultural use or a Williamson Act contract within the Project area. Under CEQA, there would be no impact. This impact would be the same for the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AG-2 Result in the conversion of Important Farmlands to non-agricultural use Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 present the acreage of impacts to Important Farmland including Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, Farmland of Local Importance, and Farmland of Statewide Importance (definitions provided in Table 3.2-3) within the Proposed Project corridors and the study area, respectively. The exact locations of project components (i.e., access roads, structures, pull sites, and material storage) are not yet known. However, it is certain that the placement of all tower structures and pull sites will be located within the Proposed Project corridor. Therefore, the disturbance acreage presented in Table 4.2-1 is calculated using a conservative approach that compares the disturbance assumptions for new structures and pull sites (presented in Appendix E) with the number of acres of Important Farmlands within each segment of the Proposed Project corridor. Other project components, including existing roads, new access roads, and material storage may be placed outside of the Proposed Project corridor. These components are analyzed similarly but within the study area, as defined in Section 3.1. There are 72,637 acres of Important Farmland within the study area (about 22.2 percent of the total study area) and 2,087 acres within the Proposed Project corridor (about 15.5 percent of the total Proposed Project corridor). Prime Farmland is primarily located in the North and Central segments of the study area. Construction of the Proposed Project could temporarily convert Important Farmland to non-agricultural use as shown in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2. However, pursuant to EPMs, Western would implement the Proposed Project in a manner that includes the avoidance of agricultural resources whenever feasible and the restoration of construction sites to preconstruction conditions to the greatest extent feasible. During construction, movement would be limited to the designated access roads and within a designated area in the easement to minimize damage to agricultural land. Therefore, temporary impacts to farmlands would be negligible. Construction of access roads and material storage sites could, as a worst-case scenario, permanently convert up to 93.1 acres of Important Farmland to non-agricultural use within the study area. This comprises 21.9 acres of Prime Farmland, 66.7 acres of Farmland of Local Importance, 3.8 acres of Unique Farmland, and 0.8 acre of Farmland of Statewide Importance. Transmission structures and substations could permanently convert up to 49.9 acres of Important Farmland to non-agricultural use. These 49.9 acres represent 31.7 acres of Prime Farmland, 18.0 acres of Farmland of Local Importance, and 0.2 acre of Unique Farmland. However, the Important Farmlands are distributed through the study area such that, in most cases, the transmission towers and Project components could be located outside of Important Farmlands (see Figures 3.2-1a through 3.2-1d). Furthermore, agriculture operations could continue without interruption within Western’s easements. Therefore, impacts to agriculture would be less than significant. O&M activities would generally be performed from existing access roads. Although some repairs could temporarily disturb active agricultural land, impacts would be minimal. Impact AG-3 Result in changes to the existing environment that, due to their location or nature, would impair the use of agricultural land Construction and maintenance activities could temporarily impede the operation of or access to agricultural production lands and facilities. In addition, construction activities along access roads and spur roads would also cause a temporary increase in vehicular traffic that may result in a short-term preclusion of farming and grazing activities. However, pursuant to EPMs, Western would implement the Proposed Project in a manner that includes the avoidance of agricultural resources whenever feasible and the restoration of construction sites to preconstruction conditions to the extent feasible. During construction and maintenance, movement would be limited to the designated access roads and within a designated area in the right-of-way (ROW) to minimize damage to agricultural land. Therefore, these activities would result in minor, short-term impacts to agricultural resources. During operation, the presence of transmission lines is generally compatible with agricultural use (e.g., agriculture operations could continue within the easement and around the towers) and would not substantially impair the use of agricultural land. Therefore, the Proposed Project would result in minor long-term impacts. Under CEQA, this would result in a less-than-significant impact. This impact would be the same for the North, Central, San Luis, and South Segments. Impact AG-4 Result in uncompensated loss of crop production or the foreclosure of future land uses. Construction and operation activities that could interfere with agricultural crop production would include the installation of 230-kV and 500-kV transmission structures, construction of new access and spur roads, wire stringing, and maintenance actions. Construction activities and the presence of construction equipment could temporarily interfere with agricultural operations by damaging crops or soil, impeding access to certain fields or plots of land, obstructing farm vehicles, or potentially disrupting drainage and irrigation systems. The work procedures for major repairs, such as replacement of towers or conductors, would be essentially identical to that of new construction. However, construction and operation of the Proposed Project would not result in the permanent foreclosure of future agricultural use. During operation of the Proposed Project, the presence of the transmission towers and conductors could result in minor impacts to agricultural operations. Crop dusters would need to make additional passes around transmission lines and structures to achieve the same coverage as fields without structures and transmission lines. Additionally, impacts on the ground would include additional passes for tilling, planting, and harvesting to maneuver around structures. Transmission lines and structures can also create potential safety hazards because they present additional obstacles to avoid during aerial inspections. In areas where the Project corridor parallels existing transmission lines, the addition of new transmission lines would not add to these impacts that already exist. Pursuant to EPMs, construction and maintenance activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If avoidance is infeasible and damage occurs, the landowner would be compensated. Therefore, this impact would be minor. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same for the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.2.4 Corridor Alternatives Western and the Authority have not identified the Agency-preferred route; therefore, the analysis below combines each alternative within each segment with the Proposed Project corridors from the other segments to determine whether the significance thresholds in Section 4.2.1 would be exceeded. 4.2.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads, and has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. The potential disturbance acres to Important Farmlands within the Proposed Project corridor and the study area presented in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 would be slightly less than the Proposed Project. Overall, impacts to agricultural resources would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project.   Table 4.2-1. Disturbance to Important Farmlands within the Project Study Area Corridor Segment Local Importance Prime Farmland Unique Statewide Importance Total Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) North Segment (Proposed Project) 2.1 6.1 2.3 6.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.1 4.7 13.7 Central Segment (Proposed Project) 1.9 27.4 0.7 9.5 0.1 2.1 0.0 0.2 2.7 39.2 Patterson Pass Road Alternative 1.6 25.9 0.6 9.7 0.1 2.1 0.0 0.2 2.4 37.8 San Luis 500-kV Segment (Proposed Project) 1.4 9.5 0.3 1.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.7 11.3 Butts Road Alternative 1.0 7.3 0.2 1.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.2 8.7 West of Cemetery Alternative 0.9 14.4 0.2 2.7 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 1.1 17.2 San Luis 70-kV Segment (Proposed Project) 1.5 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 0.3 West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative 1.2 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 0.3 South Segment (Proposed Project) 2.6 23.7 0.4 4.0 0.1 0.7 0.1 0.5 3.1 28.9 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative 0.7 6.0 0.4 3.9 0.1 0.7 0.1 0.5 1.2 11.1 Billy Wright Road Alternative 1.1 15.2 0.2 2.3 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.3 1.3 18.2 Proposed Project Total (acres)  12.21 93.11 Refer to Section 3.1 for a definition of the study area). As these buffers overlap between segments, acreages cannot be added together to equal the sum of the whole. Impact acres are based on the disturbance assumptions presented in Appendix E. 1 - The totals for the Proposed Project study equal the sum of the Proposed Project segments with the exception of the San Luis 70-kV Segment as this segment falls within the San Luis 500-kV segment Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Land Resource Protection, 2014   Table 4.2-2. Disturbance to Important Farmlands within Project Corridors Corridor Segment Local Importance Prime Farmland Unique Statewide Importance Total Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) North Segment (Proposed Project) 5.7 7.4 16.4 21.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 22.1 29.0 Central Segment (Proposed Project) 20.7 2.0 9.7 10.2 1.8 0.2 0.0 0.0 32.1 12.3 Patterson Pass Road Alternative 20.3 2.0 6.2 7.1 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 26.9 9.1 San Luis Segment (Proposed Project) 5.5 6.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.5 6.3 Butts Road Alternative 3.4 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.4 3.8 West of Cemetery Alternative 2.5 2.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 2.6 San Luis Segment – 70 kV (Proposed Project) 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.0 West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative 6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.2 0.0 South Segment (Proposed Project) 16.9 2.3 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.5 2.3 San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative 16.9 2.3 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.1 2.3 Billy Wright Road Alternative 6.9 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.9 0.9 Proposed Project Total (acres)  77.21 49.91 Impact acreage is within the Proposed Project or alternative corridor (refer to Section 3.1 for a definition of the Proposed Project corridor). Impact acres are based on the disturbance assumptions presented in Appendix E. 1 - The totals for the Proposed Project study equal the sum of the Proposed Project segments with the exception of the San Luis 70-kV Segment as this segment falls within the San Luis 500-kV segment Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Land Resource Protection, 2014 4.2.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 0.5 mile longer than the Proposed Project, and would have two more support structures. The impacts to agricultural resources would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the duration and intensity would likely be slightly greater than for the Proposed Project due to longer length of the corridor. The potential disturbance acres to Important Farmlands with the Proposed Project corridor and study area presented in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 would be slightly less than the San Luis Segment of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.2 miles longer than the Proposed Project, and would have six more support structures. The potential disturbance acres to Important Farmlands within the Proposed Project corridor and study area presented in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 would be less than the Proposed Project. Overall, impacts to agricultural resources would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads, and has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. The potential disturbance acres to Important Farmlands presented in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 would be slightly less than the Proposed Project. Overall, impacts to agricultural resources would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project. 4.2.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative has the same length of new access roads and same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore, would have similar impacts to agricultural resources as the Proposed Project. The potential disturbance acres to Important Farmlands presented in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 are very similar to the Proposed Project. Overall, impacts to agricultural resources would be slightly less than that of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.5 miles longer and have 8 more support structures than the Proposed Project. The potential disturbance acres to Important Farmlands within the Proposed Project corridors and study area presented in Table 4.2-1 would be less than the Proposed Project. Overall, impacts to agricultural resources would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project. 4.2.5 No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. There would be no direct impacts to agriculture. 4.3 Air Quality and Climate Change 4.3.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant adverse effects on air quality or climate change if any activity associated with their construction and O&M would: . Violate ambient federal and/or state air quality or emissions standards applicable to the study area, or increase the frequency of severity of any existing violation of state and/or federal ambient air quality standard (Impact AQ-1); . Expose sensitive receptors to detrimental pollution concentrations (Impact AQ-2); . Contribute to a collective or combined air quality effect, including existing and foreseeable other projects, that leads to violation of air quality standards, even if the individual effect of the project/ activity is relatively minor compared with other sources (Impact AQ-3); . Produce air contaminants above the level of significant cancer risk, if any. The State of California defines the level of significant cancer risk as more than 10 confirmed cases per million individuals exposed (Impact AQ-4); . Conflict with adopted environmental plans and goals as provided in the State Implementation Plan (SIP) or regional air quality plan (Impact AQ-5); . Emissions exceed conformity de minimis thresholds (Impact AQ-6); . Greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) are generated, either directly or indirectly, that may have a substantial impact on the environment, or if global climate change would affect Project facilities in a measurable way (Impact AQ-7); or . Conflict with an applicable plan, policy, or regulation adopted for the purpose of reducing the emissions of GHGs (Impact AQ-8). Quantitative thresholds recommended by air quality management agencies and derived from the applicable regulations, plans and standards are listed in Table 4.3-1. Table 4.3-1. EPA and Air District Emissions Thresholds PM10 or PM2.5 EPA General Conformity Rate – PM10 in SJVAPCD 100 tons/year EPA General Conformity Rate – PM2.5 in SJVAPCD 100 tons/year SJVAPCD Construction Threshold of Significance 15 tons/year BAAQMD Construction Threshold of Significance (PM2.5 Exhaust Emissions Only) 54 lbs/day BAAQMD Construction Threshold of Significance (PM10/PM2.5 Fugitive Dust) Best management practices NOx EPA General Conformity Rate – NOx in SJVAPCD 10 tons/year SJVAPCD Construction Threshold of Significance 10 tons/year BAAQMD Construction Threshold of Significance 54 lbs/day Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) EPA General Conformity Rate – VOC in SJVAPCD 10 tons/year SJVAPCD Construction Threshold of Significance 10 tons/year BAAQMD Construction Threshold of Significance 54 lbs/day 4.3.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Project participants will comply with applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. . Equipment and vehicles will be operated in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. . Vehicles and equipment used in construction and O&M of the Proposed Project or alternatives will maintain appropriate emissions control equipment and be appropriately permitted. . Regular watering of exposed soils and unpaved access roads will be conducted during the construction period. . Engine idling will be in accordance with an idling policy compliant with the California state regulations. . If new sulfur hexafluoride equipment is installed as part of the Project, Western will include this information in their annual reports to California Air Resources Board and the Environmental Protection Agency. Best management practices will be followed to eliminate sulfur hexafluoride emissions during installation and commissioning. 4.3.3 Proposed Project Potential air emissions were analyzed for all phases of the Project, including construction and O&M, and for all alternatives. While construction activities can emit substantial amounts of air pollution, the Project would have no emissions during operation, and only minor emissions during maintenance activities. Therefore, this evaluation focuses primarily on potential air emissions that could occur during construction of each alternative from fugitive dust and construction equipment exhaust, though O&M and decommissioning activities are also discussed. Air quality impacts would be essentially proportional to the number of support structures and the combined length of new access roads that would be constructed for each segment. During construction, impacts to air quality would be caused by motor vehicle and mechanized equipment emissions, and fugitive dust created by construction activities such as auguring of transmission tower foundations and excavation for new access roads. The equipment used and the length of construction is discussed in detail in Section 2.1.3. Diesel engine emissions would be sporadic and short-term and cause direct impacts to local air quality, but would dissipate quickly. Impact AQ-1 Violate applicable ambient federal and/or state air quality or emissions standards to the study area, or increase the frequency of severity of any existing violation of applicable state and/or federal ambient air quality standard. Emissions during construction and O&M activities would come primarily from equipment and vehicle exhaust and fugitive dust created by ground disturbing activities. As shown in Table 2-4, construction activities at any one time could involve various equipment and vehicles, depending on scheduling and manpower. However, not all activities are likely to be conducted simultaneously. For example, conductor stringing is not likely to occur until all structures are completed; also, not all machinery involved in any one activity will be running at the same time. As stated in the proposed construction schedule in Table 2-2 of Section 2.1.3, construction would occur over approximately 525 days, beginning in 2018. Emissions for the entire construction period were estimated based on the current construction plan as described in Section 2.1.3 (assumptions are presented in Appendix I, Air Quality Emission Calculations). For planning purposes, all The geophysical location of Project construction emissions and all alternatives have been presumed to would occur in the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin, although and only a limited portion of the emissions related to construction of the new Tracy East Substation would occur in the jurisdiction of the BAAQMD, where the thresholds are generally less stringent. Construction would not be likely to exceed the BAAQMD thresholds or contribute to violations of air quality standards in the BAAQMD. Based on the preliminary estimate of total construction emissions shown in Table 4.3-2, construction emissions could exceed the SJVAPCD significance threshold values for NOx and PM10, but not PM2.5 or VOC, depending on the extent of overlapping construction activities or phases. Table 4.3-2. Estimated Construction-Phase Emissions (tons per year) Proposed Project Totals (by Calendar Year) NOx VOC PM10 PM2.5 CO Year 1 (2018) 26.21 1.6 29.9 5.6 33.7 Year 2 (2019) 26.10 1.65 39.12 6.8 33.6 Year 3 (2020) 6.6 3.5 9.78 1.5 9.0 Proposed Project Totals (all years) 58.89 6.67 78.89 14.013.9 76.23 General Conformity Threshold for San Joaquin Valley Air Basin 10 10 100 100 — Does Proposed Project Potentially Exceed Conformity Threshold? Yes No No No — SJVAPCD Construction Threshold of Significance 10 10 15 15 100 Does Proposed Project Potentially Exceed CEQA Threshold? Yes No Yes No No Off-site Reductions Necessary for No Net Increase 59 — 79 — — Source: Appendix I. Note: “—“ means no threshold applies. Construction of all segments of the Proposed Project simultaneously, while unlikely, could result in an exceedance of air quality or emissions standards in the region. Therefore, under CEQA, this impact would be significant. Feasible mitigation would include steps that are recommended by SJVAPCD in its Guidance for Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts (SJVAPCD, 2015); which construction equipment operators can implement in conjunction with the EPMs. These feasible practices are included in Mitigation Measure AQ-1 (Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions). Mitigation Measures for Impact AQ-1 MM AQ-1 Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Western will specify that construction contractors should: . Use alternative fueled or catalyst-equipped diesel construction equipment or construction equipment powered by engines meeting, at a minimum, Tier 3 or higher emission standards, as set forth in §2423 of Title 13 of the California Code of Regulations, and Part 89 of Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations. . Minimize heavy equipment use, trips, and unnecessary idling time (e.g., 5 minute maximum). . Maintain and tune engines per the manufacturer’s specifications. . Prohibit any tampering with engines and require adherence to manufacturer’s recommendations. . Locate construction equipment and staging zones away from sensitive land uses that include children, the elderly, and the infirm. . Limit the hours of operation of heavy duty equipment and/or the amount of equipment in simultaneous use. . Replace fossil-fueled equipment with electrically driven equivalents (provided they are not run via a portable generator set). . Stabilize open storage piles and disturbed areas by covering and/or applying water or chemical/organic dust palliatives where appropriate. These dust suppressants should remain effective on inactive and active sites during all phases of construction. . Install wind breaks or fencing at windward sides of substation sites and staging areas. . When hauling material and operating non-earthmoving equipment, prevent spillage. . Limit traffic speeds on unpaved roads to 15 miles per hour and limit speed of earthmoving equipment to 10 miles per hour. . Install wheel washers or wash off all trucks and equipment leaving substation sites. . Curtail construction during periods of high ambient pollutant concentrations; this may include ceasing of construction activity during the peak-hour of vehicular traffic on adjacent roadways. . Implement construction activity management (e.g., rescheduling activities to reduce short-term impacts). The construction activity management strategy should include cost-effective commitments to use newer on-highway vehicles, non-road vehicles and equipment meeting or exceeding Tier 4 standards, and advanced technology demonstration and deployment, for example for plug-in hybrid-electric vehicles and battery-electric vehicles. Prior to commencing construction, the construction contractors shall submit the construction activity management strategy and schedule to Western for review and approval. . Periodically inspect activities to ensure that construction adheres to the controls required by this measure, California’s anti-idling requirements, and the construction activity management schedule. During construction, the construction contractors shall submit monthly construction activity reports and inspection records to Western for review and approval. . Upon completion of detailed engineering plans for the SLTP and prior to commencing construction, Western will conduct a detailed air quality analysis of the construction phase of the project to determine the feasibility and necessity of finance and verify implementation of ing additional off-site emission reduction programs to offset SLTP construction emissions. Western commits to entering into an agreement or other legally binding instrument with the SJVAPCD to implement 60 tons of NOx and 82 tons of PM10 criteria pollutant emission reductions, as necessary for the Agency Preferred Alternative. To achieve measurable and enforceable emission reductions, the SJVAPCD may administer the emission reduction projects on the behalf of Western, and Western may require the SJVAPCD to prepare a report demonstrating that the emission reduction projects have achieved 60 tons of successful and actual NOx reductions to levels that are less than the EPA demonstrate General Conformity thresholds. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of EPMs would reduce NOx, PM10, PM2.5, and VOC emissions to the maximum extent practical. However, NOx and PM10 emissions still could exceed local thresholds of significance and NOx could exceed the EPA General Conformity threshold rate for the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin. Because of the linear nature of the Project, construction emissions would be sporadic and spread over the length of the route. Emissions would not be expected to contribute to new violations of ambient air quality standards, or increase the frequency or severity of existing violations. Emissions would not be expected to substantially contribute to nonattainment of standards. Construction emissions are included as a category in the San Joaquin Valley emissions inventory for attainment demonstration purposes. Western has adopted a proactive stance by implementing EPMs that mirror measures recommended by the air districts. Therefore, the Project would comply with air district requirements. Emission controls identified in Mitigation Measure AQ-1 include stringent dust control practices and the best available technology standards for mobile source controls. Implementation of the mitigation would reduce total construction emissions for all construction activities, and, in conjunction with these controls, an off-site emission reduction program would offset all estimated construction-phase NOx and PM10 emissions. Implementation of off-site emission reduction programs identified in Mitigation Measure AQ-1 would achieve a targeted require detailed engineering of the Project, development of a construction schedule, and quantification of construction activity emissions. Determining the final quantity of offsets, although and therefore the cost of any potential emission reduction programs, requires quantification of the actual construction emissions, which depends on other portions of the mitigation and on final engineering that is not available at this time. Mitigation Measure AQ-1 requires Western to reduce construction emissions and determine whether to finance and verify implementation ofing additional off-site emission reductions. The emission reduction program would be feasible and achieve sufficient levels of NOx reductionsnecessary to demonstrate that no net increase occurs for this pollutant in a manner consistent with that the overall emission levels are below the EPA General Conformity, as shown thresholds listed in Table 4.3-21. The mitigation will achieve off-site emission reductions of 60 tons of NOx as needed for implementation of the Agency Preferred Alternative. However, implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1 should also result in lower levels of Project on-site emissions by requiring a partial construction fleet of Tier 4 equipment; the estimated emissions in Table 4.3-2 are conservatively high because some equipment like loaders/backhoes, excavators, dozers, off-highway trucks, generator sets, and forklifts would be capable of meeting the Tier 4 standards. The EPA requires that projects with construction emissions over the General Conformity thresholds provide mitigation during the period that is contemporaneous with the schedule for construction (Vol. 75 Federal Register, page 17268, April 5, 2010). To complete the mitigation, Western proposes to establish an agreement that enables SJVAPCD to implement an off-site emissions reduction program that provides reductions during the schedule for construction. Western and the SJVAPCD may execute a Voluntary Emission Reduction Agreement to achieve the necessary level of off-site reductions contemporaneous with the final schedule of construction. Appendix M of the Final EIS/EIR includes an Air Quality General Conformity Evaluation and Draft Conformity Determination. Under CEQA, PM10 is included along with NOx as part of the implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1 to finance and verify implementation of additional off-site emission reductions. The off-site reductions of both NOx and PM10 ensure that no net increases occur for these pollutants, and this the extent feasible would reduce this impact to a less than significant level. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AQ-2 Expose sensitive receptors to detrimental pollution concentrations. Sensitive receptors near the Project area may be affected by a temporary increase in fugitive dust. Residences and other sensitive areas located within 1 mile of the Proposed Project corridor and the distances to the edge of the Project area are listed in Table 4.3-3. Table 4.3-3. Sensitive Receptors in the Project Area North Segment The community of Mountain House 0.5 mile Mountain house elementary school 0.5 mile A group of residences near the intersection of W. Grantline Road and S. Central Parkway south of Mountain House 0.2 mile The San Joaquin Delta College South Campus at Mountain House 0.2 mile A group of residences near the intersection of W. Patterson Pass Road and Midway Road 0.25 mile Central Segment A group of residences off the southern end of S. Tracy Boulevard 0.2 mile A group of residences off Vernalis Road near the San Francisco Water Public Utilities Commission’s Tesla Water Treatment Facility 0.3 mile A single residence approximately 1 mile west of South Bird Road 0.2 mile A single residence at the end of Gaffery Road 0.3 mile A single residence on Khalsa Road 0.2 mile Two residences at the end of Ingram Creek Road 0.1 mile A single residence adjacent to southbound I-5 near Sperry Avenue 0.9 mile One to two residences on Oak Flat Road, one of which may have been converted to another use 0.7 to 1 mile A single residence off the end of Fink Road 0.3 mile Two residences at Sullivan Road 0.1 mile San Luis Segment Two residences at Butts Road 0.1 and 0.9 mile A group of residences and the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery at McCabe Road 0.1 mile Recreation areas located at San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, and Los Banos Creek Reservoir, including campgrounds and picnic areas 0.2 mile A group of residences and a commercial campground east of the Los Banos Substation 0.1 mile South Segment A group of homes near Billy Wright Road 0.06 mile A single residence near Canyon Road 0.1 mile A group of homes off Arburua Road 0.1 mile Total construction time at each transmission structure location would be approximately 1-2 weeks spread over a period of approximately 18 months. Construction of all segments of the Proposed Project could result in an exceedance of air quality or emissions standards and could cause sensitive receptors to be exposed temporarily to construction emissions. Therefore, Project-generated emissions of criteria air pollutants and ozone precursors could expose sensitive receptors to substantial pollutant concentrations. This impact would be significant under CEQA. Mitigation Measures for Impact AQ-2 MM AQ-1 Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1 would require development of a construction schedule and quantification of a construction activity management strategy that reduces emissions. Mitigation Measure AQ-1 also requires Western to finance and verify implementation of off-site emission reduction programs that reduce or offset construction emissions to demonstrate that the overall emission levels are below the emission thresholds listed in Table 4.3-1. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not expose sensitive receptors identified in Table 4.3-3 to detrimental pollution concentrations. Under CEQA, this impact would be reduced to a less than significant level. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AQ-3 Contribute to a collective or combined air quality effect, including existing and foreseeable other projects that leads to violation of air quality standards, even if the individual effect of the project/activity is relatively minor compared with other sources. As shown in Table 3.3-2, the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin is already in nonattainment with several state and federal air quality standards. To assess the project contribution to the collective or combined effect of total emissions in the air basin, the local air districts recommend comparing emissions from construction of the Proposed Project against applicable significance thresholds shown in Table 4.3-1. The Proposed Project has the potential to exceed applicable emissions thresholds, which would constitute a significant impact. Mitigation Measures for Impact AQ-3 MM AQ-1 Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measure AQ-1 requires Western to reduce or offset construction emissions to demonstrate that the overall emission levels are below the emission thresholds listed in Table 4.3-1. Reducing Project emissions to levels below these thresholds ensures that the Project would not contribute to a collective or combined air quality effect that causes a violation of any air quality standard. Under CEQA, this impact would be reduced to a less than significant level. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AQ-4 Produce air contaminants above the level of significant cancer risk, if any. The State of California defines the level of significant cancer risk as more than 10 confirmed cases per million individuals exposed. The principal Hazardous Air Pollutant (HAP) of concern for the Proposed Project is diesel particulate matter associated with use of diesel-fueled construction equipment. The dose to which sensitive receptors are exposed (a function of concentration and duration of exposure) is the primary factor used to determine health risk (i.e., potential exposure to HAP emission levels that exceed applicable standards). Construction of the Proposed Project would cause emissions over a limited duration of less than 2 years, and the diesel particulate matter emissions would cease at the completion of construction. No single location near the corridor of about 95 miles of new transmission lines would be exposed to construction-related contaminants for an excessive duration. The total construction time at each transmission structure location would be limited to approximately 1–2 weeks. Diesel particulate matter is highly dispersive, and studies have shown measured concentrations of vehicle-related pollutants, including ultra-fine particles, decrease dramatically within approximately 300 feet of the source (Zhu et al., 2002). Because of the brief duration of work at each transmission structure along the corridor, the emissions from diesel equipment used along the 95-mile corridor would be unlikely to pose a notable health risk at any single location. Longer durations of activity and emissions would occur at each of the two new 500-kV substations, where emission calculations in Appendix I show that the average rate of diesel particulate matter emissions would be less than 4 lb/day at each of the two substation sites. These substations would cover up to 50 acres each, and sensitive receptors are separated from the substation sites by approximately 600 feet or more. The potential cancer risk over a 70-year lifetime for sensitive receptors near either substation would not be above the level of significant cancer risk because there would be sufficient distance separating the receptors and the sources, the rate of emissions would be relatively low, and the duration of these emissions would span only two years over a typical 70-year lifetime. The resulting diesel particulate matter concentrations would not require a detailed Health Risk Assessment (HRA), and Therefore, the direct or indirect exposure of sensitive receptors to construction-related HAP emissions and pollutant concentrations would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AQ-5 Conflict with adopted environmental plans and goals as provided in the State Implementation Plan (SIP) or regional air quality plan. Project participants would comply with applicable federal, state, and local rules and regulations regarding air quality. Because all machinery and vehicles used during construction of the Proposed Project would be in compliance with the emissions control requirements of the local air district and California Air Resources Board, construction of the Proposed Project would not conflict with the SIP or the SJVAPCD’s air quality plans. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AQ-6 Emissions exceed conformity de minimis thresholds. Table 4.3-1 shows the EPA de minimis thresholds for General Conformity and the local air pollution control district emissions thresholds for construction projects. Emissions of NOx and PM10, but not PM2.5 or VOC, during construction could exceed SJVAPCD significance thresholds, and emissions of NOx could exceed EPA’s General Conformity applicability rate for NOx, as shown in Table 4.3-2. Western has adopted a proactive stance by implementing Project EPMs that mirror measures recommended by the air district. While the implementation of Project EPMs and construction standards would reduce NOx, PM10, PM2.5, and VOC emissions, emissions of NOx and PM10 could still exceed SJVAPCD significance threshold values depending on overlapping construction activities or phases, and NOx could exceed the EPA de minimis threshold of applicability for General Conformity. Western anticipates that overlapping construction activities or phases could be managed to ensure that the NOx, PM10, PM2.5, and VOC emissions would be less than the BAAQMD and SJVAPCD significance thresholds and EPA’s General Conformity applicability rates. However, based on the preliminary estimate of total construction emissions shown in Table 4.3-2quantification of actual construction emissions will depend on final engineering that is not available at this time. Therefore, until quantification is available, this impact is considered significant under CEQA. Mitigation Measures for Impact AQ-6 MM AQ-1 Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1 above would require detailed engineering of the Project, development of a construction schedule, and a quantification of construction activity management strategy that reduces emissions. Mitigation Measure AQ-1 also requires Western to finance and verify implementation of off-site emission reduction programs that reduce or offset construction emissions. Under Mitigation Measure AQ-1, Western and the SJVAPCD may execute a Voluntary Emission Reduction Agreement to achieve the necessary level of off-site reductions contemporaneous with the final schedule of construction, as necessary to demonstrate General Conformity. Appendix M of the Final EIS/EIR includes an Air Quality General Conformity Evaluation and Draft Conformity Determination. to demonstrate that the overall emission levels are below the emission thresholds listed in Table 4.3-1. With the mitigation, the impact under CEQA would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact AQ-7 Would the Project generate greenhouse gas emissions (GHG), either directly or indirectly, that may have a substantial impact on the environment, or would global climate change affect Project facilities in a measurable way?  Impact AQ-8 Would the Project conflict with an applicable plan, policy, or regulation adopted for the purpose of reducing the emissions of GHGs? With regard to Impact AQ-7 and Impact AQ-8, the Proposed Project would improve Western’s electric transmission network and improve the efficiency of electrical transmission. The potential vulnerabilities of the U.S. energy sector have been identified by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Policy and International Affairs (DOE-PI) and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in a report, released in 2013 and titled: “U.S. Energy Sector Vulnerabilities to Climate Change and Extreme Weather.” Regarding major electric transmission facilities, the key finding is: . Electricity transmission and distribution systems carry less current and operate less efficiently when ambient air temperatures are higher, and they may face increasing risks of physical damage from more intense and frequent storm events or wildfires. Project activities would have no measurable effect on global climate change nor would Project facilities be affected in a measurable way by global climate change. Climate change could result in extreme environmental conditions that impact Western’s electric transmission network. The Proposed Project would be expected to improve the transmission corridor to increase reliability of service and to maintain integrity of the transmission system. As such, the Project would be likely to improve the resilience of basic infrastructure during extreme weather. This would improve the ability of the infrastructure to provide electric transmission service while withstanding climate-related impacts. Reducing the potential for transmission system service interruptions should improve public health and safety by avoiding catastrophic service failures or power outages as a result of extreme weather. During the operation and maintenance phase of the Proposed Project electrical switchgear included with the Project would be gas-insulated and subject to applicable GHG regulations for reducing SF6 emissions. O&M activities would ensure that the potential for SF6 leaks is minimized according to a leak reduction standard that is consistent with the AB 32 Scoping Plan, including California ARB SF6 regulations (17 CCR 95350 to 95359). The Proposed Project would not conflict with any plan, policy or regulation related to reduction of GHG emissions. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Similarly, though GHG emissions from project construction would be additive to GHG emissions from other activities in the project area, they would be limited in duration and magnitude. Construction emissions would be limited to the temporary duration of the construction, and annual operational emissions would not be expected to exceed 1,000 MTCO2e (assumptions and additional details are presented in Appendix I, Air Quality Emission Calculations). Table 4.3-4 shows the estimated GHG emissions during construction based on the construction approach and schedule presented in Section 2.3.1. Table 4.3-4. Estimated Construction-Phase GHG Emissions (CO2e metric tons) Calendar Year CO2e Year 1 (2018) 5,412.65,385.1 Year 2 (2019) 5,381.05,353.6 Year 3 (2020) 2,135.62,130.9 Total for Full Duration of Construction 12,929.212,869.6 Source: Appendix I. To facilitate compliance of federal actions with the provisions of NEPA, the CEQ has developed draft guidance on when and how to consider the effects of GHG (December 2014). This analysis is a cumulative impact assessment because GHG emissions contribute, by their nature on a cumulative basis, to the adverse environmental impacts of global climate change. Construction emissions of GHG from the proposed action would be non-recurring over the service life of the transmission system. When averaged over the service life of the Project, GHG from project construction would be below a level (25,000 MTCO2e annually) that warrants quantitative disclosure. Cumulative impacts of the Proposed Project coupled with other area projects would be considered unavoidable short-term impacts. However, the Project would not generate substantial levels of GHG emissions during construction or over the long-term. These limited levels of Project GHG emissions would not be cumulatively considerable under CEQA. These impacts would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.3.4 Corridor Alternatives 4.3.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative has nine more miles of new access roads and the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. Impacts to air quality from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context but greater in the duration and intensity due to greater number of support structures and length of new access roads. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-5 summarizes the construction emissions that would be caused by the Patterson Pass Road Alternative in addition to those of the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-5. Patterson Pass Road Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions (tons) Patterson Pass Road Alternative NOx VOC PM10 PM2.5 CO Additional to Proposed Project (tons) 2.9 0.5 6.9 1.0 3.8 Source: Appendix I. 4.3.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 0.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have two more support structures, and would increase needed new access roads by 2 miles. Impacts to air quality from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context but greater in the duration and intensity due to greater number of support structures and length of new access roads. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-6 summarizes the construction emissions that would be caused by the Butts Road Alternative in addition to those of the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-6. Butts Road Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions (tons) Butts Road Alternative NOx VOC PM10 PM2.5 CO Additional to Proposed Project (tons) 0.6 0.1 1.5 0.2 0.8 Source: Appendix I. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.2 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have six more support structures, and would increase needed new access roads by 9 miles. Impacts to air quality from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context, but greater in duration and intensity due to the greater number of support structures and length of new access roads. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-7 summarizes the construction emissions that would be caused by the West of Cemetery Alternative in addition to those of the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-7. West of Cemetery Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions (tons) West of Cemetery Alternative NOx VOC PM10 PM2.5 CO Additional to Proposed Project (tons) 2.9 0.5 6.9 1.0 3.8 Source: Appendix I. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads, and has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore would have essentially the same impacts to air quality during construction and O&M as the Proposed Project. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. 4.3.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative has the same length of new access roads and same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore, would have essentially the same impact to air quality during construction and O&M activities. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have eight more support structures, and would need 3.0 miles of additional new access roads. Impacts to air quality from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context, but greater in duration and intensity due to greater number of support structures and length of new access roads. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-8 summarizes the construction emissions that would be caused by the Billy Wright Road Alternative in addition to those of the Proposed Project. Table 4.3-8. Billy Wright Road Alternative Construction-Phase Emissions (tons) Billy Wright Road Alternative NOx VOC PM10 PM2.5 CO Additional to Proposed Project (tons) 1.0 0.2 2.3 0.3 1.3 Source: Appendix I. 4.3.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built and no new emissions would occur; therefore, there would be no impacts to air quality. 4.4 Biological Resources 4.4.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant effects on biological resources if any activity associated with their construction, operation, or maintenance would: . Adversely affect a listed endangered, threatened, or proposed species or designated critical habitat, or a non-listed special-status plant or animal species either directly or through habitat loss or modification (Impact BIO-1); . Adversely and substantially affect native plant communities, including riparian areas or other sensitive communities (Impact BIO-2); . Substantially interfere with the movement or migration of any native resident or migratory fish or wildlife species, or impede the use of native wildlife nursery sites for more than one reproductive season (Impact BIO-3); . Have substantial adverse effects on wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State (Impact BIO-4); . Conflict with any local policies or ordinances protecting biological resources, such as a tree preservation policy or ordinance (Impact BIO-5); or . Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, State, or federal habitat conservation plan (Impact BIO-6). 4.4.2 Environmental Protection Measures . All Western and contract crews will complete biological awareness training to ensure they are familiar with sensitive biological resources and the associated EPMs and mitigation measures. All supervisors and field personnel will have a signed agreement on file that they have completed the training, and understood and agreed to the terms. EPMs and applicable mitigation measures will be written into the contract for construction and O&M work, and contractors will be held responsible for compliance. . Vehicle traffic will be restricted to designated access routes and the immediate vicinity of construction and O&M sites. Vehicle speeds will not exceed 15 mph on nonpublic access and maintenance roads and 10 mph on unimproved access routes. Vehicles and equipment will be parked on pavement, existing roads, and previously disturbed areas, to the extent feasible. . No pets or firearms will be permitted at Project sites. . At the end of each workday, construction and O&M workers will leave work areas and adjacent habitats to minimize disturbance to actively foraging animals, and remove food-related trash from the work site in closed containers for disposal. Workers will not deliberately or inadvertently feed wildlife. . Nighttime construction and O&M activities will be minimized to emergency situations. If nighttime construction and O&M work is required, lights will be directed to the minimum area needed to illuminate Project work areas. If nighttime work is required, a speed limit of 10 mph will be enforced on all nonpublic access roads. . Mortalities or injuries to any wildlife that occur as a result of Project- or maintenance-related actions will be reported immediately to the Western Natural Resources Department or other designated point of contact, who will instruct construction and O&M personnel on the appropriate action, and who will contact the appropriate agency if the species is listed. The phone number for the Western Natural Resources Department or designated point of contact will be provided to the construction contractors, maintenance supervisors, and to the appropriate agencies. . Caves, mine tunnels, and rock outcrops will never be entered, climbed upon, or otherwise disturbed. . If a pesticide label stipulates a buffer zone width for protection of natural resources that differs from that specified in a project mitigation measure or EPM, the buffer zone width that offers the greatest protection will be applied. . At completion of work and at the request of the land owner/manager, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. . Prior to any application of herbicide, Western will query the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database, entering location information by county, township, range, and section, entering both the commercial name and the formulation of the desired pesticide, and will follow all use limitations provided to ensure compliance with applicable pesticide standards. This database is currently located at http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/endspec/prescint.htm. The measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database will supersede those in the Project EPMs where they are different. . Seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. . Equipment will be washed prior to entering sensitive areas within the Project area to control noxious weeds. The rinse water will be disposed of through the sanitary sewage system or other appropriate disposal method that minimizes the spread of noxious weeds. . Measures described in the Suggested Practices for Avian Protection on Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2006 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2006 or more current version) and Reducing Avian Collisions with Power Lines: The State of the Art in 2012 (Avian Power Line Interaction Committee 2012 or more current version) will be implemented during O&M activities to minimize bird mortality and injury. At such time when Western finalizes an Avian Protection Plan, Western will adhere to the guidance in that document. . Construction and O&M excavations greater than 3 feet deep will be fenced, covered, or filled at the end of each working day, or have escape ramps provided to prevent the entrapment of wildlife. Trenches and holes will be inspected for entrapped wildlife before being filled. Any entrapped animals will be allowed to escape voluntarily before construction and O&M activities resume, or they may be removed by qualified personnel, with an appropriate handling permit if necessary. . A hazardous-spill plan will be developed prior to construction and will remain in effect for all O&M activities. The plan will describe what actions will be taken in the event of a spill of toxic or hazardous materials. The plan will incorporate preventive measures to be implemented for vehicle and equipment staging, cleaning, maintenance, and refueling, and for containment management and storage of hazardous materials, including fuel. In the event of a contaminant spill, work at the site will immediately cease until the contractor has contained and mitigated the spill. The contractor will immediately prevent further contamination, notify appropriate authorities, notify Western’s regional environmental manager, and will mitigate damage as appropriate. Adequate spill containment materials, such as oil diaper mats and hydrocarbon cleanup kits, will be available on site at all times, as will containers for storage, transportation, and disposal of contaminated absorbent materials. . Erosion control measures will be implemented to prevent loss of soil. Construction will be in conformance with Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management Environmental Guidance Manual. . On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads will be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the land owner/manager. . Construction and operations will be conducted in a manner that prevents unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings and to preserve the natural landscape to the extent practicable. . No permanent discoloring agents will be applied to rocks or vegetation to indicate limits of survey. . All vehicles and equipment will be equipped with required exhaust noise abatement suppression devices. . Runoff from the construction and O&M sites will be controlled and meet RWQCB stormwater requirements and the conditions of a construction stormwater discharge permit. A stormwater pollution prevention plan will be prepared and implemented. . All contaminated discharge water created by construction and O&M activities (e.g., concrete washout, pumping for work area isolation, vehicle wash water, drilling fluids) will be contained and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, State, and local regulations. . All fill or riprap placed within a stream or river channel will be limited to the minimum area required for access or protection of existing Western facilities. . All equipment will be stored, fueled, and maintained in vehicle staging areas 300 feet or the maximum feasible distance from any aquatic habitat (vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, seasonal wetland, seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh) and no closer than 200 feet unless a bermed (no ground disturbance) and lined refueling area is constructed and hazardous-material absorbent pads are available in the event of a spill. Vehicles and construction equipment will be inspected daily for fluid leaks before leaving staging areas during construction and O&M activities. Fluid leaks will be repaired before equipment is moved from staging areas. . All instream work, such as culvert replacement or installation, bank recontouring, or placement of bank protection below the high-water line, will be conducted during no-flow or low-flow conditions and in a manner to avoid impacts to water flow, and will be restricted to the minimum area necessary for completion of the work. . All equipment used below the ordinary high-water mark will be free of exterior contamination. . Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. . Non-biodegradable debris will be collected and removed from the easement daily and taken to a disposal facility. Slash and other biodegradable debris will be left in place or disposed of. . All soil excavated for structure foundations will be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Excess soil will be removed from the site and disposed of appropriately. Areas around structure footings will be reseeded with native plants. . Wherever feasible, new structures and access roads will be sited out of floodplains. Bridges will be used at new stream crossings wherever feasible. If avoidance is infeasible, Western will consult with USACE and obtain permits as required. . If wet areas cannot be avoided, Western will use vehicles, ground mats, and equipment that minimize ground impacts. . Construction vehicle movement outside of the easement will be restricted (to the extent feasible) to approved access or public roads. . Where feasible, all construction activities will be rerouted around wet areas while ensuring that the route does not cross sensitive resource areas. 4.4.3 Proposed Project Potential impacts to biological resources were analyzed for all phases of the Proposed Project, including construction, O&M, and for all alternatives. Some portions of the Project area could not be surveyed due to right-of-entry restrictions; in these areas, vegetation and habitats were interpreted based on aerial imagery or long-distance views through binoculars (see Appendix C). Mitigation measures identified in this EIS/EIR would effectively reduce or avoid impacts in accordance with NEPA and CEQA. However, Western would also have discussions with the appropriate resource agencies regarding impacts to biological resources under each agency’s purview, in order to obtain all required permits. Measures resulting from these discussions would be in addition to, and may supersede mitigation identified herein. Impact BIO-1 Adversely affect a listed endangered, threatened, or proposed species or designated critical habitat, or a non-listed special-status plant or animal species either directly or through habitat loss or modification. The following summarizes the special-status plant and animal species documented in each Project segment in the CNDDB and during Project surveys; however, additional populations may exist that have not been identified. Species in italics were detected during Project surveys in spring 2014 and 2015. Designated critical habitat is also identified. Additional listed and other special-status species have the potential to occur, as described in Tables 3.4-1 and 3.4-2 in Section 3.4 (Affected Environment – Biological Resources). Refer to the Biological Resources Technical Report (Appendix C) for a detailed discussion of special-status species. North Segment . Round-leaved filaree (CRPR 1B) . Diamond-petaled California poppy (CRPR 1B) . Caper-fruited tropidocarpum (CRPR 1B) . Delta smelt critical habitat (350.6 acres in corridor; 5914.4 acres in Study Area) . Alameda whipsnake (FT, ST) . Pacific pond turtle (SSC) . California red-legged frog (FT, SSC) . California red-legged frog designated critical habitat (12.2 acres in corridor; 1038.7 acres in Study Area) . Tricolored blackbird (SSC) . Burrowing owl (SSC) . Loggerhead shrike (SSC) . San Joaquin kit fox (FE, ST) Central Segment . Big tarplant (CRPR 1B) . Round-leaved filaree (CRPR 1B) . Hogwallow starfish (CRPR 4) . Lemmon’s jewelflower (CRPR 1B) . Diamond-petaled California poppy (CRPR 1B) . Elderberry plants (host plant for Valley elderberry longhorn beetle [FT]) . California red-legged frog (FT, SSC) . California red-legged frog designated critical habitat (209.7 acres in corridor; 5086.9 acres in Study Area) . Alameda whipsnake (FT, ST) . Coast horned lizard (SSC) . Pacific pond turtle (SSC) . Swainson’s hawk (ST) . Burrowing owl (SSC) . Least bell’s vireo (FE, SE) . San Joaquin kit fox (FE, ST) . American badger (SSC) San Luis Segment . Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (FE, SE, CFP) . Swainson’s hawk (ST) . Northern harrier (SSC) . Tricolored blackbird (SSC) . San Joaquin kit fox (FE, ST) South Segment . Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (FE, SE, CFP) . Alameda whipsnake (FT, ST) . Golden eagle (BGEPA, CFP) . Burrowing owl (SSC) . San Joaquin kit fox (FE, ST) Plants Direct effects to special-status plants during construction would be adverse and could include removal of individual plants or populations and removal of habitat including the seed bank. While loss of specialstatus plants would be site-specific, the context of this impact would be regional due to the limited distribution and populations of special-status species. Direct impacts would be short-term and minor with implementation of compensatory mitigation. Indirect adverse effects could occur from dust, erosion, and degradation of habitat and competition from spread of invasive weeds. The context of this impact is regional, and while some indirect effects are short-term and minor in intensity, the spread of invasive weeds would be a long-term impact of moderate intensity. O&M impacts to special-status plants would primarily occur from vehicle use of access roads to inspect lines, routine grading and maintenance of roads within the existing roadbed, and from localized construction activities associated with repair or replacement of structures or conductors (see Appendix D, Operation and Maintenance Plan, for a full description of O&M activities). Most O&M impacts would be indirect (dust, weeds) although localized construction activities could directly impact special-status plant populations. O&M impacts to special-status plants would be much reduced in context, duration, and intensity compared to the construction phase. Routine maintenance jobs are typically short in duration, and ground disturbance is typically minor to negligible. Western’s implementation of a variety of EPMs during construction and O&M as part of the Project would avoid or minimize impacts to special-status plants and minimize alteration of habitat. All construction personnel would receive training on federal and State laws protecting plants and wildlife, including prohibitions on collection and removal. Vehicles would be restricted to designated access routes and work areas, and temporary work areas would be restored following construction. Equipment would be washed prior to entering sensitive areas to avoid introducing new weed seeds. In addition, seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. Where appropriate, herbicides would be used to control weeds, but use would conform with standards in the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database to avoid adverse effects to non-target species and habitats. Nonetheless, under CEQA the direct and indirect impacts to special-status plants and habitats would be significant absent mitigation in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Wildlife Direct effects to special-status wildlife would be adverse and could include physical damage to or removal of occupied or potential habitats (including designated critical habitat), construction-related erosion or runoff into aquatic habitats, injury or mortality of individuals, disturbance through human presence and construction noise and vibration, and collapse of burrows. Construction in and around agricultural lands, grasslands, and canals could result in the loss of individual western burrowing owls or giant garter snakes; and impacts to vernal pools and seasonal wetlands could result in take of listed fairy shrimp. Direct effects to birds could also include disturbance to nesting birds or nest destruction. The primary effects to bats would be direct effects associated with disturbance at roost sites through human presence and construction noise and vibration. Direct impacts would be short-term and moderate in intensity. The context of direct impacts would be regional due to the limited distribution and populations of special-status species. Indirect adverse effects could include degradation of habitats through introduction of trash, introduction or spread of non-native plants or predators, spread of disease, spill of hazardous materials, and increased susceptibility to wild fire. The context of indirect impacts is regional, and would be long-term and of moderate intensity. O&M impacts to special-status wildlife would primarily occur from vehicle use of access roads to inspect lines, routine grading and maintenance of roads within the existing roadbed, and from localized construction activities associated with repair or replacement of structures or conductors. Impacts to special-status wildlife would generally be of similar types as those described for construction, but would be much reduced in context, duration, and intensity. Routine maintenance jobs are typically short in duration, and ground disturbance is minor to negligible. Western’s implementation of a variety of EPMs during construction and O&M as part of the Project would avoid or minimize impacts to special-status wildlife and minimize alteration of habitat (including designated critical habitat). All construction personnel would receive training on federal and state laws protecting plants and wildlife, including prohibitions on collection and removal. Vehicles would be restricted to designated access routes and work areas, and trash would be removed each day to avoid attracting predators. Nighttime construction would occur only under emergency circumstances. Temporary work areas would be restored following construction. The transmission facilities would be constructed to current Avian Power Line Interaction Committee standards to minimize avian electrocutions and collisions during operation. Excavations during construction and operation would be managed to avoid wildlife entrapment. Nonetheless, under CEQA the direct and indirect impacts to special-status wildlife and habitats would be significant absent mitigation in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Mitigation Measures for Impact BIO-1 MM BIO-1 Conduct surveys for special-status plants and sensitive habitats. Prior to construction, an agency-approved botanist will survey Project areas during appropriate blooming periods for listed and special-status plant species and sensitive habitats. Special-status vegetation communities and species will be reported to the USFWS and/or CDFW. MM BIO-2 Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities. The following measures will be implemented during construction and O&M activities for special-status plants and vegetation communities. Special-status plants include federal and State-listed plant species (large-flowered fiddleneck, Hoover’s spurge, Delta button-celery, Contra Costa goldfields, Mason’s lilaeopsis, Hartweg’s golden sunburst, and Greene’s tuctoria), and all CRPR special-status plants. During construction activities: . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until an agency-approved botanist has surveyed the site. . Ground-disturbing activities will require a bloom season survey by an agency-approved biologist to flag any existing plant populations. Ground disturbance will be prohibited within the flagged boundary unless further consultation with USFWS or coordination with CDFW (as appropriate) is completed. Flagging or other field markers such as temporary fence posts, or other markers that will last for the construction season, will be placed in the prohibited area to ensure that no disturbance occurs at that location. Populations of special-status plants will also be mapped and located in the field using a GPS so that they are clearly identified at all times of the year and construction workers can easily identify areas to be avoided. The area where special-status plants are being preserved will be avoided by workers doing construction activities at all times of the year. After construction is completed, the flagging and markers can be removed. . During Project construction, a biological monitor will be present when work occurs within 100 feet of a flagged listed plant population. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all grounddisturbing activities to prevent impacts to special-status plants and vegetation communities. . Where impacts to special-status plants cannot be avoided, and mitigation cannot be achieved through the purchase of credits at a mitigation or conservation bank, the top 4 inches of topsoil will be removed, salvaged, and applied to an appropriate onsite or off-site restoration area. When this topsoil is replaced, compaction will be minimized. Soil will not be stockpiled for more than one year to maintain seed viability. . Western will comply with conditions of any affected existing conservation easement, and will avoid and minimize impacts within conservation easements to the extent feasible. During O&M activities: . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until an agency-approved biologist has surveyed the site. . If vegetation management activities are proposed between March 1 and August 31, an agency-approved biologist will mark special-status plant populations, including a 50-foot (15-meter) buffer zone, prior to construction and O&M activities. Within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the marked area, the following work area limits will be provided: (1) only manual clearing of vegetation will be allowed within 50 feet of the edge of the flagged area, (2) mechanical treatment of all kinds (including mowers, tractors, chippers, dozers) will be prohibited, and (3) herbicide use will be prohibited at all times with the exception of direct application to target vegetation. . Workers will refer to maps that show the location of mapped populations of specialstatus plants so that these areas can be avoided. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all grounddisturbing activities to prevent impacts to plants. . Where impacts to special-status plants cannot be avoided, and mitigation cannot be achieved through the purchase of credits at a mitigation or conservation bank, the top 4 inches of topsoil will be removed, salvaged, and applied to an appropriate onsite or off-site restoration area. When this topsoil is replaced, compaction will be minimized. Soil will not be stockpiled for more than one year to maintain seed viability. . Western will comply with conditions of any affected existing conservation easement, and will avoid impacts within conservation easements to the extent feasible. MM BIO-3 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to special-status plants. Western will purchase credits in an appropriate mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank for the plant species to be impacted as appropriate. If a mitigation bank is not available Western will contribute in-lieu fees to a mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank that can provide appropriate mitigation for the special-status plant species affected. Western will work with the appropriate resource agency (USFWS and/or CDFW) to ensure adequate compensation. Mitigation ratios will be sufficient to achieve the performance criterion of no net loss of the affected plant species. If mitigation cannot be achieved by purchase of credits in a mitigation or conservation or by in-lieu fees, then Western will prepare a mitigation plan that describes the compensatory mitigation measures that will be implemented for special-status plants. The mitigation plan will be submitted to the USFWS for approval for federally listed plants and to CDFW for State-listed and CRPR plants. The mitigation plan will include the mitigation measures, which are adopted from the CNPS Policy on Mitigation Guidelines Regarding Impacts to Rare, Threatened and Endangered Plants (CNPS, 1998); or equally effective alternative measures. MM BIO-4 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to federally listed branchiopod habitat. If effects to branchiopod habitats cannot be avoided, Western will compensate for effects through one of the following: (a) affected pools will be restored on site after construction is complete, (b) credits will be acquired from an agency-approved conservation bank, (c) funds will be deposited into an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) a conservation easement will be purchased. Compensation amounts will be approved by USFWS. For on-site creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. If it is necessary for cysts to be salvaged to restore affected pools and with concurrence from the USFWS, an agency-approved biologist will salvage soils from local sites that are known to support vernal pool branchiopods at least 2 weeks before the onset of construction, or during the preceding dry season if pools are anticipated to hold water when construction begins. The salvaged soil samples will be stored and used to inoculate restored pools. MM BIO-5 Avoidance and minimization measures for valley elderberry longhorn beetle. The following measures will be implemented during construction and O&M activities to protect valley elderberry longhorn beetle. During construction activities: . If the Project may affect valley elderberry longhorn beetle, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations for this beetle, which could include but may not be limited to the following: – A 100-foot (30.5-meter), no-disturbance buffer fence will be installed and maintained around the perimeter of elderberry shrubs. No grading or any other grounddisturbing activities will be conducted within the fenced area without prior verification that the requirements of the USFWS have been satisfied including the issuance of any necessary permits or authorizations. – Contractors will be briefed on the status of the beetle, the need to protect its elderberry host plant, the need to stay out of this 100-foot buffer, and the possible penalties for not complying with these requirements. – Signs will be erected every 50 feet (15 meters) along the edge of avoidance areas with the following statements: “This area is habitat of the valley elderberry longhorn beetle, a threatened species, and must not be disturbed. This species is protected by the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. Violators are subject to prosecution, fines, and imprisonment.” The signs will be clearly readable from a distance of 20 feet (6 meters), and will be maintained for the duration of construction. – Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of elderberry plants. During O&M activities: . Prior to initiating vegetation clearance with elderberry plants present, qualified personnel will clearly flag or fence each elderberry plant with a stem measuring 1 inch (2.54 centimeters) or greater in diameter at ground level. If an elderberry plant meeting this criterion is present: – A minimum buffer zone of 20 feet (6 meters) outside of the dripline of each elderberry plant will be provided during all routine O&M activities within which all O&M activities except manual clearing will be prohibited. – No insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers, or other chemicals will be used within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of an elderberry plant, except direct application to target vegetation. – Trimming, rather than removal of shrubs, will be used where feasible. Directional felling of trees and manual-cutting trees prior to removal will be used to minimize impacts to elderberries. – Replacement of existing conductor or installation of additional lines will be performed by pulling the line from tower to tower without touching the vegetation in areas where elderberry plants are present. MM BIO-6 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to elderberry plants. If complete avoidance (100 feet) of elderberry plants is not feasible during construction, a mitigation plan will be developed in accordance with the most current USFWS mitigation guidelines (currently USFWS, 1999) that will include provision for compensatory mitigation. The mitigation plan will include, but may not be limited to, relocating elderberry shrubs, planting elderberry shrubs, establishing success criteria, monitoring relocated and planted elderberry shrubs to ensure success, and an adaptive management plan in the event that mitigation is not successful. MM BIO-7 Avoidance and minimization measures for Alameda whipsnake. Western will minimize or avoid impacts to Alameda whipsnake and its habitats by implementing the following measures. . If suitable Alameda whipsnake habitat will be impacted by the Proposed Project, Western will consult with the USFWS and coordinate with CDFW. Applicable take authorization/permits will be obtained, as necessary. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations, which could include but may not be limited to the following: – If habitat for Alameda whipsnake will be impacted by Project activities, Western will develop and implement a protection and monitoring plan for Alameda whipsnake that will be approved by USFWS and coordinated with CDFW. Measures in this plan will include, but may not be limited to, a procedure for conducting preconstruction surveys and/or trapping surveys before the onset of initial ground-disturbing activities in areas with high-quality habitat that cannot be avoided, surveying before construction and/or restoration begins each day that these activities will occur, and direct monitoring by an agency-approved biologist of the occupied or potentially occupied grassland/scrub/mosaic habitats in the Project area that will be directly affected by Project construction. MM BIO-8 Avoidance and minimization measures for blunt-nosed leopard lizard. To protect bluntnosed leopard lizard, Western will implement the following for both construction and O&M activities. . An agency-approved (USFWS and CDFW) biologist will conduct blunt-nosed leopard lizard surveys for each ground disturbance site in blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat per the 2004 Approved Survey Methodology for the Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard (CDFG, 2004) or currently approved methodology. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are not detected during surveys, a flashing barrier or other short-term or longer-term fencing plan approved by CDFW will be installed when feasible and necessary around the work area to prevent blunt-nosed leopard lizards from entering the work area. Fencing options may be shorter term (temporary for just a few hours) or longer term (days or weeks) and may include but would not be limited to a 36-inch- (0.9-meter) tall barrier, buried 6 inches (15 centimeters) deep, and reinforced with rebar or T-posts, and may include escape ramps of silt-fencing material, wood, or soil to allow any undetected blunt-nosed leopard lizard to exit the site. Fencing plans and types may be altered based on length of time the fence is to remain in place, terrain, and Project needs. Fencing will be removed upon Project completion. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are subsequently found within the fenced work area, a section of fence may be removed so that the lizard may leave the exclusion zone. The agency-approved biologist will monitor the location of the blunt-nosed leopard lizard to ensure that it has moved outside of the work area. The fencing will be immediately replaced to exclude the lizard from the construction area. When all observed bluntnosed leopard lizards have exited the site, additional surveys will be implemented during appropriate conditions for detection for at least five survey days before construction begins to ensure that no more blunt-nosed leopard lizards inhabit the work-area exclusion zone. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are detected during surveys, any active burrow within a 200-foot radius of activity sites will be flagged and marked with a burrow number prior to construction or O&M activities. Flagged, 50-foot (15-meter) exclusion zones will be established around any potentially active burrow. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this exclusion zone. A flashing barrier or appropriate fencing approved by CDFW will be established between burrow(s) and work sites. The barrier or fencing will be established at least 180 degrees around the burrow site and will flare out at the ends to direct lizards away from the activity sites. The barrier or fencing will not enclose an active burrow site. . An agency-approved biological monitor will monitor all vehicular traffic within 200 feet (61 meters) of active burrows by escorting all vehicles through this zone on foot. The monitor will walk in front of the vehicle to ensure that no blunt-nosed leopard lizards are in the road or path of travel. All personnel vehicles or other vehicles not needed for construction activities will park at least 200 feet (61 meters) from the flagged burrow site and crews will walk into the work area. . An agency-approved biological monitor will be on site for any activities within suitable blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat. Prior to construction or O&M activities each day within suitable blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site during appropriate conditions for detection to verify that no blunt-nosed leopard lizards are visible within the site. The agency-approved biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect Project activities in coordination with the Project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of blunt-nosed leopard lizards. The agency-approved biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Vehicle speed limit of 15 mph (24 kph) will be enforced during construction and O&M activities on all nonpublic Project access roads within blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat and outside of blunt-nosed leopard lizard flagged areas. Vehicle speeds within 200 feet (61 meters) of flagged blunt-nosed leopard lizard areas (known presence) will be contingent upon the walking speed of biological monitor. MM BIO-9 Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status reptiles. To protect California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake, Western will implement the following measures during construction and ground-disturbing O&M activities. . A preconstruction survey for California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist in all suitable habitats where tower construction, new access roads, or ground-disturbing O&M activities will affect suitable sandy grassland, scrub, sycamore, or sandy wash habitats. The survey will be conducted within 14 to 30 days of the onset of construction. If individuals of these species are not found, no further action will be required. . If California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, or San Joaquin whipsnake are found, occupied habitat as well as other suitable habitats will be avoided to the extent feasible. An agency-approved biologist will conduct daily surveys in suitable habitats during construction and O&M activities and will attempt to capture or otherwise move animals out of harm’s way when necessary. MM BIO-10 Avoidance and minimization measures for giant garter snake. Western will implement the following measures to protect giant garter snake during construction and O&M activities in Los Banos Creek and adjacent uplands below the dam impounding Los Banos Creek Reservoir. During construction activities: . A preactivity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before construction activities begin, and an agency-approved biologist will be on site during all activities in potential giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitats. Preactivity surveys will be repeated whenever a lapse in construction activity of two weeks or longer occurs. The biologist will have the authority to stop construction if a giant garter snake is encountered; construction may resume when the snake has been seen to leave the area on its own or the agency-approved biologist confirms the snake will not be harmed. Only personnel with a USFWS 10(a)(1)(A) recovery permit will have the authority to capture and/or relocate giant garter snakes encountered in project area. All sightings and incidental take will be reported to the Western Natural Resources Department, who will report to the USFWS. During Category A O&M activities (Appendix D): . Implement EPMs. During Category B O&M activities (Appendix D): . With the exception of direct application, use of herbicides within 200 feet (61 meters) of potential giant garter snake habitat will be prohibited at all times. . Giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitats will be flagged as environmentally sensitive areas by an agency-approved biologist within or adjacent to the disturbance footprint. Only manual vegetation removal will be allowed within the flagged area. . An agency-approved monitor will be present for O&M activities within the flagged area. Ground-disturbing activities will be avoided within 200 feet (61 meters) from the banks of giant garter snake aquatic habitat. If this were not feasible, O&M activities will be conducted between May 1 and September 30, the giant garter snake active period, and all potentially affected aquatic habitats will be dewatered prior to any ground disturbance. Dewatered areas will remain dry with no puddled water remaining for at least 15 consecutive days prior to excavation or filling of that habitat. If a site could not be completely dewatered, prey items will be netted or otherwise salvaged if present. . If it is not feasible to conduct O&M activities between May 1 and September 30, the Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office will be contacted, and the following actions will be performed: – A pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before construction activities begin, and an agency-approved biologist will be on site during all activities in potential giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitat. Pre-activity surveys will be repeated whenever a lapse in construction activity of two weeks or longer occurs. The biologist will have the authority to stop construction if a giant garter snake is encountered; construction may resume when the snake has been seen to leave the area on its own or the agency-approved biologist confirms the snake will not be harmed. Only personnel with a USFWS 10(a)(1)(A) recovery permit will have the authority to capture and/or relocate giant garter snakes encountered in the Project area. All sightings and incidental take will be reported to the Western Natural Resources Department, who will report to the USFWS – Any temporary fill and debris that might provide habitat for giant garter snakes will be immediately removed and disturbed areas will be restored to pre-Project conditions after completion of O&M activities. Restoration work could include replanting species removed from banks or replanting emergent vegetation in the active channel. Filter fences and mesh will be of a material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians. Erosion-control blankets will be used as a last resort because of their tendency to biodegrade slowly and trap reptiles and amphibians. No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near aquatic features. During Category C O&M activities (Appendix D): . Follow all measures listed for Category A and B activities above. Prior to site mobilization, Western will provide notification to appropriate agencies. MM BIO-11 Avoidance and minimization measures for western pond turtle. Western will implement the following measures to protect western pond turtle during construction and O&M activities. During construction activities: . A preconstruction survey for western pond turtles will be conducted by an agencyapproved biologist in all construction areas identified as potential nesting or dispersal habitat located within 1000 feet (305 meters) of potential aquatic habitat. The survey will be conducted within 48 hours prior to initiation of construction activities. If a western pond turtle is found during preconstruction surveys in an area where it may be affected by construction, an agency-approved biologist will relocate it with permission from CDFW to a site that is a suitable distance from construction activities as necessary. If a nest is found within the construction area, construction will not take place within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the nest until the turtles have hatched and have left the nest or can be safely relocated, as determined through coordination with CDFW. . Because attempting to locate pond turtle nests will not necessarily result in detection, after completion of preconstruction surveys and any necessary relocation, exclusion fencing will be placed around all construction sites adjacent to suitable aquatic habitats during the nesting season to eliminate the possibility of nest establishment in uplands adjacent to aquatic areas, as necessary. . If construction activities occur near aquatic areas where turtles have been identified during preconstruction or other surveys, a biological monitor will be present during construction. If a turtle is found, it will be relocated, if necessary, to a site a suitable distance from construction activities. . If a pond turtle is encountered on the Project site, any construction activity that could result in harm of the turtle will immediately cease and will not resume until the agencyapproved biologist has moved the turtle to a safe location. During O&M activities: . For Category A activities (Appendix D): follow standard EPMs. . For Category B and C activities (Appendix D): From April 15 to July 15, any grounddisturbing activity within 400 feet (122 meters) of a permanent pond, lake, creek, river, or slough that could affect the bed, bank, or water quality of any of these features will be prohibited or an agency-approved biologist will inspect the Project area. If adult or juvenile pond turtles are present, an agency-approved biologist will monitor Project activities to ensure that no turtles are harmed. If the biologist determines that nests could be adversely affected, potential nesting areas will be avoided between June 1 and October 31. MM BIO-12 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to special-status reptiles. If habitat for listed or other special-status reptiles cannot be avoided, Western will provide compensatory mitigation as follows: . Alameda Whipsnake. Western will compensate for permanent and temporary loss of upland scrub habitats that could support Alameda whipsnake by (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. For on-site creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. . Blunt-Nosed Leopard Lizard. Western will provide compensation for permanent and temporary impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat by (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. For on-site creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. . Other Special-Status Reptiles. If California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, or San Joaquin whipsnake are found during preconstruction surveys and avoidance of habitats is not feasible, Western will restore habitats temporarily affected. Surveys, fencing, and compensatory mitigation for blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat and upland habitat for California red-legged frog and California tiger salamander will benefit these species as well. MM BIO-13 Avoidance and minimization measures for California red-legged frog. Western will implement the following measures to protect California red-legged frog during construction and O&M activities. During construction activities: . California red-legged frog presence will be assumed in all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted in the year prior to construction. Uplands within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) will be assumed to be occupied around all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted. . If the Project may affect California red-legged frog, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations, which could include but may not be limited to the following. – Transmission towers and new access roads will be sited as far from aquatic habitats as is feasible. – To the extent feasible, construction activities will take place during the dry season (generally June 1 through September 30) within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. If construction extends into the wet season (generally October 1 through May 31), temporary exclusion fencing will be installed 100 feet (30.5 meters) out from work areas to prevent California red-legged frogs from entering construction areas as necessary. – Escape ramps will be constructed in all trenches or excavations to allow wildlife to escape. – Biological monitoring will be provided by a USFWS-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. The biological monitor will identify, capture, and relocate sensitive amphibians present in work areas if necessary. – A 300-foot (91-meter) setback, incorporating both riparian vegetation and uplands, will be provided on all sides of aquatic habitats identified as occupied or assumed occupied by red-legged frogs as feasible. A setback may be reduced or expanded through consultation with the USFWS depending on whether it would (a) affect habitat or (b) result in adverse impacts to the species or the biological values of the habitat. Setbacks will maintain existing vegetation free of disturbance and new construction, equipment storage, vehicle parking, and other activities that might compact or disturb soils or vegetation or that could introduce contaminants into aquatic habitats. Setbacks will be clearly delineated during the construction. – Water quality will be maintained through implementation of appropriate erosioncontrol measures to reduce siltation and contaminated runoff from Project sites by maintaining vegetation within buffers and/or through the use of hay bales, filter fences, vegetative buffer strips, or other accepted equivalents. – Construction and other ground disturbances will be prohibited within setbacks. The use of insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides, and pesticides will occur in accordance with USEPA guidelines addressing the use of these materials in occupied California red-legged frog habitat. – Where aquatic sites cannot be avoided by 300 feet (91 meters) on all sides, a USFWSapproved biologist will survey the work site immediately prior to construction activities. If California red-legged frogs, tadpoles, or egg masses are found, the approved biologist will contact USFWS to determine whether moving any of these life-stages is appropriate. In making this determination USFWS will consider whether an appropriate relocation site exists. If USFWS approves moving animals, the approved biologist will be allowed sufficient time to move California red-legged frogs from the work site before work activities begin. Only USFWS-approved biologists will participate in activities associated with the capture, handling, and monitoring of California red-legged frogs. Bare hands will be used to capture California red-legged frogs. USFWS-approved biologists will not use soaps, oils, creams, lotions, repellents, or solvents of any sort on their hands within two hours before and during periods when they are capturing and relocating individuals. To avoid transferring disease or pathogens from handling the amphibians, USFWSapproved biologists will follow the Declining Amphibian Populations Task Force Fieldwork Code of Practice. During O&M activities: . A USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential California red-legged frog breeding habitat within the vicinity of O&M activities, and will flag a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer. The following restrictions will apply within the buffer: (1) only manual vegetation removal will be allowed; (2) only direct (e.g., injection and cut-stump) herbicide application methods will be allowed, except when otherwise restricted; (3) no ground disturbance (e.g., digging or auguring) will be allowed; and (4) erosion-control devices will be of a material that will not entrap amphibians. . If it is not feasible to follow the above-stated measures, a pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before Project O&M activities begin. If ground disturbance is required, an USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential California red-legged frog upland refuge habitat within disturbance areas. Areas that may provide suitable upland refuge will be avoided to the extent feasible. Ground disturbance will not occur in California red-legged frog aquatic/breeding habitat. If an area that provides suitable upland refuge must be impacted, a USFWS-approved biologist will determine if California red-legged frogs are present using visual surveys, an endoscope, or other accepted detection method. If California red-legged frogs are detected, the area will be avoided using a buffer determined appropriate by the biologist, and a USFWSapproved monitor will remain on site to ensure that California red-legged frogs are not impacted during Project activities in the vicinity. A USFWS-approved biologist will remain on site during all activities to ensure protection of California red-legged frog or an exclusion barrier will be constructed around the work site using USFWSapproved methods and materials. Exclusion materials will be removed at the end of the work activity. Crews will inspect any trenches left open for more than 24 hours for trapped animals. Only a USFWS-approved biologist will remove trapped animals. . To comply with the California red-legged frog injunction for herbicide applications, Western will ensure that, in the counties named in the injunction, there will be no ground application of any of the chemicals named in the injunction (http://www. epa.gov/espp/litstatus/redleg-frog/steps-info.htm). Currently, the no-use buffer is 60 feet (18 meters) from any aquatic feature, aquatic breeding habitat, non-breeding aquatic habitat, and upland habitat. MM BIO-14 Avoidance and minimization measures for California tiger salamander and western spadefoot. To protect California tiger salamander and western spadefoot, Western will implement the following measures. During construction activities: . California tiger salamander presence will be assumed in all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted in the year prior to construction. Uplands within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) will be assumed to be occupied around all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted . If the Project may affect California tiger salamander, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations. . Transmission towers and new access roads will be sited as far from aquatic habitats as is feasible. . To the extent feasible, construction activities will take place during the dry season (generally June 1 through September 30) within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. If construction extends into the wet season (generally October 1 through May 31), temporary exclusion fencing will be installed 100 feet (30.5 meters) out from work areas to prevent California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots from entering construction areas as necessary. . Escape ramps will be installed in all trenches or excavations to allow wildlife to escape. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. The biological monitor will identify, capture, and relocate sensitive amphibians present in work areas if necessary. . A 300-foot (91-meter) setback, incorporating both riparian vegetation and uplands, will be provided on all sides of aquatic habitats identified as occupied or assumed occupied by California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots. A setback may be reduced or expanded in consultation with the USFWS depending on whether it would (a) affect habitat or (b) result in adverse impacts to the species or the biological values of the habitat. Setbacks will maintain existing vegetation free of disturbance and new construction, equipment storage, vehicle parking, and other activities that might compact or disturb soils or vegetation or that could introduce contaminants into aquatic habitats. Setbacks will be clearly delineated during the construction. . Water quality will be maintained through implementation of appropriate erosioncontrol measures to reduce siltation and contaminated runoff from Project sites by maintaining vegetation within buffers and/or through the use of hay bales, filter fences, vegetative buffer strips, or other accepted equivalents. . Construction and other ground disturbances will be prohibited within setbacks. The use of insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides, and pesticides will occur in accordance with USEPA guidelines addressing the use of these materials in occupied California tiger salamander and western spadefoot habitat. . Where aquatic sites cannot be avoided by 300 feet (91 meters) on all sides, an agencyapproved biologist will survey the work site immediately prior to construction activities. If California tiger salamanders, larvae, or eggs are found, the approved biologist will contact USFWS to determine whether moving any of these life-stages is appropriate. In making this determination USFWS will consider whether an appropriate relocation site exists. If USFWS approves moving animals, the approved biologist will be allowed sufficient time to move California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots from the work site before work activities begin. Only USFWS-approved biologists will participate in activities associated with the capture, handling, and monitoring of California tiger salamanders. Bare hands will be used to capture salamanders and toads. USFWSapproved biologists will not use soaps, oils, creams, lotions, repellents, or solvents of any sort on their hands within two hours before and during periods when they are capturing and relocating individuals. To avoid transferring disease or pathogens from handling the amphibians, agency-approved biologists will follow the Declining Amphibian Populations Task Force Fieldwork Code of Practice. During O&M activities: . A USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential California tiger salamander breeding habitat in the vicinity of O&M activities, and will flag a 500-foot buffer. The following restrictions will apply within the buffer: (1) only manual vegetation removal will be allowed; (2) only direct (e.g., injection and cut-stump) herbicide application methods will be allowed, except when otherwise restricted; (3) no ground disturbance (e.g., digging or augering) will be allowed; and (4) erosion-control devices will be of a material that will not entrap amphibians. . If it is not feasible to follow the above-stated measures, a pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before O&M activities begin. If ground disturbance is required, a USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential CTS aestivation habitat (burrows, rock piles) within disturbance areas. CTS aestivation habitat will be avoided to the extent feasible. Ground disturbance will not occur in CTS breeding/aquatic habitat. If a burrow or other potential aestivation habitat must be impacted, a USFWSapproved biologist will determine if CTS are present within the burrow using an endoscope or other accepted detection method. If CTS are detected, the burrow will be avoided using a buffer determined appropriate by the biologist and a USFWSapproved monitor will remain on site to ensure that CTS are not impacted during Project activities in the vicinity. A USFWS-approved biologist will remain on site during all activities to ensure protection of CTS or an exclusion barrier will be constructed around the work site using USFWS-approved methods and materials. Exclusion materials will be removed at the end of the work activity. Crews will inspect any trenches left open for more than 24 hours for trapped animals. Only a USFWSapproved biologist will remove trapped animals. MM BIO-15 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to listed amphibians. Western will provide compensation for permanent and temporary construction impacts to California tiger salamander and California red-legged frog aquatic and upland habitat through one or more of the following: (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. For on-site creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. If Western intends to eliminate aquatic habitat including wetlands, ponds, springs, and other standing water sources, and to create new, on-site habitat, then the newly created habitat will be created and filled with water prior to dewatering and destroying the existing habitat. Dewatering and relocation of aquatic habitats should occur outside of the breeding season for red-legged frogs (approximately January through June). If Western intends to eliminate aquatic habitat including wetlands, ponds, springs, and other standing water sources, and will not create new, on-site habitat, then dewatering of existing habitat should occur prior to commencement of construction and other sitedisturbing activities. Dewatering and relocation of aquatic habitats should occur outside of the breeding season for red-legged frogs (approximately January through June). Preserve lands acquired to offset impacts to the red-legged frog must have occupied habitat of at least equal habitat value as determined by the USFWS. MM BIO-16 Avoidance and minimization measures for burrowing owl. Western will protect burrowing owls by implementing the following methods derived from the CDFW Staff Report on Burrowing Owl Mitigation (CDFG, 2012). During construction activities: . In coordination with CDFW, a burrowing owl protection and monitoring plan will be developed following guidelines in the updated CDFW staff report (CDFG, 2012). It will include but may not be limited to (a) conducting a protocol survey of the Project area the year before construction begins to identify sites of wintering and breeding activity, (b) identifying measures to avoid and minimize impacts, (c) identifying restrictions on construction activities and buffer distances related to time of year, (d) determining whether burrow exclusion or closure will be necessary, and developing a plan for implementation, (e) developing mitigation measures and a compensation plan for unavoidable impacts, (f) conducting a preconstruction survey, and (g) developing a mitigation and monitoring plan to ensure success of mitigation. Compensatory mitigation could include habitat restoration or contribution to a conservation bank. During O&M activities: . From February 1 to August 31, Project construction, herbicide application (with the exception of direct application), and other O&M activities will be prohibited within 250 feet (76 meters) of potential burrowing owl nesting dens (ground squirrel burrows, culverts, concrete slabs, debris piles that could support nesting burrowing owls). From September 1 through January 31, disturbance will be prohibited within 160 feet (49 meters) of potential burrowing owl dens. . If this is not feasible, a qualified biologist will conduct nesting and wintering surveys using methods described in California Burrowing Owl Consortium 1993, CDFG 2012, or currently accepted method. If nesting or wintering activity is detected, a CDFWapproved biologist will mark and monitor an appropriate no-disturbance buffer in the vicinity of burrows that have been active within the last 3 years. . Within the buffer zone, all Project construction and O&M activities and herbicide applications will be prohibited from February 1 to August 31. MM BIO-17 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to occupied burrowing owl habitat. For unavoidable impacts to burrowing owl habitat known to be occupied within the last 5 years, compensatory mitigation will be required. Compensation may take the form of (a) acquiring and dedicating lands into conservation easements; (b) purchasing mitigation credits at compensation ratios that have been approved by the CDFW; or (c) preserving area contiguous or near the acreage lost. To prevent hazards attributable to interactions between wildlife and aviation, the location of any conservation easement or habitat restoration for burrowing owl shall be located outside of any established Airport Influence Area. MM BIO-18 Avoidance and minimization measures for California fully protected birds. To protect the California fully protected golden eagle and white-tailed kite, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting period for these species is March 1 through August 15. . For ground-breaking activities that begin outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a CDFW-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey in suitable habitats for each species no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) in all directions from construction areas. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . During construction, if a golden eagle or white-tailed kite nest is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a 0.5-mile (0.8-kilometer), no-disturbance buffer around the nest or center of activity. The buffer will be maintained until a CDFW-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged or the nest is no longer active. If this buffer cannot feasibly be implemented, Western will contact and coordinate with CDFW well in advance of ground-disturbing activities (CDFW in litt. 2014c). . During O&M, if a golden eagle or white-tailed kite nest is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within 0.25 mile (0.4 kilometer), Western will establish a 0.25-mile (0.4-kilometer), no-disturbance buffer around the nest or center of activity; a smaller buffer may be established if a qualified biologist determines that the O&M activity will not adversely affect adults or young. . When construction or O&M activities begin in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. MM BIO-19 Avoidance and minimization measures for least Bell’s vireo. To protect least Bell’s vireo, Western will implement the following measures. . Where any construction-related activity will take place within 1000 feet (305 meters) of potential least Bell’s vireo habitat during the nesting season (mid-March through September), a protocol survey will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist, in coordination with the USFWS. If nesting least Bell’s vireos are not detected, no further action is required for this species. If nesting is detected, Western will establish a clearly marked no-disturbance buffer of 1000 feet (305 meters) around the nest, or center of activity if the nest cannot be detected. The buffer will be maintained until the agencyapproved biologist has determined that the nest is no longer active or that the young have fledged. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1000 feet (305 meters) of occupied habitat. The biological monitor will ensure that construction activities do not disturb nesting vireos. MM BIO-20 Avoidance and minimization measures for Swainson’s hawk. To protect nesting Swainson’s hawks, Western will implement the following measures pursuant to guidelines from CDFW (CDFG, 1994) and the Swainson’s Hawk Technical Advisory Committee (SWTAC, 2000); and pursuant to informal consultation for the Project initiated January 2014 (CDFW in litt. 2014c). The nesting season for Swainson’s hawks, which encompasses the courtship and nest initiation phase, is considered by CDFW to be February 1 through September 15. During construction activities: . An agency-approved biologist will conduct preconstruction surveys according to guidelines presented in SWTAC 2000, which establishes five survey periods. During the first period (January 1 to March 20) potential nest locations are identified. During the second period (March 20 to April 5) Swainson’s hawks are returning to traditional nesting territories during a time when most nest trees are leafless and birds and their activities are easier to detect. During the third period (April 5 to April 20), pair bonding, courtship, and nest construction are taking place and while nests may be more difficult to see, they can be inferred from increased activity. During the fourth period (April 20 to June 10) nests are difficult to detect and activity is low because adults are incubating. Surveys should not be initiated during the fourth period. During the fifth period (June 10 to July 30), young birds may be active and visible, and both adults are making many visits to the nest with prey. Three surveys will be completed in at least two of the survey periods immediately prior to Project construction. Surveys will encompass the area within 0.5 mile (0.8 kilometer) of construction activities. . In addition, if ground-disturbing activities are to take place during the breeding season (February 1 through September 15), the CDFW recommends that additional preconstruction surveys for active nests be conducted by a CDFW-approved biologist no more than 10 days prior to the start of construction. . If an active Swainson’s hawk nest is found, a 0.5-mile (0.8-kilometer), no-disturbance buffer will be established around the nest. If such a buffer cannot feasibly be implemented, coordination with CDFW will occur well in advance of ground-disturbing activities and the acquisition of a State incidental take permit pursuant to Fish and Game Code section 2081(b) may be warranted. During O&M activities: . From February 1 to September 15, a 0.25-mile buffer zone will be established and maintained around potential Swainson’s hawk nest trees, within which there will be no intensive disturbance (e.g., use of heavy equipment, power saws, chippers, cranes, or draglines). This buffer may be adjusted, as assessed by a qualified biologist, based on changes in sensitivity exhibited by birds over the course of the nesting season and the type of O&M activity performed (e.g., high noise or human activity such as mechanical vegetation maintenance versus low noise or human activity such as semiannual patrols), or a qualified biologist will conduct nest surveys using methods described in SHTAC 2000 (or more current protocol) to determine absence. . Within 0.25 mile of an active nest, routine O&M activities will be deferred until after the young have fledged or until it is determined by a CDFW-approved biologist that the activities will not adversely affect adults or young. MM BIO-21 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat. Compensatory mitigation will be required for loss of Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat using compensation ratios provided in CDFG 1994 (or a more current document) or a ratio determined through coordination with CDFW. As provided in CDFW 2014c, compensatory mitigation for Swainson’s hawk will also be required for loss of nest trees. To prevent hazards attributable to interactions between wildlife and aviation, the location of any compensatory mitigation for Swainson’s hawk shall be located outside of any established Airport Influence Area. MM BIO-22 Avoidance and minimization measures for tricolored blackbird. Tricolored blackbird nests colonially in a variety of densely vegetated habitats. The nesting season for tricolored blackbird is March 1 through August 15. During construction activities: . For ground-breaking activities that begin or take place outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a biologist experienced with tricolored blackbirds and their range of habitats will conduct a preconstruction survey no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 500 feet (152 meters) in all directions from construction areas. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . If nesting is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within 500 feet (152 meters) of a construction or laydown area, Western will establish a clearly marked 500-foot (152-meter), no-disturbance buffer around the outer edges of the habitat. The buffer will be maintained until a CDFW-approved biologist has determined that the colony is no longer active. . If tricolored blackbirds begin nesting near construction or laydown areas after construction has started, a clearly marked no-disturbance buffer will be established around the colony that is the maximum feasible size for the circumstances. The buffer will be maintained until the colony is no longer active. . Biological monitoring will be provided by a CDFW-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 500 feet (152 meters) of occupied habitat. The biological monitor will ensure that construction activities do not disturb the colony. . When construction begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. During O&M activities: . From March 1 to August 15, herbicide application (with the exception of direct application) and vegetation clearing/disturbance will be prohibited in marshes, willows, and blackberry thickets, or a qualified biologist will conduct a nesting survey prior to O&M activities. If nesting activity is detected, a qualified biologist will mark and monitor an appropriate buffer zone around the nesting colony within which all O&M activities and herbicide applications will be prohibited from March 1 to August 15. MM BIO-23 Avoidance and minimization measures for other special-status and native birds. To protect loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, yellow-headed blackbird, and other non-listed birds protected by the MBTA and California Fish and Game Code, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting season for these species is March 1 through August 31. . For ground-breaking activities that begin or take place outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a CDFW-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey in suitable habitats for each of these species no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 250 feet (76 meters) in all directions from construction areas for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and 500 feet (152 meters) for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl. For species covered by the MBTA and California Fish and Game Code, but with no other special status, the survey area will encompass a sufficient area around the work site to identify nests that are present and determine their status. A sufficient area means any nest within an area that could potentially be affected by the Project. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . During construction, if nests of loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, or yellow-headed blackbird are detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within this survey distance, Western will establish a clearly marked 250-foot (76-meter), no-disturbance buffer around each nest or center of activity for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer around each nest or center of activity for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl. Buffers will be maintained until a CDFW-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged or the nest is no longer active. . During O&M, if nests of loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, and/or yellow-headed blackbird are detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a clearly marked 250-foot (76-meter), no-disturbance buffer around each nest or center of activity for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer around each nest or center of activity for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl; a smaller buffer may be established if the biologist determines that the O&M activity will not adversely affect adults or young. . Identified nests will be surveyed prior to construction or O&M activities to establish a behavioral baseline. Once work commences, all nests of MBTA- and Fish and Game Code–covered birds that are not designated as any other special status will be monitored during work activities to detect any behavioral changes as a result of the Project. If behavioral changes are observed, the work causing that change will cease and CDFW and USFWS will be contacted for additional avoidance and minimization measures. Or, if monitoring of identified nests by an agency-approved wildlife biologist is not feasible, CDFW and USFWS recommend a minimum no-disturbance buffer of 250 feet (76 meters) around active nests of non-listed passerine-type bird species and a 500-foot (152-meter), no-disturbance buffer around the nests of non-listed raptors until the breeding season has ended, or until an agency-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged and are no longer reliant upon the nest or parental care for survival. Variance from these no-disturbance buffers may be implemented when there is compelling biological or ecological reason to do so, such as when Project activities would be concealed from a nest site by topography. Any variance from these buffers will be supported by an agency-approved biologist and it is recommended that CDFW and USFWS be notified in advance of implementation of a no-disturbance buffer variance. . When construction or O&M begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. MM BIO-24 Avoidance and minimization measures for American badger. To protect American badger, Western will implement the following measures. . Concurrent with other required surveys (e.g., kit fox and burrowing owl), a CDFWapproved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey to identify the presence of American badgers. If this species is not found, no further action will be required. If badgers are identified, they will be passively relocated using burrow exclusion (e.g., installing one-way doors on burrows) or similar CDFW-approved exclusion methods. In unique situations it might be necessary to actively relocate badgers (e.g., using live traps) to protect individuals from potentially harmful situations. Such relocation will be performed with advanced CDFW coordination and concurrence. When unoccupied dens are encountered outside of work areas but within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of proposed activities, vacated dens will be inspected to ensure they are empty and temporarily covered using plywood sheets or similar materials. . If badger occupancy is determined at a given site within a construction area, construction will be halted. Depending on the den type, reasonable and prudent measures to avoid harming badgers will be implemented and may include seasonal limitations on Project construction near the site (i.e., restricting the construction period to avoid spring-summer pupping season), establishing a construction exclusion zone around the identified site, or resurveying the den a week later to determine species presence or absence. MM BIO-25 Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status bats. To protect Townsend’s big-eared bat and other special-status bats, Western will minimize impacts by performing preconstruction surveys and creating no-disturbance buffers around active bat-roosting sites, especially maternity roosts and especially during the bat pupping season (April 1 through August 15) for Project construction and O&M activities using the following measures. . Before construction or O&M activities within 250 feet (76 meters) of trees, cliffs, or caves, a CDFW-approved bat biologist will survey for special-status bats. If no evidence of bats (i.e., direct observation, guano, staining, or strong odors) is observed, no further mitigation will be required. If evidence of bats is observed, Western will implement the following measures to avoid potential impacts on breeding populations: – A no-disturbance buffer of 250 feet (76 meters) will be created around active bat roosts or occupied roosting habitat during the pupping season (April 1 through August 15). Bat roosts initiated during construction will be presumed to be unaffected by the indirect effects of noise and construction disturbances. However, the direct take of individuals will be prohibited without further coordination with CDFW. – Removal of trees showing evidence of active bat use will occur during the periods least likely to affect bats in winter hibernacula or maternity roosts, as determined by a CDFW-approved bat biologist (generally between August 15 and October 15, and between February 15 and April 1). If the exclusion of bats from potential roost sites is necessary to prevent indirect impacts due to construction noise and adjacent human activity, bat exclusion activities (e.g., installation of netting to block roost entrances) will be conducted by a CDFW-approved biologist. MM BIO-26 Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status kangaroo rats. Western will either assume presence of giant and short-nosed kangaroo rats and implement measures to avoid or minimize impacts, or conduct research to assess habitat potential. Research could take the form of (a) evaluating the Project area using a model based on satellite imagery currently being applied to giant kangaroo rat habitats throughout their range (T. Bean pers. comm.) or other habitat models, or (b) conducting protocol trapping in potentially suitable areas immediately prior to construction. If research indicates that kangaroo rats are not likely to be present, no further action will be required. If Western either assumes presence or research indicates that either kangaroo rat species could be present, Western will implement the following measures. . Prior to construction or O&M activities, any active burrows in the vicinity of work sites will be flagged and marked with a burrow number. Exclusion zones with a 30-foot (9-meter) radius will be established around any active burrow. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this exclusion zone. . A biological monitor will be on site for all activities within suitable kangaroo rat habitat. Prior to construction or O&M activities each day within suitable habitat, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site to verify that no kangaroo rats are present within the site. The biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect Project activities in coordination with the Project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of giant kangaroo rats. The biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Installation of barrier fencing around the work site may be used to further limit the risk of direct impacts to kangaroo rats where necessary. Barrier fencing will at no time inhibit the kangaroo rat’s ability to move between its den and other habitats that allow breeding, feeding, and sheltering. All barriers will be removed at the end of Project activities. . If giant kangaroo rats are detected within a disturbance site, through coordination with USFWS and if necessary, they may be relocated to a suitable site away from Project activities but as close to the disturbance site as feasible. Relocation methods will follow the recommendations in Tennant et al. (2013) or other USFWS-approved methods. MM BIO-27 Avoidance and minimization measures for San Joaquin kit fox. To protect San Joaquin kit fox, Western will implement the following measures. . To the extent feasible, Western will avoid Project construction and O&M activities that require ground disturbance or off-road travel between December 1 and May 31, the kit fox breeding/pupping season. . Prior to Project construction or O&M activities that involve ground disturbance, offroad travel, or vegetation management in suitable kit fox habitat, an agency-approved biologist will conduct habitat/den surveys in accordance with the “Small Projects” recommendations in the 2011 USFWS Standardized Recommendations for Protection of the Endangered San Joaquin Kit Fox Prior to or During Ground Disturbance (USFWS, 2011). Any suitable den (i.e., burrow with an entrance greater than 4 inches in diameter) will be monitored for evidence of kit fox use by placing either a tracking medium or wildlife monitoring cameras at the entrance for at least three consecutive nights. Active dens will be marked with a 100-foot (30.5-meter) buffer and natal or pupping dens (December 1 through May 31) will be marked with a 1,000-foot (305-meter) buffer. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this buffer area. . If activities must occur within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of an active den, San Joaquin kit foxes will be excluded from the den. Methods will follow those outlined in USFWS 2011. The den will be monitored for at least five consecutive nights from initial observation to allow the animal to move to another den during its normal activity. Use of this den may be discouraged by partially plugging the den in such a manner that any resident animal can easily escape but may be discouraged from re-entering. Once the kit fox has abandoned the den or is still present after five or more consecutive days of partial plugging and monitoring, the den will be plugged or excavated (by hand as feasible) when the qualified biologist determines that the animal is absent due to normal activities. Natal dens will not be destroyed or disturbed during breeding/pupping season (December 1 through May 31). . A biological monitor will be on site for any work activities within suitable kit fox habitat. Prior to construction activities each day, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site to verify that no kit foxes are present. The biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect Project activities in coordination with the Project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of kit foxes. The biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Installation of barrier fencing around the work site may be used to further limit the risk of direct impacts on kit fox. If necessary, barrier fencing will be used to prevent kit foxes from entering the work site and getting injured or killed by equipment but will at no time inhibit the kit fox’s ability to move between its den and other habitats that allow breeding, feeding, and sheltering. All barriers will be removed at the end of construction or O&M work. . Any excavated, steep-walled holes or trenches more than 2 feet (0.6 meter) deep will be covered at the close of each working day with plywood or similar materials or escape ramps will be installed in the hole or trench. Before any hole or trench is filled, it will be inspected for trapped animals. . All construction pipes, culverts, or similar structures with a diameter of 4 inches (10 centimeters) or more that are stored at a construction site overnight will be thoroughly inspected for kit foxes before the pipe is buried, capped, or moved. If a kit fox is discovered inside a pipe, that section of pipe will not be moved until the kit fox has left the pipe. . Use of rodenticides and herbicides in the Project area will be limited to the extent feasible. Use of any such compounds will observe label and other restrictions mandated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, California Department of Food and Agriculture, and other State and federal legislation. If rodent control must be conducted, zinc phosphide will be used as feasible because it presents a lower risk to kit foxes. MM BIO-28 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to San Joaquin kit fox. Compensatory mitigation will be required for temporary and permanent impacts to San Joaquin kit fox habitat. Compensation may take the form of (a) acquiring and dedicating lands into conservation easements or (b) purchasing mitigation credits at compensation ratios that have been approved by State and federal agencies. Impacts within conservation easements may require compensatory mitigation at higher ratios than impacts outside of easements, and mitigation will be consistent with the requirements of the easement. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-28 provide a variety of avoidance and minimization measures for listed and other special-status species and their habitats. Preconstruction surveys would be conducted for special-status species including plants (MM BIO-1), Alameda whipsnake (MM BIO-7), blunt-nosed leopard lizard (MM BIO-8), California Species of Special Concern reptiles and amphibians (MMs BIO-9 and BIO-14), giant garter snake (MM BIO-10), western pond turtle (MM BIO-11), California red-legged frog (MM BIO-13), California tiger salamander (MM BIO-14), burrowing owl (MM BIO-16), least Bell’s vireo (MM BIO-19), Swainson’s hawk (MM BIO-20), tricolored blackbird (MM BIO-22), other specialstatus and native birds (MMs BIO-18 and BIO-23), American badger (MM BIO-24), special-status bats (MM BIO-25), special-status kangaroo rats (MM BIO-26), and San Joaquin kit fox (MM BIO-27). These mitigation measures include a suite of species-specific avoidance and minimization measures for specialstatus species, if present, to be implemented during construction and O&M activities. These avoidance and minimization measures include biological monitoring; seasonal restrictions; buffers around occupied habitats, burrows, and nests; relocation of individuals from work areas to nearby suitable habitat out of harm’s way; exclusion fencing in occupied habitats; restrictions on herbicide and rodenticide use; and management of potential wildlife pitfalls to avoid entrapment. Where avoidance of impacts to occupied habitats is not feasible, Western would provide compensatory mitigation and habitat replacement as described in Mitigation Measures BIO-3 (plants), BIO-4 (federally listed branchiopods), BIO-6 (valley elderberry longhorn beetle), BIO-12 (special-status reptiles), BIO-15 (listed amphibians), BIO-17 (burrowing owl), BIO-21 (Swainson’s hawk), and BIO-28 (San Joaquin kit fox). Compensatory mitigation would vary by species and impact area, consistent with agency-accepted guidelines and permit conditions (as applicable). Compensatory mitigation for most species can be achieved through (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. Together, implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-28 would effectively avoid, minimize, and compensate for impacts to special-status plants and wildlife and their habitats, and this impact would be less than significant in each Project segment. Impact BIO-2 Adversely and substantially affect native plant communities, including riparian areas or other sensitive communities. Construction activities would result in direct adverse effects to native vegetation, including sensitive communities, primarily from vegetation removal and grading for access roads, tower pads, and other temporary and permanent ground disturbance. Loss of sensitive native vegetation is adverse in a regional context, due to limited distribution. Direct impacts to native vegetation would be moderate in intensity, as vegetation removal would be dispersed throughout the entire Project area. Table 4.4-1 presents estimated temporary and permanent disturbance by vegetation and landform type within the Project corridor. Because the exact locations of Project features is not yet known, the estimates were developed by calculating the proportion of the total acres in each segment corridor that would be subject to temporary and permanent disturbance, and applying that proportion to the amount of each habitat type in the corridor. Only those impacts that would occur entirely within the corridors (i.e., new structures, pulling sites, the new Tracy East Substation [North Segment], and the new Los Banos West Substation [San Luis 500-kV Segment]) can be estimated because vegetation was mapped only within the corridors (see Figure 3 of Appendix C). Roads and material storage yards may occur outside the corridors and would result in additional temporary and permanent direct impacts to vegetation during construction. See Appendix E for Project disturbance assumptions. Indirect effects to vegetation during construction could occur from dust, erosion, and degradation of habitat and competition from spread of invasive weeds; these effects would range from short-term (dust and erosion) to long-term (habitat degradation and spread of weeds). Indirect effects would be of the same type but of a lower magnitude during O&M activities. Impacts to great valley riparian forest and scrub habitats and freshwater emergent wetlands would occur if large woody vegetation was removed from the water’s edge in riparian habitats. This could result in additional solar heating of the water. Removing vegetation in riparian zones could also result in erosion with the subsequent increase in sedimentation of the watercourse. This could reduce the value of the habitat to aquatic and semi-aquatic wildlife. However, sedimentation control measures would be implemented to prevent sediment from reaching riverine habitat. Where previously cleared areas are not available, it may be necessary to clear vegetation for pulling sites and staging areas. These areas may include locations where pulling sites occur at turning structures. Removing vegetation in these areas would be a short-term impact because temporarily disturbed areas would be restored following construction. However, this ground disturbance may contribute to the introduction or spread of noxious weeds. The introduction and spread of invasive weeds can adversely affect natural plant communities by displacing native plant species that provide shelter and forage for wildlife species. Vegetation removal and other land-disturbing activities and access road use can contribute to the introduction or spread of invasive weeds. Equipment would be washed prior to entering sensitive areas within the Project area to avoid introducing new weed seeds. In addition, seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. Where appropriate, herbicides would be used to control weeds, but use would conform with standards in the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database to avoid adverse effects to non-target species and habitats. Weed control measures would be implemented during construction and O&M activities. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts to native vegetation, including sensitive plant communities, would be significant absent mitigation. This impact would be the same for the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Table 4.4-1. Disturbance to Vegetation and Landforms in the Proposed Project Corridor Type North Segment Central Segment San Luis Segment 500-kV San Luis Segment 70-kV South Segment Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Temporary (acres) Permanent (acres) Aqueducts and other waters* 0.76 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.01 Ephemeral creek* 0.10 0.01 3.66 0.35 0.04 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.17 0.02 Freshwater marsh* 0.16 0.02 0.09 0.01 0.20 0.02 0.21 0.00 0.01 0.00 Grassland, native perennial* 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Intermittent creek* 0.01 0.00 1.08 0.10 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.15 0.01 Irrigation ditches* 0.26 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.28 0.03 0.28 0.00 0.45 0.04 Lake* 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.02 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.00 Pond* 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Riparian great valley forest* 0.00 0.00 0.75 0.07 0.30 0.03 0.31 0.00 0.00 0.00 Riparian great valley scrub* 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Vernal pool* 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.11 3.40 0.01 0.00 0.03 0.00 Waters, drainage* 0.25 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.36 0.00 1.46 0.14 Waters, impoundment* 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Waters, river* 0.04 0.00 0.94 0.09 0.17 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 Wetlands, other* 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 Wetlands, seasonal* 0.27 0.03 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 Wildflower fields* 0.00 0.00 2.16 0.21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Barren 1.01 0.10 1.56 0.15 1.07 0.10 1.05 0.00 2.83 0.27 Commercial 1.01 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Coyote brush scrub 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.45 2.51 0.56 0.00 1.76 0.17 Grain fields planted with hay or alfalfa 17.45 14.78 6.10 0.59 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.76 0.17 Grassland, non-native annual 17.89 1.70 220.35 21.34 43.65 55.20 13.06 0.01 78.51 7.59 Irrigated pastures 0.85 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Orchards 0.99 0.09 5.93 0.57 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Other 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.01 0.94 0.09 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 Agriculture, unspecified 0.00 0.00 3.73 0.36 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.75 0.56 Vineyards 0.00 0.00 1.45 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total 41.07 17.02 247.93 24.01 47.44 61.42 16.11 0.01 93.02 9.00 *Vegetation and landforms marked with an asterisk (*) are considered sensitive. Mitigation Measures for Impact BIO-2 MM BIO-1 Conduct surveys for special-status plants and sensitive habitats MM BIO-2 Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities MM BIO-29 Avoidance and minimization measures for vernal pool and seasonal wetland habitats. During construction and O&M activities in the vicinity of vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands, Western will implement the following measures. During O&M Category A Activities (see Appendix D): . Vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads unless soils are dry. Soils will be considered sufficiently dry for vehicle access when they resist compaction, and after annual plants have set seed (generally June 1 to September 30, or as determined by qualified personnel based on personal observation of the soils). For patrolling the ROW off of established roads in a pickup truck, or for inspecting hardware on structures with a bucket truck, vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands will be avoided by 50 feet (15 meters) during the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31). No avoidance will be necessary if soils are completely dry. During construction and O&M Category B and C activities (Appendix D) in the vicinity of vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands: . Vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads unless soils are dry. Soils will be considered sufficiently dry for vehicle access when they resist compaction, and after annual plants have set seed (generally June 1 to September 30, or as determined by an agency-approved biologist based on personal observation of the soils). If vegetation management activities were proposed within 250 feet (76 meters) of a vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, or seasonal wetland, an agency-approved biologist will be present at all times to ensure the protection of the work-area limits below, or qualified personnel will clearly flag or fence the limits of the work area, according to limits presented in the following, prior to the maintenance activity. (The herbicide restriction measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database supersede those below where they are different.) . Mixing or application of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals will be prohibited. . Herbicide application to target vegetation with hand-held applicator (cut-stump treatment) will be prohibited within 25 feet (7.6 meters) in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31) and allowed up to the edge of the pool or seasonal wetland in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). . Herbicide application with power sprayers for spot treatment and selective elimination of target species will be prohibited within 100 feet (30.5 meters) in any season. . Broadcast herbicide application by vehicle with boom for treating large or dense areas of the ROW will be prohibited within 150 feet (45.7 meters) in any season. . Manual clearing of vegetation (chainsaw, axe, clippers) will be allowed up to the edge of the pool or seasonal wetland in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31); a buffer will not be necessary in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). . Mechanical clearing of vegetation (heavy-duty mowers, crawler tractors, or chippers) will be prohibited within 100 feet (30.5 meters) in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31); a buffer will not necessary in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). . For ground-disturbing activities, a 50-foot (15-meter) wet season or 25-foot (7.6-meter) dry season buffer zone from the edge of the vernal pool or wetland will be maintained and the vernal pool or wetland will be protected from siltation and contaminant runoff by use of erosion control. Erosion-control materials will be of a tightly woven natural fiber netting or similar material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians (e.g., coconut coir matting). No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near vernal pools and seasonal wetlands. Erosion-control measures will be placed between the outer edge of the buffer and the activity area. All fiber rolls and hay bales used for erosion control will be certified as free of noxious weed seed. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. . For activities such as installation or repair of underground components (water, power, communication, or ground electrical line) or soil borings, a 250-foot (76-meter) buffer zone will be maintained. A smaller buffer could be approved after a site assessment by an agency-approved biologist, but must include silt fencing or other sediment control, to be established no less than 50 feet (15 meters) from the wetland boundary. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. MM BIO-30 Avoidance and minimization measures for sensitive wetland habitats. During construction and O&M activities in the vicinity of seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, and marshes, and their associated habitats, Western will implement the following measures. During O&M Category A activities (see Appendix D): . The following activities will be prohibited at all times within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, and their associated habitats: – vehicle access, except on existing access and maintenance roads – dumping, stockpiling, or burying of any material – mixing of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals – open petroleum products During construction and O&M Category B and C activities (see Appendix D): . The following activities will be prohibited at all times within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, and their associated habitats: – vehicle access, except on existing access and maintenance roads – dumping, stockpiling, or burying of any material, except as required for specific O&M activities such as rip-rap – mixing of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals – open petroleum products . For vegetation management or maintenance within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of any seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, or any of their associated habitats, the following work-area limits will be provided (the herbicide restriction measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database supersede those below where they are different): – Only manual clearing of vegetation will be permitted – Foliar application of herbicides will be prohibited. Only cut-stump treatments of target vegetation will be allowed using herbicide approved for aquatic use by the EPA and in coordination with the appropriate land manager. . For ground-disturbing activities, a 100-foot (30.5-meter) buffer zone will be maintained from the edge of the seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, marsh, or their associated habitats for protection from siltation and runoff of contaminants by use of erosioncontrol measures. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. Erosion-control materials will be of a tightly woven natural fiber netting or similar material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians (e.g., coconut coir matting). No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or marshes. Erosioncontrol measures will be placed between the outer edge of the buffer and the activity area. All fiber rolls and hay bales used for erosion control will be certified as free of noxious weed seed. . Western will obtain applicable section 404 discharge and 401 water-quality permits prior to any maintenance activities that must take place within jurisdictional wetlands or other waters of the U.S. These will be coordinated with USACE and RWQCB as needed. . Dewatering work for maintenance operations adjacent to or encroaching on seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or marshes will be conducted to prevent muddy water and eroded materials from entering the water or marsh. . All stream crossings will be constructed such that they reduce the potential for stream flows to result in increased scour, washout, or disruption of water flow. To the extent feasible, stream crossings will be located in stream segments without riparian vegetation, and structure footings will be installed outside of stream banks. Should Western need to modify existing access roads or install new access roads, they will be built at right angles to streams and washes to the extent feasible. Trees providing shade to water bodies will be trimmed only to the extent necessary and will not be removed unless they presented a specific safety concern. . Trees that must be removed will be felled to avoid damaging riparian habitat. They will be felled out of and away from the stream maintenance zone and riparian habitat, including springs, seeps, bogs, and any other wet or saturated areas. Trees will not be felled into streams in a way that will obstruct or impair the flow of water, unless instructed otherwise. Tree removal that could cause streambank erosion or result in increased water temperatures will not be conducted in and around streams. Tree removal in riparian or wetland areas will be done only by manual methods. MM BIO-31 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to sensitive plant communities. Western will purchase credits in an appropriate mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank for the vegetation community to be impacted. If a mitigation bank is not available, Western will contribute in-lieu fees to a mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank that can provide appropriate mitigation for the vegetation type. Western will work with the appropriate resource agency (USFWS or CDFW) to ensure adequate compensation. If no mitigation bank, conservation bank, or in-lieu-fee compensation is available, then Western will prepare a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan that describes the compensatory mitigation measures that will be implemented for these vegetation communities. The mitigation plan will be submitted to the CDFW for approval and will outline performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. Impacts within conservation easements may require compensatory mitigation at higher ratios than impacts outside of easements, and mitigation will be consistent with the requirements of the easement. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measures BIO-1, BIO-2, BIO-29, and BIO-30 provide a variety of avoidance and minimization measures for native plant communities, including riparian areas or other sensitive communities. Mitigation Measure BIO-1 requires surveys for sensitive habitats prior to construction. Mitigation Measures BIO-2, BIO-29, and BIO-30 require a variety of avoidance and minimization measures for sensitive communities to be implemented during construction and O&M. These avoidance and minimization measures include restrictions on off-road travel; erosion- and sediment-control measures; topsoil salvage for use in restoration; restrictions on herbicide use; avoidance of vernal pool and seasonal wetland habitats during the wet season; prohibitions on vehicle access, dumping/stockpiling, mixing of chemicals, and open petroleum products near wetland habitats; management of construction and O&M activities to prevent runoff into wetlands; measures to ensure minimize stream crossing impacts; and restrictions on activities that would damage riparian habitat. Where avoidance of impacts to sensitive communities is not feasible, Western would provide compensatory mitigation and habitat replacement as described in Mitigation Measures BIO-31. Together, implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1, BIO-2, BIO-29, BIO-30, and BIO-31 would effectively avoid, minimize, and compensate for impacts to native plant communities, including riparian areas or other sensitive communities. This impact would be less than significant in the North, Central, South, and San Luis segments. Impact BIO-3 Substantially interfere with the movement or migration of any native resident or migratory fish or wildlife species, or impede the use of native wildlife nursery sites for more than one reproductive season. The Proposed Project would not impact fish movement or migration, as no facilities would be built within waterways that support native fish. Due to the intermittent locations of construction activity and its temporary nature, terrestrial wildlife would not be physically prevented from moving around Project equipment in the transmission corridor, and the widely spaced towers would not physically obstruct wildlife movement during O&M. Access roads would be used infrequently except for temporary localized use during construction and O&M, and would not permanently obstruct movement. The Proposed Project’s impacts to terrestrial wildlife movement and migration would be minor and shortterm. There are no known wildlife nursery sites in the Project area, and no impacts would occur. During Proposed Project operation, transmission lines may interfere with bird movement and migration by providing a collision and electrocution hazard. Pursuant to EPMs, Western would implement current best industry practices to minimize collision and electrocution risks from Project facilities during operation. This impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact BIO-4 Have substantial adverse effects on wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State. The following summarizes acres of potentially jurisdictional wetlands and waters of the U.S. and waters of the State in each segment corridor. See Figure 3 of Appendix C for the locations of potentially jurisdictional features. Western will avoid impacts within wetlands and Waters of the U.S. and State to the extent feasible. . North Segment – 34.4 acres . Central Segment – 77.0 acres . San Luis Segment (500-kV) – 42.3 acres . San Luis Segment (70-kV) – 42.4 acres . South Segment – 18.4 acres Access roads and new structures would be sited outside of wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State to the extent feasible. If avoidance is not feasible, direct adverse impacts could include removal of riparian vegetation from jurisdictional features; construction of access roads, culverts, or other Project components within jurisdictional waters; discharge of fill; degradation of water quality; and increased erosion and sediment transport. While loss of wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State would be site-specific, the context of this impact would be regional due to the limited distribution and high biological value of these resources. However, direct impacts would be short-term and minor due to the limited areas of potential impact. Indirect adverse impacts could include alterations to the existing topographical and hydrological conditions and the introduction of non-native, invasive plant species. The context of this impact is regional, and while some indirect effects are short-term and minor in intensity, the spread of invasive weeds would be a long-term impact of moderate intensity. Indirect effects would be of the same type but of a lower magnitude during O&M activities. Western’s implementation of a variety of EPMs as part of the Project would avoid or minimize impacts to wetlands and water of the U.S. and State during construction and O&M. Vehicles would be restricted to designated access routes and work areas, and temporary work areas would be restored following construction. Equipment would be washed prior to entering sensitive areas to avoid introducing new weed seeds. In addition, seed mixtures applied for erosion control and restoration will be certified as free of noxious weed seed, and will be composed of native species or sterile nonnative species. Where appropriate, herbicides would be used to control weeds, but use would conform with standards in the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database to avoid adverse effects to non-target species and habitats. The EPMs also require stormwater runoff control from work areas and erosion control during construction and O&M; this would prevent materials from entering jurisdictional waters and would prevent loss of soil in wetland areas. A hazardous-spill plan will be developed prior to construction and will remain in effect for all O&M activities. Fill, riprap, and other instream work would be limited to the minimum area required for access or protection of Western facilities and would be conducted during low- or no-flow conditions and would not restrict stream flows. All construction activities and vehicle access would be routed around wet areas, and if wet areas cannot be avoided, Western would use wide-track or balloon tire vehicles and equipment and/or timber mats. Nonetheless, under CEQA any direct and indirect impacts to jurisdictional wetlands and waters would be significant absent mitigation in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Mitigation Measures for Impact BIO-4 MM BIO-29 Avoidance and Minimization Measures for Vernal Pool and Seasonal Wetland Habitats. MM BIO-30 Avoidance and Minimization Measures for Sensitive Wetland Habitats MM BIO-32 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to wetlands and waters. Compensation for loss of wetlands and waters will depend on habitat value and integrity, and may take the form of creation, restoration, enhancement, or preservation. Federal and State agencies have a no-net-loss of wetlands policy, which requires that any permanent loss of wetlands be mitigated. Mitigation can be accomplished through purchase of credits in an approved wetland mitigation bank or contribution of in-lieu fees to a conservation bank or other conservation organization that will create the wetlands as mitigation/ compensation for impacts from the Project. If these options are not available then mitigation will be accomplished by the creation of new wetlands on site or in an appropriate off-site location. For creation of new wetlands, Western will develop and implement a wetland mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan in compliance with USACE and RWQCB guidelines. The plan will outline performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. All newly created wetlands must be monitored and maintained for a minimum of 5 years to ensure achievement of performance standards and success criteria. Annual reporting to the USACE and RWQCB are required as part of monitoring. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measures BIO-29 and BIO-30 require a variety of avoidance and minimization measures for wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State to be implemented during construction and O&M. These avoidance and minimization measures include restrictions on off-road travel; erosion- and sedimentcontrol measures; topsoil salvage for use in restoration; restrictions on herbicide use; avoidance of seasonal wetland habitats during the wet season; prohibitions on vehicle access, dumping/stockpiling, mixing of chemicals, and open petroleum products near wetland habitats; management of construction and O&M activities to prevent runoff into wetlands; measures to ensure minimize stream crossing impacts; and restrictions on activities that would damage riparian habitat. Where avoidance of impacts to wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State is not feasible, Western would provide compensatory mitigation as described in Mitigation Measures BIO-32. Together, implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-29, BIO-30, and BIO-32 would effectively avoid, minimize, and compensate for impacts to wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State. This impact would be less than significant in the North, Central, South, and San Luis segments. Impact BIO-5 Conflict with any local policies or ordinances protecting biological resources, such as a tree preservation policy or ordinance. The following local and regional policy documents were reviewed for consistency with the Proposed Project: . East Alameda County Conservation Strategy . Alameda County General Plan and Tree Ordinance . San Joaquin County General Plan . Stanislaus County General Plan . Merced County General Plan Generally, these policies and ordinances support the preservation, enhancement, and restoration of natural habitats and protection of special-status species. Because of the extensive planning involved in Project design, including implementation of Western’s EPMs, as well as Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32, the Proposed Project would be consistent with local and regional policies and ordinances protecting biological resources. No impact would occur. Impact BIO-6 Conflict with the provisions of an adopted local, regional, State, or federal habitat conservation plan. Habitat conservation plans (HCPs) in the Project area include the following: . North Segment – Bay Delta Conservation Plan, San Joaquin County Multi-Species Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJMSCP) . Central Segment – SJMSCP, Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) . San Luis Segment – None . South Segment – None The Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area HCP covers activities associated with repowering and continued maintenance and operation of wind turbines in Alameda County, and is not applicable to the Proposed Project. The Bay Delta Conservation Plan is not yet adopted, and will focus on restoring the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta ecosystem while securing California’s water supplies. It is not applicable to the Proposed Project. The SJMSCP covers 912,640 acres in San Joaquin County, and includes 97 covered species. The goals of the SJMSCP are to “provide a strategy for balancing the need to conserve open space and the need to convert open space to non-open space uses while protecting the region’s agricultural economy; preserving landowner property rights; providing for the long-term management of plant, fish and wildlife species, especially those that are currently listed, or may be listed in the future, under the federal ESA or CESA; providing and maintaining multiple-use open spaces which contribute to the quality of life of the residents of San Joaquin County; and accommodating a growing population while minimizing costs to project proponents and society at large.” (SJCOG, 2000). Portions of the Proposed Project are within areas covered by the SJMSCP. Species covered in the SJMSCP that occur within the Project area include diamond-petaled California poppy, caper-fruited tropidocarpum, California red-legged frog, Pacific pond turtle, tricolored blackbird, loggerhead shrike, Swainson’s hawk, burrowing owl, and San Joaquin kit fox. Western would coordinate with the San Joaquin Council of Governments for impacts to special-status species covered under the SJMSCP. The Proposed Project would not conflict with any adopted HCP, so no impact would occur. A number of conservation easements established to protect biological resources occur in the Project area, including the Simon Newman Ranch (Central Segment), the CCWD Corral Hollow property (pending; Central Segment), the Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve (Central Segment), the USFWS South Preserve (Central Segment), the Cubiburu Preserve (Central Segment), the Romero Ranch (San Luis Segment), and a permanent conservation easement for the protection of San Joaquin kit fox just north of O’Neill Forebay (San Luis Segment). The Proposed Project would avoid impacts within conservation easements to the extent feasible (Mitigation Measure BIO-2), and Western would comply with all applicable requirements within conservation easements (Mitigation Measures BIO-28 and BIO-31). The Proposed Project would not conflict with the provisions of any existing conservation easements, and no additional mitigation is required. This impact would be less than significant. Some conservation easement agreements may prohibit ground disturbance or other project activities within the easement boundaries, creating the potential for the Proposed Project to conflict with the provisions of these agreements. Such conflict, if it were to occur, would be potentially significant absent mitigation in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Mitigation Measures for Impact BIO-6 MM BIO-2 Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities MM BIO-28 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to San Joaquin kit fox MM BIO-31 Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to sensitive plant communities MM BIO-33 Minimization measures for conservation easements. Western will consult with easement holders and implement measures to minimize impacts to any existing or pending conservation easements along the Project alignment, to ensure that the Project does not conflict with the provisions of any conservation easements or otherwise impair or interfere with the conservation values of the easement property. For both construction and O&M activities, Western will minimize ground disturbance and will provide compensation at the required ratios for each easement, as applicable. Minimization measures can include, but not be limited to, siting staging and storage areas outside of easement boundaries, limiting ground disturbance to the minimum feasible area, limiting Project personnel within the easement property to only those actively required at any given time during both construction and O&M, and minimizing the duration of work within the easement during construction and O&M. Where a conservation easement prohibits new ground disturbance, Western will minimize impacts by attempting to span covered areas, routing around easement boundaries, or other methods developed through consultation with the easement holder, including amending the easement agreement to allow and compensate for construction, operation, and maintenance of the Proposed Project. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measures BIO-2, BIO-28, BIO-31, and BIO-33 require a variety of avoidance and minimization measures for activities within conservation easements to be implemented during construction and O&M. These avoidance and minimization measures include compliance with all applicable requirements within conservation easements, limiting ground disturbance, providing compensatory mitigation per the requirements of each affected easement (as applicable), and limiting the size of crews and duration within easement properties. Mitigation Measure BIO-33 also requires coordination and consultation with affected easement holders to identify any additional measures appropriate to each easement. Together, implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-2, BIO-28, BIO-31, and BIO-33 would effectively avoid, minimize, and compensate for impacts within existing and pending conservation easements. This potential impact would be less than significant with mitigation in the North, Central, San Luis and South segments. 4.4.4 Corridor Alternatives The following describes the impacts of each alternative to biological resources, relative to the impacts from the Proposed Project. No new impacts to biological resources would be introduced by any of the alternatives, but direct and indirect impacts may differ in magnitude from those described for the Proposed Project. Table 4 of Appendix C provides a comparison of habitat types in the proposed and alternative corridors, and Chapter 5 of Appendix C presents a detailed analysis of alternatives with respect to biological resources. 4.4.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be the same length as the Proposed Project in the Central Segment and would have the same number of support structures. However, it would result in approximately 23 acres of additional permanent disturbance associated with access roads due to the more rugged terrain. This alternative has more wildflower fields, Great Valley riparian forest, intermittent creeks, and seasonal wetlands than the Proposed Project corridor in the Central Segment, and less ephemeral creeks, freshwater marsh, and vernal pool habitat. More special-status plants were found in this alternative alignment compared with the Proposed Project. This alternative corridor also contains approximately 73.3 more acres of designated critical habitat for the California red-legged frog compared to the Proposed Project. Impacts to biological resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type, duration, and context; however, the intensity of impacts would be somewhat greater than the Proposed Project due to the greater amount of sensitive biological resources in this alignment. The alternative corridor also has a eucalyptus grove within the floodplain of Lone Tree Creek that supports a variety of nesting birds. Impacts of this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA, with implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32. 4.4.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 0.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project in the San Luis Segment, would have two more support structures, and would result in approximately 1.2 acres of additional permanent disturbance and 1.8 acres of additional temporary disturbance. This alternative has more ephemeral creek, native grasslands, seasonal wetlands, and coyote brush scrub than the Proposed Project. The alternative has less Great Valley riparian forest, freshwater marsh, intermittent creek, and other potentially jurisdictional waters than the Proposed Project corridor, and the Butts Road Alternative would likely impact less sensitive plant communities than the Proposed Project. However, this alternative has more potential blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat than the Proposed Project, and is more likely to adversely impact this listed species. This alternative would not cross the permanent San Joaquin kit fox conservation easement north of O’Neill Forebay. Impacts to biological resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type, duration, and context; however, the intensity of impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard would be somewhat greater than the Proposed Project while the intensity of impacts to sensitive plant communities and jurisdictional resources would be less. Impacts of this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA, with implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.2 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have six more support structures, and would require approximately 9 miles of additional new access roads in the San Luis Segment. The West of Cemetery Alternative would result in an estimated additional 43.6 acres of permanent and 5.4 acres of temporary disturbance compared with the Proposed Project. This alternative has more native grasslands, seasonal wetlands, and coyote brush scrub than the Proposed Project. The alternative has less ephemeral creek, Great Valley riparian forest, freshwater marsh, intermittent creek, and other potentially jurisdictional waters than the Proposed Project and would impact less sensitive plant communities than the Proposed Project. However, this alternative has more potential blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat than the Proposed Project, and would result in greater adverse impacts to this listed species. This alternative would not cross the permanent San Joaquin kit fox conservation easement north of O’Neill Forebay. Impacts to biological resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type, duration, and context; however, the intensity of impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard would be somewhat greater than the Proposed Project while the intensity of impacts to sensitive plant communities and jurisdictional resources would be less. Impacts of this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA, with implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative corridor would be the same length as the 70-kV Proposed Project in the San Luis Segment, would have the same number of support structures, and would require the same length of new access roads. The West of O’Neill Forebay alternative has more non-native grassland, seasonal wetland, and northern claypan vernal pool habitat than in the 70-kV San Luis Segment, but less Great Valley cottonwood riparian forest and coastal and valley freshwater marsh habitat. This alternative supports more potential habitat for special-status species including San Joaquin kit fox, burrowing owl, California tiger salamander, and blunt-nosed leopard lizard. This alternative would cross the permanent San Joaquin kit fox conservation easement north of O’Neill Forebay as well as the Romero Ranch conservation easement; these easements would be avoided by the Proposed Project San Luis (70-kV) corridor. Impacts to biological resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type, duration, and context; however, the intensity of impacts to special-status species would be somewhat greater than the Proposed Project. Impacts of this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA, with implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32. 4.4.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative has the same length of new access roads and same number of support structures as the Proposed Project in the South Segment, and its study area largely overlaps that of the Proposed Project. The only notable difference in biological resources is that this alternative corridor has less non-native grassland than the Proposed Project, but overall impacts to biological resources would be largely similar. Impacts of this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA, with implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be approximately 1.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project, and would have eight more support structures. It would require approximately 3 miles additional permanent access roads, although it would not require temporary access roads (the Proposed Project would require about 2 miles of temporary roads), and it would require upgrades to 8 fewer miles of existing roads. The Billy Wright Road Alternative would permanently impact approximately 10.2 fewer acres than the Proposed Project, but would temporarily impact approximately 5.2 more acres. This alternative includes more non-native grassland but less agricultural lands than the Proposed Project in the South Segment. It has more potential habitat for the blunt-nosed leopard lizard. There are approximately 4.8 more acres of potentially jurisdictional resources in the Billy Wright Road Alternative corridor compared with the Proposed Project in the South Segment, although as with the Proposed Project, most of these areas can likely be avoided. Impacts to biological resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type, duration, and context; however, the intensity of impacts to special-status species would be somewhat greater than the Proposed Project. Impacts of this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA, with implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1 through BIO-32. 4.4.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built; therefore, there would be no new impacts to biological resources.  4.5 Cultural Resources 4.5.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on cultural resources if any activity associated with their construction or operation would result in: . Damage or degradation to, or loss of a unique archaeological resource as defined by CEQA or a resource of archaeological, tribal, or historical value that is listed, or eligible for listing, on the National Register of Historic Places (National Register) or California Register of Historical Resources (California Register). (Impact CUL-1); . Adverse effects to National Register– or California Register–eligible properties that cannot be satisfactorily mitigated as determined through consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer and other interested parties (Impact CUL-2); . Alterations to setting, feeling, or association for a National Register– or California Register–eligible properties (Impact CUL-3); . Alterations of the setting or feeling to resources of concern to tribal or other interest groups (Impact CUL-4); . Loss or degradation of a TCP or sacred site, or if the property or site is made inaccessible for future use (Impact CUL-5); . Unmitigated adverse effect to a TCP determined to be National Register–eligible or identified as important to tribes (Impact CUL-6); or . Disturbance of any human remains, including those interred outside of formal cemeteries (Impact CUL-7). 4.5.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Before construction, all construction personnel will be instructed by Western on the protection of cultural and paleontological resources and that cultural and paleontological resources might be present in the study area. To assist in this effort, the construction contract will address applicable federal and State laws regarding cultural and paleontological resources, including historic and prehistoric resources, and fossils. Construction personnel will be informed of the penalties for collection and removal of such resources, as well as the importance of these resources and the purpose and necessity of protecting them. Contractors will be trained to stop work near any discovery and notify Western’s regional environmental manager immediately, who will ensure that the resource is evaluated and avoided. Known cultural and paleontological resources will be flagged for avoidance and a minimum distance maintained for work disturbances. . Western will have qualified archaeological monitors on site during ground disturbing construction activities. Archaeological monitors will look for any inadvertent cultural resource discoveries or other sensitive resources that may be important to tribes. Archaeologists will stop work in the immediate area should any such resources be uncovered until an assessment of the find can be made by Western. . Cultural resources would be considered during post-EIS/EIR phases of Project implementation. Surveys would be completed prior to any ground disturbing activities or Project construction activities in order to inventory and evaluate cultural resources of the Project, or of any components that might be added to the Project, or any existing components that would be modified. These surveys and any resulting historic property evaluation and analysis of effects would be conducted in accordance with Section 106 of the NHPA and in consultation with the SHPO. If adverse effects to historic properties cannot be avoided, Western would develop a PA or MOA in consultation with the SHPO to determine appropriate mitigation to avoid lessen any adverse effects to cultural resources. 4.5.3 Proposed Project Potential impacts to cultural resources were analyzed for all phases of the Project, including construction, O&M, and for all alternatives. While a number of cultural resources were identified as being present within both the Proposed Project and alternative corridors, additional, unidentified resources likely exist in areas that were inaccessible to survey and below the ground surface. In total, 62 percent of the Proposed Project corridor has been surveyed for cultural resources. The potential exists for additional cultural resources to be identified within the Project area. See Table 4.5-1 for cultural resources present and the survey coverage of the Proposed Project area, separated by segment. Table 4.5-1. Resources and Survey Coverage by Project Segment Segment Resources. Present Percent Surveyed Acres Surveyed Percent Remaining to be Surveyed North Segment 2 45 338.5 55 Central Segment 1 71 2092.5 29 San Luis Segment 2 32 455.8 68 San Luis Segment 70-kV 1 58 295.2 42 South Segment 0 53 392.8 47 1 – Refers to cultural resources recommended as eligible to the National or California Registers as well as unevaluated resources. Source: Ballard et al., 2015; Holm et al., 2014b The majority of resources that were encountered within the Proposed Project area were evaluated for their National/California Register eligibility. A total of four resources that have been previously recommended eligible for listing on the National Register or California Register were identified within the Proposed Project area: the California Aqueduct (P-24-001931), the McCabe Road Bridge (P-24-001934), the buried San Joaquin Pipelines No. 1-3 (P-39-004860), and the Delta-Mendota Canal (P-39-000089). All of these are related to water conveyance and any impacts to them would be similar. Potential impacts were identified based on the predicted interaction between construction, operation, and maintenance activities with the affected environment and the impact significance criteria described above. Project EPMs, were considered as Project features in the impact analysis. Construction and Operations and Maintenance During construction, impacts to cultural resources would be primarily caused by ground-disturbing activities, including operation of heavy equipment, trenching for utilities, grading and vegetation clearing for access roads, site leveling, auguring of transmission tower foundations, and other infrastructure excavations. These activities would have the potential to cause direct adverse effects to significant cultural resources. Indirect impacts could include visual and noise impacts to the setting and feeling of cultural resources and damage caused by vibrations and dust from construction to historic period builtenvironment resources and prehistoric rock art. Impacts to cultural resources could also occur during O&M activities such as grading access roads and vegetation removal. The work procedures for major repairs, such as replacement of towers or conductors, would be essentially identical to that of new construction. Impact CUL-1 Cause damage, degradation to, or loss of a unique archaeological resource as defined by CEQA or a resource of archaeological, tribal, or historical value that is listed, or eligible for listing, on the National Register or California Register. Construction and O&M activities, particularly any involving ground disturbance, can cause direct adverse impacts to cultural resources. Additionally, these activities can produce dust, sound, vibration, and other issues that may cause indirect damage or degradation to cultural resources. Any adverse impacts from ground-disturbing activities, such as access roads, would be permanent, while adverse impacts to setting would likely be temporary from construction activities, and long-term from the presence of transmission line structures. As per the Project EPMs, Western would identify and evaluate any cultural resources in unsurveyed portions of the Project area prior to construction and would avoid any known cultural resources. Pursuant to EPMs, if National Register– or California Register–eligible resources are identified within currently unsurveyed areas of the Project, construction and O&M activities would avoid them. If adverse effects to National Register– or California Register–eligible resources cannot be avoided, Western would develop a PA or MOA in consultation with the SHPO to determine appropriate mitigation to avoid or reduce any adverse effects to cultural resources. Archaeological monitors would be on site during ground-disturbing activities in order to minimize impacts to inadvertently discovered cultural resources. Therefore, the construction of the Proposed Project would not result in damage or degradation to, or loss of a resource that is listed, or eligible for listing, on the National Register or California Register. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. However, if unanticipated discoveries of unique archaeological resources as defined by CEQA are encountered, this impact would be significant without mitigation as there are no analogous EPMs to avoid impacts to these resources. Mitigation Measures for Impact CUL-1 MM CUL-1 Prepare and implement Archaeological Resource Management and Treatment Plan for unique archeological resources. In the case of the inadvertent discovery of a unique archaeological resource, Western will have a Secretary of Interior–qualified archaeologist prepare and implement an Archaeological Resource Management and Treatment Plan that specifies the treatment of the resources. Prior to implementation, this document shall be submitted for review to the Authority as CEQA Lead Agency. This plan shall be tailored to the specific needs of the Project area and the particular resources present there. The proposed Archaeological Resources Management and Treatment Plan must minimally address the following: . A general research design shall be developed that: – Charts a timeline of all research activities. – Recapitulates any existing paleoenvironmental, prehistoric, ethnohistoric, ethnographic, and historic contexts to create a comprehensive historic context for the Project vicinity. – Poses research questions and testable hypotheses specifically applicable to the resource types encountered. – Clearly articulates why it is in the public’s interest to address the research questions that it poses. . Artifact collection, retention/disposal, and curation policies shall be discussed, as related to the research questions formulated in the research design. These policies shall apply to archaeological materials and documentation resulting from evaluation and data recovery of unique archaeological resources. . Person(s) expected to perform each of the tasks, their responsibilities, and the reporting relationships between Project construction management and the mitigation and monitoring team shall be identified. . The manner in which Native American observers or monitors shall be included, the procedures to be used to select them, and their roles and responsibilities shall be described. . All impact-avoidance measures (such as flagging or fencing) to prohibit or otherwise restrict access to sensitive resource areas that are to be avoided during ground disturbance, construction, and/or operation shall be described. Any areas where these measures are to be implemented shall be identified. The description shall address how these measures would be implemented prior to the start of ground disturbance and how long they would be needed to protect the resources from Project-related impacts. . The commitment to curate of all archaeological materials retained as a result of the archaeological investigations (survey, testing, data recovery), in accordance with CEQA Lead Agency requirements and the California State Historical Resources Commission’s Guidelines for the Curation of Archaeological Collections (HRC, 1993), into a retrievable storage collection in a public repository or museum shall be stated. Level of Significance After Mitigation Implementation of Mitigation Measure CUL-1 would reduce the impact of construction to unanticipated discoveries of unique archaeological resources, as defined by CEQA, by requiring the development and implementation of an Archaeological Resource Management and Treatment Plan. This would reduce the impact by avoiding the resource(s) to the extent feasible and documenting the information contained in the archaeological deposits through data recovery excavation or other appropriate method of data recovery. With mitigation, the impact would be reduced to a less-than-significant level. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact CUL-2 Cause adverse effects to National Register– or California Register–eligible properties that cannot be satisfactorily mitigated. Construction and O&M activities, particularly any involving ground disturbance could cause direct adverse effects to eligible properties. Additionally, these activities can produce dust, sound, vibration, and other issues that may cause indirect adverse effects to eligible properties. Any adverse impacts from grounddisturbing activities, such as access roads, would be permanent, while adverse impacts to setting would likely be temporary from construction activities and long-term from the presence of transmission line structures. Prior to construction, Western would identify any cultural resources in unsurveyed portions of the Project area and avoid any National Register– or California Register–eligible resources or enter into a PA or MOU with the SHPO, as per Project EPMs above. As of April 2015, the only eligible resources currently identified in the Proposed Project area are the California Aqueduct (P-24-001931), the Delta- Mendota Canal (P-39-000089), McCabe Road Bridge (P-24-001934), and the San Joaquin Pipelines No. 1-3 (P-39-004860). As currently designed, with Project EPMs, no impacts to these resources are expected. If additional National Register– or California Register–eligible resources are identified during preconstruction survey or during construction, resource-specific mitigation measures from the PA/MOU would be implemented to minimize impacts. Therefore, construction of the Proposed Project would not cause significant effects to National Register– or California Register–eligible properties that cannot be satisfactorily mitigated and this impact would be negligible. This impact would be less than significant. This impact is the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact CUL-3 Cause alterations to setting, feeling, or association for a National Register– or California Register-eligible properties. Temporary impacts to the setting, feeling, or association of eligible resources may result from construction and O&M vehicles and increased noise and dust generated during ground disturbances. Long-term, but temporary, impacts to the setting, feeling, or association of historical resources could occur from the presence of structures over the life of the Project. Prior to construction, Western would identify any cultural resources in unsurveyed portions of the Project area and avoid any National Register– or California Register–eligible resources or enter into a PA or MOU with the SHPO regarding the treatment of these resources, as per Project EPMs above. As of April 2015, the only eligible resources currently identified in the Proposed Project area are the California Aqueduct (P-24-001931), the Delta-Mendota Canal (P-39-000089), McCabe Road Bridge (P-24-001934), and the San Joaquin Pipelines No. 1-3 (P-39-004860). As transmission lines are already a part of the setting of these resources, an additional line would not likely cause alterations to their integrity of setting, feeling, or association. If additional National Register– or California Register–eligible resources are identified during preconstruction survey or during construction, resource-specific mitigation measures from the PA/MOU would be implemented to minimize impacts. Therefore, construction and O&M of the Proposed Project would not cause substantial alterations to setting, feeling, or association to National Register– or California Register– eligible properties and this impact would be less than significant. This impact is the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact CUL-4 Cause alterations to the setting or feeling of resources of concern to tribal or other interest groups. The presence of transmission structures and access roads, as well as removal of vegetation, grading, and other construction-related activities could cause alterations to the setting or feeling of resources of concern to tribal or other interest groups. These impacts could be temporary or permanent in nature. At publication, no resources of concern to tribal or other interest groups have been identified within or in the vicinity of the Proposed Project corridor through Western’s consultation efforts or a search of the NAHC Sacred Lands File (see Section 106 Consultation, Chapter 5). Therefore, there would be no adverse effects on such resources. Construction and O&M of the Proposed Project would not cause alterations of the setting or feeling to resources of concern to tribal or other interest groups. Therefore, under CEQA, there would be no direct or indirect impact. This impact is the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact CUL-5 Cause loss or degradation of a TCP or sacred site, or cause the property or site to be made inaccessible for future use. The presence of transmission structures and access roads, as well as removal of vegetation, grading, and other construction-related activities could cause loss or degradation of a TCP or sacred site, or cause the property or site to be made inaccessible for future use. These impacts could be temporary or permanent in nature. At publication, no TCPs or sacred sites have been identified within or in the vicinity of the Proposed Project through Western’s consultation efforts or a search of the NAHC Sacred Lands File (see Section 106 Consultation, Chapter 5), therefore there would be no adverse effects on such resources. Construction and O&M of the Proposed Project would not cause loss or degradation of a TCP or sacred site, or cause the property or site to be made inaccessible for future use. Therefore, under CEQA, there would be no direct or indirect impact. This impact is the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact CUL-6 Cause any unmitigated adverse effects to a TCP determined to be National Register– eligible or identified as important to tribes. The presence of transmission structures and access roads, as well as removal of vegetation, grading, and other construction-related activities could cause unmitigated adverse effects to a TCP determined to be National Register–eligible or identified as important to tribes. These impacts could be temporary or permanent in nature. As of September 2014, no TCPs have been identified within or in the vicinity of the Proposed Project through Western’s consultation efforts or a search of the NAHC Sacred Lands File (see Section 106 Consultation, Chapter 5), therefore there would be no unmitigable adverse effects on such resources. Construction and O&M of the Proposed Project would not cause loss or degradation of a TCP or sacred site, or cause the property or site to be made inaccessible for future use. Therefore, under CEQA, there would be no impact. This impact is the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact CUL-7 Disturb any human remains, including those interred outside of formal cemeteries. As of April 2015, no human remains or burials have been identified within the Proposed Project corridor, therefore there would be no disturbance to these remains. However, investigation or earth-disturbing activities performed prior to construction could reveal the presence of human remains. Any disturbance of human remains would likely be permanent in duration. With currently available data, construction of the Proposed Project would not disturb any human remains, including those interred outside of formal cemeteries. However, if human remains are encountered, any disturbance would be significant without mitigation. Mitigation Measures for Impact CUL-7 MM CUL-2 Treatment of inadvertent discovery of human remains. If human remains are encountered, Western’s Regional Preservation Official (RPO) and the relevant county coroner shall be notified within 24 hours of the discovery. No further excavation or disturbance of the site or any nearby area reasonably suspected to overlie potential remains shall occur until the relevant county coroner has determined the appropriate treatment and disposition of the human remains. If the coroner determines that the remains are or are believed to be Native American, they will contact the NAHC, who will notify a designated most likely descendant (MLD). The MLD will inspect the site and will determine, in consultation with the property owner and Western’s RPO, the disposition of the remains. Level of Significance After Mitigation If human remains are encountered, the enactment of Mitigation Measure CUL-2 may render this impact less than significant by following the procedures set up in California law. These procedures would ensure that the remains are minimally damaged, evaluated for their cultural affiliation, documented, and that consultation regarding disposition occurs. In some cases, data contained in the burials will be recovered, if authorized by the descendant community. These actions reduce this impact to a less-thansignificant level. However, if the belief system of the descendant community places particular importance on leaving burials undisturbed, this impact may remain significant. It is likely, however, that mitigation would reduce the impact to a less-than-significant level, as described above. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.5.4 Corridor Alternatives The majority of resources that were encountered within the alternative corridors were evaluated for their National/California Register–eligibility. The same National Register– or California Register–eligible resources that were identified in the Proposed Project are present in the alternatives. As expressed above in Western’s Project EPMs, cultural resources would be avoided during the siting of new transmission line structures and access roads. Additionally, two resources were identified in the alternative corridors that have not been evaluated for their National Register or California Register eligibility. See Table 4.5-2 for cultural resources present and the survey coverage of the alternative corridors, separated by segment. Table 4.5-2. Resources and Survey Coverage by Alternative Alternative Resources. Present Percent Surveyed Acres Surveyed Percent Remaining to be Surveyed Patterson Pass 2 72 2046.3 28 Butts Road 1 47 477.9 53 West of Cemetery 0 36 424.8 64 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV 2 51 536.1 49 San Luis to Dos Amigos 0 55 394.1 45 Billy Wright Road 0 40 159.0 60 1 – Refers to cultural resources recommended as eligible to the National or California Registers as well as unevaluated resources. Source: Ballard et al., 2015; Holm et al., 2014b 4.5.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative As per the Project EPMs, Western would identify and evaluate any cultural resources in unsurveyed portions of the Project area prior to construction and would avoid any known cultural resources. If National Register– or California Register–eligible resources are identified within currently unsurveyed areas of the Project, construction and O&M activities would avoid them. If adverse effects to National Register– or California Register–eligible resources cannot be avoided, Western would develop a PA or MOA in consultation with the SHPO to determine appropriate mitigation to avoid lessen any adverse effects to cultural resources. As of April 2015, two resources were identified in this alternative corridor that have not been evaluated for eligibility to the National Register and California Register: a multicomponent site consisting of both prehistoric and historic period elements and a prehistoric site. As part of the Project, prior to construction, Western would evaluate these resources, identify and evaluate any cultural resources in unsurveyed portions of the Project area, and avoid any known cultural resources. If cultural resources cannot be avoided, Western will enter into a PA or MOU with the SHPO, as per Project EPMs above. Therefore, during the construction and O&M phases of the Project, Impacts CUL-2 and CUL-3 would be less than significant and there would be no impact under CUL-4 through CUL-6. With implementation of Mitigation Measures CUL-1 and CUL-2, Impacts CUL-1 and CUL-7 would be less than significant during the construction and O&M activities. Impacts to cultural resources from the Patterson Pass Alternative would be similar to those of the Proposed Project. 4.5.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative Western would enact its Project EPMs for construction and O&M work, including identification and evaluation of cultural resources in unsurveyed areas. Therefore, during the construction and O&M phases of the Project, Impacts CUL-2 and CUL-3 would be less than significant and there would be no impact under CUL-4 through CUL-6. With implementation of Mitigation Measures CUL-1 and CUL-2, Impacts CUL-1 and CUL-7 would be less than significant during the construction and O&M. Impacts to cultural resources from the Butts Road Alternative would be similar to those of the Proposed Project. West of Cemetery Alternative Western would enact its Project EPMs for construction and O&M work, including identification and evaluation of cultural resources in unsurveyed areas. Therefore, during the construction and O&M phases of the Project, Impacts CUL-2 and CUL-3 would be less than significant and there would be no impact under CUL-4 through CUL-6. With implementation of Mitigation Measures CUL-1 and CUL-2, Impacts CUL-1 and CUL-7 would be less than significant during the construction and O&M phases. Impacts to cultural resources from the West of Cemetery Alternative would be similar to those of the Proposed Project. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative Western would enact its EPMs for construction and O&M work, including identification and evaluation of cultural resources in unsurveyed areas. Therefore, during the construction and O&M phases of the Project, Impacts CUL-2 and CUL-3 would be less than significant and there would be no impact under CUL-4 through CUL-6. With implementation of Mitigation Measures CUL-1 and CUL-2, Impacts CUL-1 and CUL-7 would be less than significant during the construction and O&M phases. Impacts to cultural resources from the West of O’Neill Forebay Alternative would be similar to those of the Proposed Project. 4.5.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative Western would enact its Project EPMs for construction and O&M work, including identification and evaluation of cultural resources in unsurveyed areas. Therefore, during the construction and O&M phases of the Project, Impacts CUL-2 and CUL-3 would be less than significant and there would be no impact under CUL-4 through CUL-6. With implementation of Mitigation Measures CUL-1 and CUL-2, Impacts CUL-1 and CUL-7 would be less than significant during the construction and O&M tasks. Impacts to cultural resources from the San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative would be similar to those of the Proposed Project. Billy Wright Road Alternative Western would enact its Project EPMs for Project construction and O&M work, including identification and evaluation of cultural resources in unsurveyed areas. Therefore, during the construction and O&M phases of the Project, Impacts CUL-2 and CUL-3 would be less than significant and there would be no impact under CUL-4 through CUL-6. With implementation of Mitigation Measures CUL-1 and CUL-2, Impacts CUL-1 and CUL-7 would be less than significant during the construction and O&M tasks. Impacts to cultural resources from the Billy Wright Road Alternative would be similar to those of the Proposed Project. 4.5.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built and no ground disturbance would occur. Therefore, there would be no new impacts to cultural resources.  4.6 Environmental Justice 4.6.1 Thresholds of Significance Environmental justice is not a topic considered under CEQA; therefore, there are no CEQA significance criteria for Environmental Justice. The following significance threshold is defined by Executive Order 12898. The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse environmental justice effects if any activity associated with their construction or operation would: . Result in a disproportionate distribution of impacts on minority or low-income populations (Impact EJ-1). 4.6.2 Environmental Protection Measures There are no EPMs applicable to Environmental Justice. 4.6.3 Proposed Project Construction Construction of the Proposed Project could result in a disproportionate distribution of impacts to environmental justice communities associated with each of the issue areas in this EIS/EIR. The following is a discussion of the distribution of minority and low-income population within the Project Area and their relation to the potential environmental impacts that could result from the Proposed Project construction. Impact EJ-1 Result in a disproportionate negative effect on minority or low-income populations in the Project Area, as defined by Executive Order 12898. The study area covers 11 census blocks in portions of Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties with a combined minority population of 9,012 (31.7 percent). The North Segment of the Proposed Project crosses one census block group containing a 60 percent minority population (see Table 3.6-1). The Central, San Luis, and South segments of the Proposed Project corridor do not traverse areas that contain high minority populations. On average, the study area has a similar minority population distribution as the region. Therefore, environmental impacts associated with construction of the Proposed Project would not disproportionately affect minority populations in the study area. The study area contains 2,477 low-income individuals in the workforce or 10.1 percent of the study area population. The Project corridor would not cross census block groups that contain low-income populations greater than 50 percent. Because the potentially affected low-income population accounts for such a small percentage, environmental impacts associated with construction of the Proposed Project would not result in disproportionate adverse impacts to low-income populations in the study area. Impacts to environmental justice communities could occur during operation and maintenance activities through a disproportional distribution of Project-related social and physical impacts. The work procedures for major repairs, such as replacement of towers or conductors, would be essentially identical to that of new construction. Because adverse impacts from such work would be similar to or less severe in nature and duration than that of new construction as described above, Impact EJ-1 would be short-term and negligible during the operation and maintenance phase of the Proposed Project. 4.6.4 Coridor Alternatives As illustrated in Figures 3.6-1 and 3.6-2, the corridor alternatives would not result in adverse impacts to environmental justice communities as they do not cross any census blocks with minority or low-income populations greater than 50 percent and do not contain a low-income or minority population percentage meaningfully greater than the low-income population percentage in the region. 4.6.5 No Action/No Project Alternative Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, construction and operation of the San Luis Transmission Project would not occur. Therefore, environmental justice impacts would not occur. Greater rate increases are expected to occur under the No Action/No Project Alternative than under the Proposed Project. Rate increases can have a disproportionate impact on low-income and minority residents. 4.7 Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources 4.7.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on geology, soils, and mineral resources if any activity associated with their construction or operation would result in: . Exposure of people or structures to potential substantial adverse effects due to slope instability, effects of earthquake (fault rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, landslide), slumps, rockfalls, or adverse soil conditions such as compressible, expansive, or corrosive soils (Impact GEO-1); . Substantial soil erosion or the loss of topsoil, including soil loss or accelerated erosion due to disturbance that results in the formation of rills and/or gullies, or that results in sediment deposition in downgradient lands or water bodies to the extent that existing uses cannot be maintained (Impact GEO-2); . Compaction or mixing of soils that would cause long-term loss of productivity or significantly alter current use or restoration of vegetation (Impact GEO-3); . Loss of availability of a locally important mineral resource recovery site delineated on a local general plan, specific plan, or other land use plan (Impact GEO-4); or . Placement of a structure on unstable soils that would result in exposure to landslide, lateral spreading, subsidence, liquefaction, or collapse (Impact GEO-5). 4.7.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. . Non-biodegradable debris will be collected and removed from the ROW daily and taken to a disposal facility. Slash and other biodegradable debris will be left in place or disposed of appropriately. . All soil excavated for structure foundations would be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Excess soil would be removed from the site and disposed of appropriately. Areas around structure footings would be reseeded with native plants. . Erosion control measures would be implemented to prevent loss of soil. Construction would be in conformance with Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management Environmental Guidance Manual. . At completion of work and at the request of the landowner/manager, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. . On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads will be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. . Construction vehicle movement outside of the easement will be restricted (to the extent feasible) to approved access or public roads. . Where feasible, all construction activities will be rerouted around wet areas while ensuring that the route does not cross sensitive resource areas. . If wet areas cannot be avoided, Western will use vehicles, ground mats, and equipment that minimize ground impacts. 4.7.3 Proposed Project The Proposed Project could affect geology, soils, and mineral resources through ground disturbance associated with construction and O&M activities, including operation of heavy equipment, grading and vegetation clearing for access roads, site leveling, auguring of transmission tower foundations, and other infrastructure excavations. These activities would have the potential to cause both direct and indirect adverse effects to geology, soils, and mineral resources. Mitigation Measures for Impact GEO-1 Impact GEO-1 Expose people or structures to potential substantial adverse effects due to slope instability, effects of earthquake (fault rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, landslide), slumps, rockfalls, or adverse soil conditions such as compressible, expansive, or corrosive soils. The Proposed Project does not cross any active earthquake fault zones, landslide zones or liquefaction zones. However, construction and O&M of the Proposed Project could result in adverse direct and indirect effects due to geologic and seismic hazards. If not properly designed and sited, structures and access roads could be constructed on unstable slopes or expansive soils. These geologic and seismic hazards could result in damage or collapse, especially for transmission structures. Unstable slopes and expansive soils could result in movement or failure of structure foundations that could result in hazards to workers or the public, or failure of the transmission line. A preconstruction geotechnical investigation would be required to verify the adequacy of the underlying soils and geologic formations to support structure foundations and to provide a stable road bed. Under CEQA, this impact would be significant without mitigation. Mitigation Measures for Impact GEO-1 MM GEO-1 Conduct geotechnical investigations and implement project design recommendations. A California-registered Professional Geotechnical Engineer shall evaluate the potential for geotechnical hazards and unstable slopes on the centerline route and areas of new road construction or widening of roads with slopes with more than a 15 percent gradient. Geological hazards shall be evaluated during final design specification for each structure location and road construction area. Project design recommendations will include measures to stabilize and protect Project structures from geologic hazards. Geologically unstable sites will be avoided or stabilized prior to construction. Additionally, expansive soils (such as vertisols) will be avoided or stabilized prior to tower installation. Level of Significance After Mitigation In conformance with Mitigation Measure GEO-1, a California-registered Professional Geotechnical Engineer would evaluate the potential for geotechnical hazards and unstable slopes on the centerline route and areas of new road construction or widening of roads with slopes with more than a 15 percent gradient. Geological hazards would be evaluated during final design specification for each structure location and road construction area. Geologically unstable sites would be avoided or stabilized prior to construction. Additionally, expansive soils (such as vertisols) would be avoided or stabilized prior to tower installation. With implementation of MM GEO-1, this impact would be reduced to a less than significant level. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact GEO-2 Cause substantial soil erosion or the loss of topsoil, including soil loss or accelerated erosion due to disturbance that results in the formation of rills and/or gullies, or that results in sediment deposition in downgradient lands or water bodies to the extent that existing uses cannot be maintained. Construction of the Proposed Project would include soil-disturbing activities, such as leveling and excavation of the transmission tower sites as well as grading and improvement of existing access roads. This soil disturbance could lead to increased erosion and sedimentation. In conformance with Western’s EPMs and Construction Standard 13, erosion control methods would be implemented to prevent loss of soil, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. Therefore, sediment-related impacts to downgradient lands or water bodies would be negligible from construction and O&M of the Proposed Project. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact GEO-3 Compact or mix soils in a way that would cause long-term loss of productivity or significantly alter current use or restoration of vegetation. Soils would be compacted and mixed during the creation of tower foundations and access road construction and improvement. In conformance with Western’s EPMs and Construction Standard 13, compacted soils from construction activities in hay meadows, alfalfa fields, pastures, and cultivated productive lands will be returned to preconstruction conditions upon completion of the work unless otherwise specified by the land owner/manager. The land and facilities would be restored as nearly as practicable to their original conditions. Areas around structure footings would be reseeded with native plants. Permanently compacted soils would be limited to tower footings and new or improved access and spur roads. After construction, temporary access and spur roads would be restored and revegetated, and the compacted portion of those roads would be limited to the minimum width necessary for operation and maintenance of the Proposed Project. Therefore, impacts to soil productivity or vegetative cover would be negligible due to construction and O&M of the Proposed Project. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact GEO-4 Cause a loss of availability of a locally important mineral resource recovery site delineated on a local general plan, specific plan, or other land use plan. Sand and gravel that could be used by the construction industry is found throughout the study area, and three small areas of regionally significant deposits of concrete aggregate would be traversed by the Proposed Project. However, all three of these areas are very narrow at the point where they are traversed by the Proposed Project and it is anticipated that transmission towers and associated infrastructure would be placed outside of these mineral resource recovery sites. Western will coordinate with the affected counties and landowners to ensure that there would be no loss of availability of a locally important mineral resource. The Proposed Project corridor mostly parallels an existing transmission corridor, and does not cross any active mining sites. Therefore, impacts to locally important mineral resource recovery sites would be negligible due to construction of the Proposed Project. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact GEO-5 Place a structure on unstable soils, which would result in exposure to landslide, lateral spreading, subsidence, liquefaction, or collapse. The Proposed Project is not located within any mapped landslide or liquefaction zones. However, without proper design and siting, the Proposed Project could place structures on unstable soils. Improperly designed or sited structures or access roads could trigger landslides. Also, unstable soils could result in movement or failure of structure foundations that could result in hazards to workers or the public, or failure of the transmission line. A preconstruction geotechnical investigation would be required to verify the adequacy of the underlying soils to support structure foundations and to provide a stable road bed. Under CEQA, this impact would be significant without mitigation. Mitigation Measures for Impact GEO-5 MM GEO-1 Conduct geotechnical investigations and implement project design recommendations. Level of Significance After Mitigation In conformance with Mitigation Measure GEO-1, a California-registered Professional Geotechnical Engineer would evaluate the potential for geotechnical hazards and unstable slopes on the centerline route. Areas of new road construction or widening of roads with slopes with more than a 15 percent gradient would be evaluated prior to construction. Geological hazards would be evaluated during final design specification for each structure location. Geologically unstable sites would be avoided or stabilized prior to construction. Additionally, expansive soils (such as vertisols) would be avoided or stabilized prior to tower installation. With implementation of MM GEO-1, this impact would be reduced to a less-thansignificant level. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.7.4 Corridor Alternatives 4.7.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative has 9 more miles of new access roads and the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. Due to the increased ground disturbance, this alternative would have greater impacts to geology, soils, and mineral resources as the Proposed Project during construction, operation, and maintenance. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 through GEO-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 and GEO-5 would be less than significant with implementation of mitigation. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-2 through GEO-4 would be less than significant and no mitigation is required. 4.7.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 0.5 mile longer than the Proposed Project, would have two more support structures, and would increase the need for new access roads by 2 miles. Therefore, soil disturbance would be increased compared to the Proposed Project, and potential impacts to geology, soils, and mineral resources also would be slightly increased. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 through GEO-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 and GEO-5 would be less than significant with implementation of mitigation. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-2 through GEO-4 would be less than significant and no mitigation is required. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.2 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have six more support structures, and would increase the need for new access roads by 9 miles. The terrain would be slightly steeper than the Proposed Project corridor for this segment, which would slightly increase the potential for erosion and landslide. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 through GEO-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 and GEO-5 would be less than significant with implementation of mitigation. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-2 through GEO-4 would be less than significant and no mitigation is required. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads, and has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore, would have essentially the same impact to geology, soils, and mineral resources during construction, operation, and maintenance as the Proposed Project. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 through GEO-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 and GEO-5 would be less than significant with implementation of mitigation. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-2 through GEO-4 would be less than significant and no mitigation is required. 4.7.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative has the same length of new access roads and same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore would have essentially the same impact to geology, soils, and mineral resources during construction, operation, and maintenance. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 through GEO-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 and GEO-5 would be less than significant with implementation of mitigation. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-2 through GEO-4 would be less than significant and no mitigation is required. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have eight more support structures, and would need 3 miles of additional new access roads. Additionally, the topography of this alternative corridor is slightly steeper than the Proposed Project corridor for this segment, and therefore, the potential for erosion and landslides would be increased slightly. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 through GEO-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for GEO-1 and GEO-5 would be less than significant with implementation of mitigation. Direct and indirect impacts for GEO-2 through GEO-4 would be less than significant and no mitigation is required. 4.7.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built, and therefore no impacts to geology, soils, and mineral resources would occur. 4.8 Land Use 4.8.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on land use if any activity associated with their construction or operation would: . Conflict with applicable land use plans, policies, goals, or regulations (Impact LU-1); . Conflict with existing utility rights-of-way (Impact LU-2); . Substantially disrupt or divide the physical arrangements of an established community; or have a substantial adverse effect on the existing character of the vicinity (Impact LU-3); . Conflict with State or federally established, designated, or reasonably foreseeable planned special use areas (e.g., recreation, wildlife management area, game management areas, waterfowl production areas, scientific and natural areas, wilderness areas, areas of critical environmental concern, etc.) (Impact LU-4); . Result in nuisance impacts attributable to incompatible land uses (Impact LU-5); or . Result in the permanent conversion of existing land uses (Impact LU-6). 4.8.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Post proper signage in areas within the easements that will require temporary closure or limited access to accommodate certain land uses. Where feasible, construction activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If this is not feasible and damage occurs, the landowner may be compensated. . On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads would be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. . During construction, movement would be limited (to the greatest extent feasible) to the access roads and within a designated area in the easements to minimize damage to agricultural land. . Construction and operations would be conducted in a manner that prevents unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings to preserve the natural landscape to the extent practicable. . No permanent discoloring agents would be applied to rocks or vegetation to indicate limits of survey. . Damaged fences and gates would be repaired or replaced to restore them to their preconstruction condition. 4.8.3 Proposed Project Impact LU-1 Conflict with applicable land use plans, policies, goals, or regulations. Transmission Lines Land use planning for the Proposed Project is described in Sections 3.8.1.1 and 3.8.1.2. The Proposed Project would be constructed adjacent to existing transmission lines in zones that are compatible with utility infrastructure development. The Proposed Project would cross through lands designated as open space or urban reserve in the Villages of San Luis Community Planning area, but these areas are currently zoned as large-scale agricultural, which allows utility infrastructure development, such as the existing transmission lines in the area; and according to the Villages Community Plan, no zoning changes are currently proposed or planned. The Proposed Project would also cross lands administered by the California Department of Parks and Recreation on either end of Los Banos Creek Reservoir, and an area to the north of the reservoir administered by DWR. The Proposed Project would be located adjacent to existing transmission facilities, which are an allowed use on the State-administered lands. The Proposed Project would widen the total width of existing utility corridors along the entire route. An additional utility corridor would be compatible with existing agricultural land uses, allowing continued use as farming and ranching lands. The addition of the Proposed Project would effectively reduce the amount of land available for some other types of land uses, especially residential development. Under current planning guidelines, residential development would be an incompatible use within the lands zoned for agricultural use in the four counties affected by the Project. In the near term, therefore, increased residential or commercial development within the area is not anticipated. The Proposed Project would be compatible with adjacent land uses, and would not conflict with land use planning in the Project area. Under CEQA, this would be a less-than-significant impact. Substations Construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation would require up to 50 acres within the existing 150-acre Jasper Sears OHV Use Area, which is on land owned by Reclamation and leased to CDPR within the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area. The proposed substation would not be compatible with the parcels’ current designated recreational use under the SLRRLSRA RGMP/GP. Mitigation for impacts to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area from construction of the proposed Los Banos West Substation could include modification of existing facilities within the OHV Area (Mitigation Measure REC-2 [Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area]). However, implementation of such mitigation would be outside of the jurisdiction of Western and the Authority. The agencies therefore cannot conclusively determine whether such mitigation is feasible (i.e., capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, and other factors). This impact remains significant and unavoidable. Additionally, refer to Section 4.12 (Recreation) for a discussion of impacts to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Impact LU-2 Conflict with existing utility rights-of-way. The Project would add new easements adjacent to existing transmission lines. As standard practice, Western will coordinate with adjacent utility easement holders throughout the final design of the Project to ensure the new lines will not conflict with the existing easements. The Project would therefore have a negligible effect on existing utility rights-of-way. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact LU-3 Cause substantial disruption or divide of the physical arrangements of an established community; or substantial adverse impact on the existing character of the vicinity The Proposed Project would mostly travel through sparsely populated rural areas adjacent to existing high-voltage transmission lines. Construction and operation of the Proposed Project would not change allowable land uses within the Project area, such as farming and ranching, which is allowed within the existing transmission line easements. It would not disrupt or divide any community, or have an adverse impact on the existing character of the area. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact LU-4 Conflict with State or federally established, designated or reasonably foreseeable planned special use areas (e.g., recreation, wildlife management area, game management areas, waterfowl production areas, scientific and natural areas, wilderness areas, areas of critical environmental concern, etc.). Substations As described under Impact LU-1, construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation would not be compatible with the parcels’ current designated recreational use under the SLRRLSRA RGMP/GP. Mitigation for impacts to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area from construction of the proposed Los Banos West Substation could include modification of existing facilities within the OHV Area (Mitigation Measure REC-2 [Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area]). However, implementation of such mitigation would be outside of the jurisdiction of Western and the Authority. The agencies therefore cannot conclusively determine whether such mitigation is feasible. This impact remains significant and unavoidable. Additionally, refer to Section 4.12 (Recreation) for a discussion of impacts to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Transmission Lines The Proposed Project crosses over recreation lands and wildlife management areas near the San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay complex, and the Los Banos Creek Reservoir. Impacts to recreation are discussed in Section 4.12. The Proposed Project would also cross two ranches just north of the San Luis Reservoir that are under conservation easement, partially as mitigation that arose from a consultation with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the California State Water Resources Control Board related to operation of the Central Valley Project. The Proposed Project would also cross parcels near Corral Hollow Road that were purchased by the Contra Costa Water District (CCWD) as mitigation to compensate for loss of wildlife habitat caused by construction of the Los Vaqueros Reservoir Expansion Project; as of October 2015, these parcels are the subject of a draft conservation easement that would transfer management of the lands to the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and calls for livestock grazing as the primary method of maintaining the conservation values of the property. The Proposed Project would be located adjacent to existing transmission lines, which are an existing and allowed use in all unprotected areas of the Project. The Project would not block movement of people and animals through these lands, and would in general not conflict with the land management objectives of the administrating agency. Therefore, construction or operation of the Proposed Project would not conflict with any state or federal special land use area. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant.However, construction or operation of the Proposed Project may include activities that are not compatible with the proposed or active conservation easement agreements of the existing mitigation properties near Corral Hollow and San Luis Reservoir. The draft conservation easement agreement covering the CCWD Corral Hollow properties, for example, currently prohibits many activities associated with proposed transmission line construction. Therefore, construction and operation of the Proposed Project could conflict with special use areas, which would constitute a significant impact if such conflict results in a significant adverse change in the conservation values of the protected property. Mitigation Measure for Impact LU-4 MM LU-1 Minimize impacts within conservation easements and/or amend conservation easements. Prior to commencing construction on any parcel protected by a conservation easement, Western will consult with the governmental agencies or non-governmental organizations involved in managing the parcel to determine whether construction, maintenance, or operation of the Proposed Project is a compatible use within the conservation easement. The consultation shall include the agency that is managing the easement (easement grantee, such as the CDFW), the agency or organization charged with management of the properties (easement grantor, such as CCWD or the Nature Conservancy), and any other agency involved in assuring that the conservation values of the properties are not significantly impacted (participating agencies, such as the USFWS). If such activities are deemed incompatible with the provisions of the conservation easement agreement, Western will attempt to minimize any prohibited activities on the property, or work with the grantor, grantee and participating agencies to amend the agreement to allow and compensate for any significant impact to conservation values resulting from construction, operation and maintenance of the Proposed Project. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of MM LU-1 would require minimization of physical impacts within conservation easements where project activities are prohibited or amend the allowed uses to accommodate project activities, thereby ensuring that construction and operation of the Proposed Project would not conflict with any special use area in any manner that results in a significant adverse change in the conservation values of the protected property. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact LU-5 Result in nuisance impacts attributable to incompatible land uses. The Project is mostly compatible with land uses within and adjacent to the proposed corridors. The Project would not emit substantial light or glare (see Section 4.15). Noise impacts are discussed in Section 4.9. Impact LU-6 Result in the permanent conversion of existing land uses. Under Western’s EPMs, work areas would be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. Damaged fences, gates, or other structures would be repaired or replaced. Therefore, permanent conversion of existing land uses would not occur. Under CEQA, this impact is less than significant. 4.8.4 Coridor Alternatives 4.8.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Alternative This alternative route is adjacent to the Proposed Project Route in the Central Segment. Land use impacts and CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.8.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative route is on the west side of O’Neill Forebay and runs through the same two land use planning zones (Agriculture and Foothill Pasture) as the Proposed Project. Land use impacts and CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative would be in lands zoned as Foothill Pasture. Transmission line development is compatible with this zone, as pasture use could continue post-construction. It would avoid encroachment on the residential and wildlife preserve land uses on the east side of O’Neill Forebay, but it would encroach on recreational uses on the west side of the Forebay, and on the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. Overall, impacts to land use would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the duration and intensity would likely be greater than the Proposed Project because this alternative would encroach on recreation and national cemetery lands. The CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative would be closer to important recreation uses on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay and to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, but would be farther away from the Village of Santa Nella and a wildlife refuge on the east side of the Forebay. Overall, impacts to land use would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the duration and intensity would likely be greater than the Proposed Project because this alternative would encroach on recreation and national cemetery lands. The CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.8.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative is adjacent to the Proposed Project route in the South Segment. Land use impacts and CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative would travel through lands zoned as Exclusive Agriculture and Urban Reserve within the Villages of Laguna San Luis, and then into lands zoned as Foothill Pasture for the remainder of the route. It would encroach on recreation lands to the west of Los Banos Creek Reservoir. Overall, impacts to land use would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context. Overall, impacts to Land Use would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. The CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.8.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. There would be no impacts to land use. 4.9 Noise and Vibration 4.9.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant noise impacts if any activity associated with their construction, operation, or maintenance would result in: . A substantial temporary or periodic increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project (Impact NOISE-1); . A substantial permanent increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project (Impact NOISE-2); . Noise levels that exceed applicable local or federal noise regulations or guidelines (Impact NOISE-3); . Excessive groundborne vibration or groundborne noise levels at sensitive receptor locations (Impact NOISE-4). A 3-dBA change is the minimum change in environmental noise that is perceptible to the human ear. An increase in noise levels of more than 5 dBA Leq is considered to be a substantial increase and a significant impact. 4.9.2 Environmental Protection Measures . All vehicles and equipment would be equipped with required exhaust noise abatement suppression devices. 4.9.3 Proposed Project Overview of Construction Noise Analyzing construction noise impacts involves three factors: the amplitude of noise generated by various pieces of construction equipment, the timing and duration of noise-generating activities, and the relative location of noise-sensitive areas. Noise impacts are considered more severe if they occur in early morning, evening, or nighttime hours; if the construction occurs adjacent to noise-sensitive land uses (receptors); or if construction continues over extended periods of time. Construction of the Proposed Project would be completed within about 18 months, and construction noise in any one area would generally be limited to about 1 to 2 weeks duration. Construction of the Proposed Project would involve the short-term use of heavy equipment such as cranes, drill rigs, dozers, excavators, compressors, generators, and trucks. Helicopters would also be needed to transport construction materials and to string the conductors for the transmission line. Construction of foundations for new towers would require use of a drill rig or large auger for the cast-inplace piles at each tower location. Spur roads and access roads would require use of graders, dozers, and trucks. Noise levels associated with individual pieces of equipment would generally range between 70 and 90 dBA (U.S. DOT, 1995). Noise levels for typical pieces of construction equipment (at 50 feet from the noise source) are listed in Table 4.9-1. Construction noise is usually made up of intermittent peaks and continuous lower levels of noise from active equipment. At any one location, a combination of multiple pieces of equipment may be present, and aggregated peak noise levels of up to about 100 dBA Lmax could occur within 50 feet from the construction activity. At 100 feet, the distance would attenuate these peak levels to about 94 dBA Lmax, and at 200 feet, the noise would attenuate to approximately 88 dBA Lmax. These short peaks would attenuate further to about 76 dBA Lmax for locations at 800 feet with an unobstructed line of sight. Over a typical day, average noise levels from construction would be lower than the intermittent peaks because most equipment would not be operated steadily or continuously at peak levels. At 50 feet, continuously steady construction noise levels would average approximately 77 dBA Leq. At 100 feet, these average levels would attenuate to 71 dBA Leq, and to 65 dBA Leq at 200 feet. These noise levels would diminish over additional distance and would be reduced further by any intervening structures. Impact NOISE-1 Result in a substantial temporary or periodic increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project. Two types of short-term noise impacts would occur during construction of the Proposed Project. The first type would be due to noise along area roadways from construction crew commutes and the transport of construction equipment and materials to the Proposed Project site. These trips would incrementally raise noise levels on roads leading to the various staging areas and work sites. The pieces of heavy equipment for grading and construction activities would be moved on site and remain for the duration of construction, and would therefore add to temporary rather than permanent daily traffic volumes in the Proposed Project vicinity. A high, single-event noise exposure potential at a maximum temporary level of 88 dBA Lmax from trucks passing at 50 feet may occur. However, the projected construction traffic noise would be sporadic and would be of the same nature as existing traffic noise that occurs along area roadways, including I-5, I-205, I-580, and several State highways and local roads. For areas near existing highways or other main roads, daytime intermittent construction traffic would produce an increase of less than 1 dBA Leq when compared with the existing long-term traffic noise level. Therefore, short-term, construction-related worker commutes and equipment transport noise impacts would be minor and would not cause a substantial temporary or periodic increase in ambient noise levels in the region. This impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. The second type of short-term noise impact is related to noise generated during construction of the Proposed Project. Table 4.9-1, Typical Noise Levels for Construction Equipment, lists typical construction equipment noise levels (Lmax), at 50 feet from the equipment. Table 4.9-1. Typical Noise Levels for Construction Equipment Equipment Typical Noise Levels (dBA, at 50 feet) Front loaders 85 Backhoes, excavators 80-85 Tractors, dozers 83-89 Graders, scrapers 85-89 Trucks 88 Concrete pumps, mixers 82-85 Cranes (movable) 83 Cranes (derrick) 88 Forklifts 76-82 Pumps 76 Generators 81 Compressors 83 Pneumatic tools 85 Jack hammers, rock drills 98 Pavers 89 Compacters 82 Drill rigs 70-85 Source: Adapted from U.S. DOT, 1995 Substation Construction Construction of new substations and grading and surface improvements of the existing substations would generate the highest noise levels (compared to other construction activities) because, typically, earthmoving equipment is the noisiest construction equipment. Construction noise for the SLTP was not modeled to predict exact noise levels. However, comparison to other projects shows that maximum noise levels from similar substation work would typically be approximately 100 dBA (Lmax) at the substation property line (50 feet from the noise source). As described above, continuously steady construction noise levels would average approximately 77 dBA Leq (50 feet). At 100 feet, these average levels would attenuate to 71 dBA Leq, and to 65 dBA Leq at 200 feet. The nearest sensitive receptor to the new Tracy East and Los Banos West Substations, and the existing Tracy, Los Banos, and Dos Amigos Substations is approximately 600 feet away from the substations. There are no sensitive receptors within one mile of the San Luis Substation, though day-use recreation users are nearby at the O’Neill Forebay and San Luis Reservoir. Noise from earthmoving equipment within the substations would attenuate to approximately 55 to 57 dBA Leq (or ambient levels) at the nearest sensitive receptor. The resulting noise levels would be comparable to and not greater than 5 dBA Leq over existing background daytime levels, which are likely to be between 55 and 60 dBA Leq for the receptors nearest to the substation sites and the area roadways accessing the sites. Construction noise impacts associated with proposed substation construction and improvements would be minor and temporary. This impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same for all substations affected by the Proposed Project. Transmission Line Construction New transmission system construction, access road construction, and pulling operations all generate noise. Helicopter use would generate the highest noise levels. Earth-moving activities associated with access road work and site preparation tasks would generate the next highest noise levels (compared to other construction activities). Helicopters may be used for delivery of equipment and materials from staging yards to structure sites, structure placement, hardware installation, and conductor or ground wire stringing operations. Noise information is available for the Bell 500 (MD 500) and Kaman Kmax; these are comparable to the Hughes 500, which would be used in construction of the Proposed Project. The reference noise level for the Bell 500 for hovering is 95.9 dBA Lmax at 100 feet. The reference noise level for the Kaman Kmax for hovering is 84.0 dBA Lmax at 250 feet. The total time within any given hour of the day that the helicopter will be used at one location is approximately 15 minutes, though a helicopter may travel back and forth multiple times within that hour at a given tower site location. Helicopter operations would be limited to the Proposed Project area, including staging areas, ground locations in close proximity to conductor or ground wire pulling, tensioning, and splice sites. Helicopter use and other noise-generating activities would not likely take place concurrently at the same location. Generally, helicopters would be used only in inaccessible areas of the Project, which have no sensitive receptors nearby. Typical equipment used for earth-moving activities include a grader, a dozer, and a compactor. As described above, a combination of multiple pieces of equipment may be present, and aggregated peak noise levels of up to about 100 dBA Lmax could occur within 50 feet from the construction activity. However, continuously steady construction noise levels would average approximately 77 dBA Leq at 50 feet. At 100 feet, these average levels would attenuate to 71 dBA Leq, and to 65 dBA Leq at 200 feet. The nearest sensitive receptor is approximately 370 feet (0.07 mile) from the Proposed Project corridor; there are several more within 500 feet (e.g., residences near Sullivan Road, Butts Road, McCabe Road, Billy Wright Road, Arburua Road). Even with noise abatement suppression devices, construction would likely result in more than a 5 dBA increase above ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors near the proposed corridor. However, construction noise in any one area would generally be limited to about 1 to 2 weeks duration. This short-term impact would be significant. Routine maintenance activities could include driving or flying along the transmission line corridor to inspect the facilities, repaint towers, and manage vegetation. Increases in ambient noise from occasional vehicle traffic or helicopter overflights would be negligible and of short duration. Occasionally major maintenance activities, such as tower replacement or reconductoring, may be needed in the future. These activities can create noise that is similar in nature and intensity to that of new construction, albeit at a smaller scale than construction of the Proposed Project. Mitigation Measures for Impact NOISE-1 MM NOISE-1 Provide construction notification. Notice shall be mailed no less than 15 days prior to construction to all residents, property owners, businesses, and public agencies that have facilities within 500 feet of the project area. The notice shall state the type of construction activities that will be conducted, and the location and duration of construction. MM NOISE-2 Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. Western shall implement the following noise-suppression techniques during construction and major maintenance activities to avoid violations of local noise ordinances and minimize exposure of noisesensitive receptors. . Confine construction noise to daytime, weekday hours (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) or an alternative schedule established by the local jurisdiction or land manager in areas within 1,000 feet of a sensitive receptor. . All vehicles and equipment would be equipped with noise suppression devices that are no less effective than those originally installed by the manufacturer. . Place construction equipment and route construction traffic away from sensitive receptors where feasible. . Minimize unnecessary construction vehicle use and idling time. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of Mitigation Measure NOISE-1 would reduce construction noise to the extent feasible by physically suppressing the noise or confining it to times/days and locations with the least potential for impact. Mitigation Measure NOISE-2 would alert sensitive receptors to upcoming construction noise with adequate time to make arrangements to limit their exposure to the noise (e.g., by leaving or avoiding the area during times of construction). Together, these measures would reduce this impact, but temporary or periodic noise increases may still occur at levels greater than 5 dBA Leq over existing background daytime levels at the sensitive receptors within about 500 feet of the proposed corridor. This short-term impact would be significant and unavoidable. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact NOISE-2 Result in a substantial permanent increase in ambient noise levels (above 5 dBA Leq) at sensitive receptor locations above levels existing without the Project. Corona noise would be generated during operation. For transmission lines, corona is the electrical breakdown of air into charged particles caused by the electrical field on the surface of conductors. It is generally characterized as a crackling/hissing noise. The noise level from corona is proportional to the strength of the line electric field during operation. In general, corona-related noise is audible only during wet weather from lines operated at 345-kV or higher. A study by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI, 1982) showed that fair weather audible noise from modern transmission lines of less than 500-kV is indistinguishable from background noise at the edge of a 100-foot transmission line easement; the proposed 500-kV transmission line easement would be 200 to 250 feet wide. Therefore, the Project would have negligible corona noise effects during operations. This impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact NOISE-3 Result in noise levels that exceed applicable local or federal noise regulations or guidelines. Noise attenuates quickly with distance from the source. A combination of multiple pieces of equipment may be present, and aggregated peak noise levels of up to about 100 dBA Lmax could occur within 50 feet from the construction activity. However, continuously steady construction noise levels would average approximately 77 dBA Leq (50 feet). At 100 feet, these average levels would attenuate to 71 dBA Leq, and to 65 dBA Leq at 200 feet. Temporary construction activities would be limited to 1 to 2 weeks at any one location along the transmission line. Substation construction would be much longer and would fluctuate in duration and noise intensity. The resulting noise level would not exceed the EPA or State of California noise guidelines shown in Section 3.9.1.2; however, depending on the site-specific proximity of residences, it could exceed the noise standards established by each county for compatibility with residential land use (i.e., Merced, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus) identified in Table 3.9-3 for the closest sensitive receptors identified in Section 3.9.1.1. Noise standards established in each county could also be exceeded in the unlikely case that helicopter use is necessarily close to residences. Therefore, this short-term impact would be significant. Mitigation Measures for Impact NOISE-3 MM NOISE-1 Provide construction notification. MM NOISE-2 Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. Level of Significance after Mitigation As with Impact NOISE-1, implementation of Mitigation Measures NOISE-1 and NOISE-2 would reduce construction noise and alert sensitive receptors to upcoming construction noise. Together, these measures would reduce this impact, but construction noise may still exceed local regulations or guidelines at the closest sensitive receptors. Although the construction noise would be temporary and periodic at each location, this impact would be significant and unavoidable during construction. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact NOISE-4 Result in excessive ground-borne vibration or ground-borne noise levels at sensitive receptor locations. No vibration-sensitive land uses occur in the Project vicinity. Therefore, ground vibration impacts in the context of this Project area are those that may result in nuisance, annoyance, or structural damage. A large dozer, which is the piece of equipment that would cause the greatest ground-borne vibration and ground-borne noise levels, has levels of 0.089 in/sec peak particle velocity (PPV) and 87 VdB at 25 feet (FTA, 2006). This would not exceed Caltrans’s thresholds of 0.1 in/sec PPV for prevention of structural damage for fragile buildings (Jones and Stokes, 2004) or FTA’s maximum acceptable level of 80 VdB for human response at residences (i.e., annoyance) (FTA, 2006). Therefore, construction and operation of the Proposed Project would not expose sensitive receptors to excessive groundborne vibration or groundborne noise levels. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.9.4 Corridor Alternatives 4.9.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative has 9 more miles of new access roads and same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore would cause essentially the same noise during construction, operation, and maintenance as the Proposed Project. It would be located on the west side of the existing transmission line corridor rather than on the east side, and therefore would be farther from most of the residences along the Proposed Project corridor. For example, the houses off the end of South Tracy Boulevard, on Sullivan Road and on Butts Road under this alternative would be approximately 500 feet farther from construction activities as compared to the Proposed Project. However, it would be closer to the residences south of Patterson Pass Road. Impacts NOISE-1 through NOISE-4 would be the same as described for the Proposed Project in context, type, and duration; however, the intensity would be slightly less because it would be farther from the residences. CEQA impact significance determinations and mitigation measures for this alternative would be the same as those described for the Proposed Project. 4.9.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 0.5 mile longer than the Proposed Project, would have two more support structures, and would increase new access roads by 2 miles. The noise created by construction, operation, and maintenance of this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. This alternative corridor is closer to a group of houses off McCabe Road, and closer to important recreation facilities on the O’Neil Forebay, which are as close as about 1,700 feet from this alternative corridor. This alternative would also be closer to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. Impacts NOISE-1 through NOISE-4 would be the same as described for the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the duration and intensity would likely be slightly greater than the Proposed Project due to longer length of the corridor and new access roads. This alternative would have noise effects on a greater number of receptors than the Proposed Project. CEQA impact significance determinations and mitigation measures are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.2 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have six more support structures, and would increase new access roads by 9 miles. It would be located closer to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and the residence nearby. Impacts NOISE-1 through NOISE-4 would be the same as described for the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the duration and intensity would likely be slightly more than the Proposed Project due to increased number of support structures and length of corridor and new access roads. CEQA impact significance determinations and mitigation measures are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads, and has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore would generate similar noise during construction, operation, and maintenance as the Proposed Project. No residences are in the area of this alternative corridor, though it is closer to important recreation facilities on the O’Neil Forebay, which are as close as approximately 1,700 feet from this alternative corridor. This alternative would also be closer to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery than the Proposed Project. Although different sensitive receptors would be affected, impacts NOISE-1 through NOISE-4 would be the same as described for the Proposed Project. CEQA impact significance determinations and mitigation measures are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. 4.9.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads and same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, and therefore would cause essentially the same noise during construction, operation, and maintenance as the Proposed Project. Four houses are located near this alternative corridor near Billy Wright Road. One is 200 feet to the east of the Proposed Project corridor, and another is 200 feet to the west of this alternative corridor. Another, which may not be occupied, is 300 feet away, and the fourth is 2,500 feet to the east side of the Proposed Project corridor. This alternative would reduce noise effects for two or three residences and increase effects for one residence. Impacts NOISE-1 through NOISE-4 would be the same as described for the Proposed Project. CEQA impact significance determinations and mitigation measures are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have eight more support structures, and would increase new access roads by 3 miles. The noise generated during construction, operation and maintenance from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the duration and intensity would likely be slightly more than the Proposed Project due to greater number of support structures and length of corridor and new access roads. Much of this alternative traverses less developed terrain and therefore is adjacent to fewer residences. Similar to that of the Proposed Project, this alternative traverses the Los Banos Creek Reservoir. However, the portion of the recreation area traversed by the alternative as opposed to the portion traversed by the Proposed Project contains fewer established recreation sites and would therefore result in slightly fewer impacts to sensitive receptors. CEQA impact significance determinations and mitigation measures are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. 4.9.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built and no emissions would occur; therefore, there would be no impacts to noise.  4.10 Paleontological Resources 4.10.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on paleontological resources if any activity associated with their construction or operation would: . Result in the loss of or inaccessibility to scientifically important paleontological resources (Impact PALEO-1). 4.10.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Before construction, all construction personnel will be instructed by Western on the protection of cultural and paleontological resources and that cultural and paleontological resources might be present in the study area. To assist in this effort, the construction contract will address applicable federal and State laws regarding cultural and paleontological resources, including historic and prehistoric resources, and fossils. Construction personnel will be informed of the penalties for collection and removal of such resources, as well as the importance of these resources and the purpose and necessity of protecting them. Contractors will be trained to stop work near any discovery and notify Western’s regional environmental manager immediately, who will ensure that the resource is evaluated and avoided. Known cultural and paleontological resources will be flagged for avoidance and a minimum distance maintained for work disturbances. 4.10.3 Proposed Project This section is based on the information provided in the Paleontological Resources Report, which is included as Appendix G. Based on the results of a literature review and museum records search conducted through the University of California Museum of Paleontology (UCMP), the geologic units underlying the Proposed Project study area have a paleontological resource potential ranging from low to high in accordance with the Society of Vertebrate Professionals (SVP) (2010) and BLM’s Potential Fossil Yield Classification (PFYC) system (2008). The Panoche, Moreno, Oro Loma, Briones, Neroly, and Tulare Formations, as well as the Quaternary older alluvium, are considered to have a high paleontological resource potential, equivalent to PFYC Class 4, because they have proven to yield vertebrate fossils near the Project study area and throughout California. Although the UCMP contains no vertebrate localities for the Kreyenhagen, Domengine, and Cierbo Formations within Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, or Merced Counties, these units have yielded intermittent vertebrate localities elsewhere in California; as such, they are assigned to PFYC Class 3 (moderate paleontological resource potential). The Tesla Formation and Laguna Seca Formations are assigned a low paleontological resource potential (PFYC Class 2); although they contain a number of invertebrate localities, they have not yielded significant vertebrate fossils. The portions of the Project near the flatlands on the edge of the Central Valley are on Holocene age alluvial deposits. Holocene deposits have a low paleontological resource potential recommendation (PFYC Class 2) because they are generally too young to preserve fossilized remains. However, these alluvial deposits may shallowly overlie older intact fine-grained Pleistocene-age sediments. Therefore, their paleontological resource potential is low to high, increasing with depth. Impact PALEO-1 Result in the loss of or inaccessibility to scientifically important paleontological resources. In general, the potential for a given project to result in negative impacts to paleontological resources is directly proportional to the amount of ground disturbance associated with the project. Since this Project entails construction of a new transmission line, new ground disturbances are anticipated. Consequently, the likelihood of adversely affecting scientifically significant fossils during Project development is high in sensitive areas. The following mitigation measures were developed in accordance with the standardized guidelines developed by SVP and BLM for treatment of paleontological resources and are consistent with the requirements of NEPA and CEQA. Mitigation Measures for Impact PALEO-1 MM PALEO-1 Conduct pre-construction survey. A qualified paleontologist will be retained to conduct a field reconnaissance survey of the Project area prior to any ground-disturbing activities. Any required permits will be obtained prior to the survey. Survey areas will include the entire corridor right-of-way, plus any additional easements, such as for substations, work or storage areas, or access roads. The purpose of the field survey will be to visually inspect the ground surface for exposed fossils or traces thereof and to evaluate geologic exposures for their potential to contain preserved fossil material at the subsurface. Only Project areas (as defined above) classified as having a PFYC Class 3 or higher will be subject to a pedestrian survey. Particular attention will be paid to rock outcrops, both inside and in the vicinity of the Project area, where accessible, and any areas where geologic sediments are well exposed. Areas determined to have a PFYC Class 1 or 2, or areas that are heavily disturbed or otherwise obscured by heavy vegetation will not require a field survey. Where possible, activities and structures should be located in areas of lower sensitivity for encountering paleontological resources. MM PALEO-2 Document all finds. All fossil occurrences observed during the course of fieldwork, significant or not, will be documented and recorded at the time of discovery. The data collected for each fossil occurrence should include, at a minimum, the following information: Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates, approximate elevation, description of taxa, lithologic description, and stratigraphic context (if known). In addition, each locality will be photographically documented with a digital camera. If feasible, with prior consent of the landowner(s), all significant or potentially significant fossils will be collected at the time they are observed in the field. If left exposed to the elements, fossil materials are subject to erosion and weathering. If the fossil discovery is too large to collect during the survey (e.g., a dinosaur skeleton or bone bed) and requires a largescale salvage effort, then it will be documented and a mitigation strategy will be devised pursuant to SVP (2010) guidelines. MM PALEO-3 Conduct Worker Environmental Awareness Training. Prior to the start of Project activities, all field personnel will receive worker’s environmental awareness training on paleontological resources. The training will provide a description of the fossil resources that may be encountered in the Project area, outline steps to follow in the event that a fossil discovery is made, and contact information for the Project Paleontologist and onsite monitor(s). The training will be developed by the Project Paleontologist and may be conducted concurrently with other environmental training (e.g., cultural and natural resources awareness training, safety training, etc.). MM PALEO-4 Conduct paleontological mitigation monitoring. Prior to the commencement of grounddisturbing activities, a qualified and professional paleontologist will be retained to prepare and implement a Paleontological Resource Mitigation Plan for the Project. Initially, full-time monitoring will be required during ground-disturbing activities in the areas of the Project with a recommended paleontological resource potential of Class 4 or higher (i.e., Panoche Formation, Moreno Formation, Oro Loma Formation, Briones Formation, Neroly Formation, Tulare Formation, and Quaternary older alluvium). Parttime monitoring or spot checking will occur in areas of the Project underlain by geologic units with a recommended paleontological resource potential of Class 3. In addition, spot checking will also occur in Project areas underlain by Quaternary alluvial deposits in order to determine if underlying sensitive geologic units are being impacted by construction, and at what depth. Monitoring will entail the visual inspection of excavated or graded areas and trench sidewalls. In the event that a paleontological resource is discovered, the monitor will have the authority to temporarily divert the construction equipment around the find until it is assessed for scientific significance and collected. Monitoring will include matrix screening for the presence of microfossils, the frequency of which will be determined by the Project Paleontologist. Monitoring is largely a visual inspection of sediments; therefore, the most likely fossils to be observed will be macrofossils of vertebrates (bones, teeth, tusk) or invertebrates (shells). At the discretion of the Project Paleontologist, the monitor will periodically screen sediments to check for the presence of microfossils that can be seen with the aid of a hand lens (i.e., microvertebrates). Should microvertebrate fossils be encountered during the screening process, then bulk matrix samples will be taken for processing off site. For each fossiliferous horizon or paleosol, a standard sample (4.0 cubic yards or 6,000 pounds) will be collected for subsequent wet-screening per SVP (2010) guidelines. MM PALEO-5 Procedures for fossil preparation, curation, and reporting. Upon completion of fieldwork, all significant fossils collected will be prepared for curation. Preparation will be done in a properly equipped paleontology laboratory and will include the removal of excess matrix from fossil materials, and stabilizing and repairing specimens, as necessary. Following laboratory work, all fossil specimens will be identified to the lowest taxonomic level, cataloged, analyzed, and curated. The fossil specimens must be delivered to the accredited museum repository identified on the permit and receipt(s) of collections will be submitted to Western. This delivery will be made as soon as practical but no later than 60 days after all fieldwork is completed. The cost of curation is assessed by the repository and will be the responsibility of Western. At the conclusion of laboratory work and museum curation, a Paleontological Mitigation Report will be prepared describing the results of the paleontological mitigation monitoring efforts associated with the Project. The report will include a summary of the field and laboratory methods, an overview of the Project area geology and paleontology, a specimen inventory of all taxa recovered (if any), an analysis of fossils recovered (if any) and their scientific significance, the signed receipt of confirmation of museum deposition, and recommendations. The report will be submitted to the designated repository, Western, and any other interested State or federal agencies involved within 45 days following completion of monitoring and laboratory work. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measures PALEO-1, PALEO-2, PALEO-3, and PALEO-4 requires that all paleontological resources be identified prior to ground disturbing activities, thoroughly documented and that workers be informed regarding their presence and protection. Implementation of these measures would avoid and minimize impacts to any inadvertent discoveries of paleontological resources. Mitigation Measure PALEO-5 would require preparation, curation, and reporting for any discovered resources. In combination, these mitigation measures would reduce impacts to paleontological resources to a less-than-significant level. 4.10.4 Coridor Alternatives Alternative corridors travel through similar geological units and formations, and would have similar potential to create impacts to Paleontological Resources as the Proposed Project. Intensity of impacts would essentially be proportional to the number of support structures for each route. 4.10.4.1 Central Segment The Patterson Pass Road Alternative would have the same number of structures as the Proposed Project, and be within the same geological units, and therefore would have the same impacts on paleontological resources as the Proposed Project. With the implementation of Western’s standard EPMs, construction standards, and Mitigation Measures PALEO-1 through PALEO-5, impacts to Paleontological Resources would be minor. CEQA determinations would be the same as for the Proposed Project. 4.10.4.2 San Luis Segment The Butts Road Alternative would have two more structures than the Proposed Project, and the West of Cemetery Alternative would have six more. Impacts to Paleontological Resources from either of these alternatives would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context but greater in the duration and intensity due to greater number of support structures and length of new access roads. With the implementation of Western’s standard EPMs, construction standards, and Mitigation Measures PALEO-1 through PALEO-5, impacts to Paleontological Resources would be minor. CEQA determinations would be the same as for the Proposed Project. 4.10.4.3 South Segment The San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative would have the same number of structures as the Proposed Project, and be within the same geological units, and therefore would have equal effect on Paleontological Resources. The Billy Wright Road alternative would have eight more structures and 3 more miles of access road than the Proposed Project. Impacts to Paleontological Resources from the Jasper Sears Road alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context but greater in the duration and intensity due to greater number of support structures and length of new access roads. With the implementation of Western’s EPMs, construction standards, and Mitigation Measures PALEO-1 through PALEO-5, impacts to Paleontological Resources would be minor. CEQA determinations would be the same as for the Proposed Project. 4.10.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built, and therefore there would be no direct or indirect impacts to paleontological resources. 4.11 Public Health and Safety 4.11.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on public health and safety if any activity associated with their construction or operation would: . Interfere with emergency response capabilities or resources (Impact H&S-1); . Create worker health hazard(s) beyond limits set by health and safety regulatory agencies or that endangers human life and/or property (Impact H&S-2); . Inflict serious injuries to workers, visitors to the area or area land users (Impact H&S-3); . Create electric and magnetic fields near an existing or proposed sensitive land use, such as schools or hospitals, which would pose a plausible risk to human health (Impact H&S-4); . Create substantial interference and disruption of emergency communications and electronic health/ safety devices that results in substandard performance (Impact H&S-5); or . Change traffic patterns that result in hazardous situations for motorists or pedestrians (Impact H&S-6). 4.11.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Conform with safety requirements for maintaining the flow of public traffic and conduct construction and operations to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience to public transportation. . Post proper signage in areas within the easement that will require temporary closure or limited access to accommodate certain land uses. Where feasible, construction activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If this is not feasible and damage occurs, the landowner may be compensated. . Mark structures and/or shield wire with highly visible devices for identified locations, as required by applicable laws and regulations (for example, Federal Aviation Administration regulations). 4.11.3 Proposed Project Each health and safety issue described below is highly regulated by one or more of the following agencies: U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), EPA, OSHA, and DOE, as well as State, county, and local governments. Additionally, Western and its contractors are required to comply with safety and environmental protection policies and guidance developed by Western, including Western’s Occupational Safety Program (WAPA Order 3790.1B), the Power System Maintenance Manual (PSMM), the Power System Safety Manual (PSSM), and Power Systems Operations Manual (PSOM). The DOE Office of NEPA Policy and Compliance has mandated that accidents and intentional acts of destruction (terrorism) be addressed in NEPA documents (DOE, 2002; and DOE, 2006). For this Project, this would include spills, falls and other types of accidents, catastrophic wildfire, and intentional acts of destruction. Some of these risks can be reduced through appropriate maintenance and management, but all of these events are dependent on many complex variables and are unpredictable. The degree of uncertainty in this analysis is therefore high. However, this impacts analysis discloses the primary risks to life, property, and environmental values. Impact H&S-1 Interfere with emergency response capabilities or resources. The Proposed Project would be constructed, operated, and maintained in a safe manner at all times, following Western’s requirements. The Proposed Project is not expected to generate a significant increase in demand for emergency services. Wildfire hazards will be minimized by controlling weeds and grasses within the Project area, such as maintaining height of grasses and brush at no more than 10 inches. Fire danger would also be reduced by avoiding certain activities during very dry and hot conditions, such as those that prompt a Red Flag Warning or Fire Weather Watch advisory by the National Weather Service. During such conditions, any activity that could emit a spark or high heat would be avoided after 10:00 a.m. each day. All machinery used for the Project would be equipped with spark arrestors. The Proposed Project would not interfere with movement of emergency vehicles during construction, operation, and maintenance activities. Impacts to traffic are addressed in Section 4.14, Traffic and Transportation. Impacts to emergency response capabilities and resources would be short-term and negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Proposed Project construction would be short-term and maintenance activities that could interfere with emergency response capabilities or resources would be infrequent. During operation, all hazardous materials for permanent storage in the Project’s finished facilities would be reported to the applicable Certified Unified Program Agencies according to applicable federal, State, and local requirements. This will ensure emergency service providers are informed of the hazardous materials stored at the facilities, and can make plans to respond accordingly. Impact H&S-2 Create worker health hazard(s) beyond limits set by health and safety regulatory agencies or that endangers human life and/or property. Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste Hazardous materials handling and use during project construction and maintenance are expected to be limited to petroleum-based products for vehicle fueling and lubrication. Hazardous waste could be generated during the handling of hazardous materials, such as used motor oil. Construction and maintenance activities would be conducted by personnel trained in the proper handling and storage of hazardous materials and waste, such as during fueling of construction vehicles and equipment. Personnel would also receive training regarding notification requirements, and containment and cleanup actions to take in the event of a spill of hazardous materials or waste. Spill kits for containment and cleanup would be maintained anywhere hazardous materials or waste are handled. Hazardous materials will not be stored outside the substations or staging areas. Waste would be managed in accordance with applicable regulations, and removed for final disposal within allowable time limits. Valey Fever Contracting Valley Fever, as an indirect impact from fugitive dust generated by Project activities, could pose a health risk to workers and nearby residents. However, with suppression of fugitive dust through Western’s Construction Standard 13.13 and following the Project EPMs, the risk of contracting Valley Fever from dust produced by Project activities would be minimal. Impacts to worker health and safety would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact H&S-3 Inflict serious injuries to workers, visitors to the area or area land users. Wildfires Grassfires often do not damage the galvanized steel transmission towers or the conductors because they move very quickly (15 mph on average, with pulses up to 35 mph). Because of their speed, however, wildfires present a serious danger to any person in the area of the fire. Fires outside of Western’s easements could start for various reasons and later move into the easement, endangering workers during construction and system operation, as well as recreation users that pass through the project area, such as those accessing the San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area, Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area, and O’Neal Forebay Wildlife Area, and people who have access to the project area on private lands, such as ranch owners and employees. Following Western’s standard construction practice, vehicles will be restricted to designated access routes and work areas. Where appropriate, herbicides would be used to control weeds, in conformance with standards in the California Department of Pesticide Regulation PRESCRIBE database. Nonetheless, under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts would be potentially significant absent mitigation given the potential to inflict serious injuries from wildfire hazards. Mitigation Measures for Impact H&S-3 MM H&S-1 Prepare a fire plan. Prior to construction in any given segment, Western shall prepare a Fire Plan for that area, in cooperation with applicable firefighting and land management areas with jurisdiction within that segment. The plan will establish standards and practices that will minimize the risk of fire danger, and in case of fire, provide for immediate suppression and notification. At a minimum, the plan will include the following elements: . Fire call directory. During construction and when completing maintenance activities within the Project easements throughout the year, should Western (or a representative of Western) identify a fire during construction or maintenance activities, Western (or a representative of Western) shall immediately call 911. In addition, Western (or Western’s representative) shall contact applicable land management agencies within 15 minutes of identifying a fire. Applicable land management agency phone numbers will be included in all Western contracts pertinent to SLTP construction and O&M and distributed within Western. Western will also provide contact information for its 24- Hour Folsom Dispatch Office and applicable supervisors during construction and maintenance to all land management agencies with jurisdiction over any portion of the Project so the agency can inform Western of any fire identified on or near Western’s easements. The fire call directory will be updated by Western each year (preferably before April 1). Updates will include dispatch centers, key contacts, titles, and daytime and after-hours phone numbers. The updated directory will be produced by Western and distributed to Western, land management agencies, and contractors as appropriate. . Obtain background information on fire potential. Prior to commencing construction or maintenance activities within Project easements, Western will contact the applicable firefighting agency for that area to obtain information on the potential for wildfire and to provide a schedule of on-site crew work. . Communication. Western and/or its contractors will have reliable communication (cell phone, satellite phone, or radio) present on the job site. If cellular coverage is not available, the location of the nearest available phone will be identified to all crewmembers. . Worker Awareness. Project workers will be briefed on precautions necessary for adherence to the Fire Plan. The plan will identify safety measures, tools to carry, and instruction in the event of a fire. Communication of the daily Project Activity Levels for the area will be discussed. . Construction restrictions based on fire conditions. Western (or a representative of Western) will be responsible for checking daily fire levels during project construction and modifying construction operations based on the level of wildfire hazard for that day. Working with the applicable land management or firefighting agency, the Fire Plan will include a description of requirements for responding to a given level of threat. This may include, for instance, providing a fire patrol, or restricting activities during peak heat hours. . Water supply for firefighting. The Fire Plan shall identify the location of available water supplies, including the 300-gallon tank (minimum) filled with water that shall be stored at each individual worksite(s) during the fire season. Western will consult with applicable land management and firefighting agencies to determine appropriate tank storage locations for inaccessible worksite(s). . Fire management/vegetation management. The Fire Plan shall also include details for reducing wildfire hazard throughout the life of the project, such as through vegetation management and creation of fire breaks. Fire breaks will be determined by coordinating with applicable land management and firefighting agency personnel. In addition, maintaining adequate easement clearance (i.e., trimming vegetation or trees close to transmission lines) will also reduce wildfire risk. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of Mitigation Measure H&S-1 would reduce the potential for injury by requiring prevention of and rapid reaction to wildfire. The coordinated effort between Western, its contractors, and land management agencies in the Project area to minimize wildlife risk as prescribed in Mitigation Measure H&S-1 would reduce this impact to a less-than-significant level. Physical Hazards Physical hazards may include injury from falling, improper use of tools or machinery, construction site dangers, and electrocution. Workers typically perform elevated work from bucket trucks or by climbing structures. In both instances, Western requires workers to use fall-protection devices. During construction, work would be performed according to standard health and safety practices, and OSHA policies and procedures. Excavated trenches and holes will be covered when not being worked on. In addition, the installation of polymer insulators, which remain intact if vandalized by a rifle shot or other means, would reduce maintenance and electrical problems, and related exposure to physical hazards by workers. Western’s construction workers and linemen are trained and experienced with transmission line O&M. Western’s comprehensive safety program includes an annual update of its Power System Safety Manual that provides direction and guidance for prevention of accidents that may result in personal injury, illness, property damage, or work interruption. The potential for serious injury resulting from physical hazards is low; impacts would be less than significant. Vandalism and Acts of Intentional Destruction Vandalism and intentional acts of sabotage of facility structures or conductors are unpredictable events. The chances of such acts occurring would be reduced by the limited access to the Project area. Western would inspect the Project on a regular basis for any signs of sabotage or vandalism, and take action immediately if a potential hazard is found. The potential for serious injury resulting from vandalism and intentional acts of destruction is low; impacts would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact H&S-4 Create electric and magnetic fields near an existing or proposed sensitive land use, such as schools or hospitals, which would pose a plausible risk to human health. The existing transmission lines have no documented adverse public health and safety effects from EMF exposure. Circuits placed parallel to each other tend to cancel electric and magnetic fields, thus reducing the measured fields under the lines and at the edge of the easement. Also, no existing schools, hospitals or other sensitive land uses are closer than 1,000 feet from the Proposed Project corridors. Several schools are planned as part of the Villages of San Luis Community Plan in the urban reserve area to the east of the project corridor. Future development of sensitive land uses within the plan area would be required to conform to setback requirements of the plan, which specify at least a 1,000-foot buffer between public facilities and utility facilities. The Project would be compliant with NESC guidance and Western would incorporate its engineering, design, and operating standards on 500-kV and 230-kV lines. This would include proper grounding standards and practices for the transmission line. The electric and magnetic fields at the edge of the easement are anticipated to be well below the recommended guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation and the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienist. The Project would therefore result in a negligible impact because it would not expose the public or workers to unusual or higher than usual levels of EMF. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact H&S-5 Create substantial interference and disruption of emergency communications and electronic health/safety devices that results in substandard performance. Potential interference with electronic devices would come from corona, which is described in Section 3.9. Corona generated radio interference is most likely to affect the amplitude modulation (AM) broadcast band (535 to 1,705 kilohertz); frequency modulation (FM) radio is rarely affected. Only AM receivers located very near the transmission lines have the potential to be affected by radio interference. Television interference from corona effects occurs during bad weather, and is generally of concern for transmission lines with a voltage of 345-kV or more and only for receivers within about 600 feet of the transmission line. The potential for the Proposed Project to interfere and disrupt emergency communications or electronic devices is negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact H&S-6 Change traffic patterns that result in hazardous situations for motorists or pedestrians. The proposed transmission lines would span roads in the Project area. Following the Project EPMs and construction standards (listed in Appendix F) would ensure public safety. There would be no change in traffic patterns attributable to the Proposed Project. Therefore, there would be no impact under CEQA. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.11.4 Coridor Alternatives The Proposed Project and all corridor alternatives would have identical effects on Public Health and Safety. CEQA determinations for all impacts to Public Health and Safety from all alternatives would be the same as for the Proposed Project. 4.11.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built, and therefore there would be no impacts to public health and safety. 4.12 Recreation 4.12.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on recreation if any activity associated with their construction, operation, and maintenance would: . Conflict with established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities (Impact REC-1); . Result in changes that alter or otherwise physically affect established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities (Impact REC-2); . Decrease accessibility to areas established, designated, or planned for recreation (Impact REC-3); . Increase demand for recreation activities due to the influx of people during construction and operation of the Proposed Project that would exceed capacity for that activity in a given area, such as a campground, wilderness, hunting area, and/or trails (Impact REC-4). 4.12.2 Environmental Protection Measures . On completion of the work, all work areas except permanent access roads would be returned to preconstruction conditions unless otherwise specified by the landowner/manager. . Construction and operations would be conducted to prevent unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings to preserve the natural landscape to the extent practicable. . Proper signage would be posted in areas within the easement that would require temporary closure or limited access to accommodate certain land uses. Where feasible, construction activities would be scheduled to minimize impacts to agricultural activities. If this is not feasible and damage occurs, the landowner may be compensated. 4.12.3 Proposed Project Impact REC-1 Conflict with established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. While dispersed recreation may occur, there are no local, State, or federally established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities within the North or Central segments of the Proposed Project. Therefore, no impacts would occur in this portion of the Proposed Project. Transmission Lines The San Luis and South segments of the Proposed Project cross portions of the SLRSRA and the Lower Cottonwood Wildlife Area (see Figure 3.12-1). Existing recreational resources and activities available in these areas, such as designated trails and overlooks, campgrounds and facilities, and water and shore activities could be temporarily disrupted by Project construction. Temporary direct and indirect adverse impacts to air quality, noise, and visual resources or a loss of sensitive resources, such as wildlife or pristine viewsheds could degrade the experience of recreationists in these areas. The presence of transmission line structures, depending on their exact location within the corridors, may conflict with planned upgrades to established recreation areas. The SLRSRA RMP/GP, described in Section 3.12.1, provides for additional facilities within the Medeiros Use Area including a new restroom, parking lot, windsurfing launch area, water-based play area, 150 tent and RV sites, 100 primitive campsites, and alternative overnight lodging. The Proposed Project could affect the placement of these facilities or prevent them from being completed resulting in a substantial, long-term impact. Under CEQA, this would result in a significant impact. Substations Modifications to existing substations or the construction and operation of the new Tracy East Substation would not result in direct or indirect impacts as these areas do not overlap with established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. Construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation would require up to 50 acres within the existing 150-acre Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. As described in Section 3.2.1, this OHV Use Area is regionally unique because it mainly serves beginner riders with its flat and open terrain. The proposed substation would not be compatible with the parcels’ current designated recreational use under the SLRSRA RMP/GP. Although the exact location of the proposed substation is not yet determined, Western believes that the OHV use area could continue to operate within the remaining 100 acres. Nonetheless, permanent conflicts with the current use of this established recreation area would occur, which would constitute a significant impact to recreational resources. Mitigation Measures for Impact REC-1 MM NOISE-1 Provide construction notification. MM NOISE-2 Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. MM AQ-1 Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. MM REC-1 Coordinate with local agencies to identify tower locations. Western shall coordinate with the CDPR regarding transmission line structure locations within the SLRSRA boundary to minimize conflicts with planned recreation areas and facility management. MM REC-2 Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Western shall coordinate with Reclamation and CDPR to identify modifications to existing facilities within the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area necessary to facilitate continued operation of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. In the case that the new Los Banos West Substation renders the existing entrance to the OHV use area unusable, Western shall coordinate with Reclamation and CDPR to relocate the entrance to provide continued access to the OHV use area. Modifications to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area, including a new entrance as necessary, shall be operational before construction begins within the OHV use area. Level of Significance after Mitigation Implementation of Mitigation Measure NOISE-1 would provide proper notification of planned construction activities. This would alert recreationists to upcoming construction noise with adequate time to make arrangements to limit their exposure to the noise (e.g., by leaving or avoiding the area during times of construction), thereby reducing the disruption of existing recreational resources and activities available in established, designated, and planned recreation areas within the study area. Implementation of Mitigation Measures AQ-1 and NOISE-2 would reduce the severity of indirect adverse impacts to air quality and noise that could degrade the experience of recreationists in established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. Implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-1 would reduce temporary conflicts with recreation areas or activities by ensuring cooperation with affected resource management agencies to determine tower structure locations that would minimize conflict with planned recreation areas or facility management. In combination, implementation of these mitigation measures would reduce impacts of the Proposed Project facilities (other than the new Los Banos West Substation, discussed below) to less than significant. Mitigation Measure REC-2 requires modification of existing facilities to maintain the current function of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area and reduce conflicts with this recreation area to the maximum extent feasible. However, implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-2 would be outside of the jurisdiction of Western and the Authority. Therefore, the agencies cannot conclusively determine whether such mitigation is feasible (i.e., capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, and other factors). This impact remains significant and unavoidable. Impact REC-2 Result in changes that alter or otherwise physically affect established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. Impact REC-2 would not occur in the North or Central segments as they do not contain any established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities. Transmission Lines Alterations of the landscape within the established and designated recreation areas in the study area (identified and described in Section 3.12) would be primarily caused by construction and operation activities including the installation of towers, foundation excavation, conductor stringing, and maintenance actions. Pursuant to EPMs, Western would construct and operate the Proposed Project in a manner that would prevent unnecessary destruction, scarring or defacing of the natural surroundings. On completion of construction, all work areas except permanent access roads would be returned to preconstruction conditions. Temporary impacts would include visual, air quality, and noise impacts that could affect the setting and landscape of existing recreation areas. During operation of the Proposed Project, transmission line structures within the San Luis and South Segments would be visible from some of the recreation sites and activities around the SLRSRA and the Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area. This could potentially reduce the quality of outdoor recreation experiences due to the visibility of permanent, man-made features. However, this impact would be minor because there are existing high-voltage transmission lines and substations currently visible from parts of these recreation areas. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Substation Construction Construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation would require up to 50 acres within the 150-acre Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. The site grading, property and substation fencing, and installation of electrical facilities associated with the substation construction would result in permanent physical alteration of this recreation area. Although the exact location of the proposed substation is not yet determined, Western believes that the OHV use area could continue to operate within the remaining 100 acres. Nonetheless, substantial physical alteration of up to one-third of the recreation area would occur, which would constitute a significant impact to recreational resources. Mitigation Measures for Impact REC-2 MM REC-2 Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measure REC-2 requires modification of existing facilities to maintain the current function of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area and minimize alterations of this recreation area to the maximum extent feasible. However, implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-2 would be outside of the jurisdiction of Western and the Authority. Therefore, the agencies cannot conclusively determine whether such mitigation is feasible (i.e., capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, and other factors). This impact remains significant and unavoidable. Impact REC-3 Decrease accessibility to areas established, designated, or planned for recreation. The North Segment of the Proposed Project does not overlap with areas established, designated, or planned for recreation and therefore, no direct or indirect impacts would occur. Transmission Line Construction Project construction activities may result in a temporary decrease in accessibility to recreation resources when construction, operation, or maintenance activities are located adjacent to primary access points of existing recreational areas. The Central Segment corridor is adjacent to portions of the I-5 corridor. Construction of the Proposed Project may result in a temporary decrease in or loss of accessibility to recreation areas accessed from the I-5 corridor (e.g., Frank Raines Off-Highway Vehicle Park, Carnegie State Vehicular Recreation Area, and Corral Hollow Ecological Preserve). Therefore, construction of the Proposed Project may result in access restrictions to these recreation areas. Additionally, the San Luis Segment overlaps with several main access points to the SLRSRA, and one main access route to the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area, as described in Section 3.12.1.1. If Project construction is conducted adjacent to these access points, temporary closure or limited access may occur. However, construction of the transmission line will be temporary and conducted in phases. Therefore, it is unlikely that all access points to any of these established recreation areas will be closed or limited during the same period or for an extended period. In addition, pursuant to EPMs, proper signage would be posted in areas within the project area that would require temporary closure or limited access to inform recreationists of alternative routes and access points. This would result in minor, temporary adverse impacts to accessibility. The South Segment corridor overlaps with the Los Banos Creek Reservoir subarea of the SLRSRA. Project construction may occur adjacent to main access routes and established access points and may cause a temporary decrease or loss of access to recreation resources within this area. However, as described above, it would be unlikely that access to the recreation area would be completely lost or a decrease in accessibility would occur for an extended period of time. This impact would be short-term, temporary, and minor. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant for transmission line construction. Substation Construction As described under Impact REC-1, permanent preclusion of up to one-third (50 acres) of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area would occur. If construction and operation of the substation occurs within the existing entrance to the OHV use area, a decrease or a complete loss of access to the recreation area could occur. This decreased accessibility would constitute a significant impact. Mitigation Measures for Impact REC-3 MM REC-2 Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Level of Significance after Mitigation Mitigation Measure REC-2 requires relocation of the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area in the case that the new Los Banos West Substation renders the existing entrance to the OHV use area unusable. Implementation of this measure would preserve access to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. However, implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-2 would be outside of the jurisdiction of Western and the Authority. Therefore, the agencies cannot conclusively determine whether such mitigation is feasible (i.e., capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, and other factors). This impact remains significant and unavoidable. Impact REC-4 Increase demand for recreation activities due to the influx of people during construction and operation of the Proposed Project that would exceed capacity for that activity in a given area, such as a campground, wilderness, hunting area and/or trails. Construction of the Proposed Project is anticipated to require a relatively small workforce (an estimated maximum employment of 87 construction workers) over an anticipated period of 525 days. Construction of the Proposed Project would be temporary and not result in a substantial influx of people, beyond the workers and possibly their families. The existing capacity of recreational resources, such as campgrounds, wilderness and hunting areas, and trails within the Project area (described in Section 3.12) would not be exceeded by this minor increase in demand. The rural setting and availability of open space in the Project area would supply additional dispersed recreational opportunities to accommodate additional demand for recreation. Impacts during operation and maintenance will be similar to or less severe in nature and duration than that of new construction as the influx of people would be much less. Under CEQA, this would be a less-than-significant impact. 4.12.4 Coridor Alternatives Impacts to recreational resources vary by alternative depending on the presence of existing established or designated recreational areas or activities. 4.12.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Alternative As with the Proposed Project, Impacts REC-1 through REC-3 would not occur as there are no local, State, or federally established, designated, or planned recreation areas or activities within this alternative. REC-4 would also be similar to the Proposed Project as this alternative would result in similar demands on the same recreation areas. CEQA significance determinations would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.12.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative would overlap a greater portion of the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area and the SLRSRA in comparison to the Proposed Project. Although still minor, Impacts REC-2 and REC-3 would be slightly greater under this alternative. However, REC-1 and REC-4 would be the same as described under the Proposed Project as the exact location of the transmission line within the recreation areas does not affect the intensity of these impacts. The CEQA significance determination would be the same as the Proposed Project. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative would overlap a greater portion of the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area and the SLRSRA in comparison to the Proposed Project. Although still minor, Impacts REC-2 and REC-3 would be slightly greater under this alternative. However, REC-1 and REC-4 would be the same as described under the Proposed Project as the exact location of the transmission line within the recreation areas does not affect the intensity of these impacts. The CEQA significance determination would be the same as the Proposed Project. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative would overlap a greater portion of the Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area and the SLRSRA in comparison to the Proposed Project. Although still minor, adverse Impacts REC-2 and REC-3 would be slightly greater under this alternative. However, REC-1 and REC-4 would be the same as described under the Proposed Project as the exact location of the transmission line within the recreation areas does not affect the intensity of these impacts. The CEQA significance determination would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.12.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative would require the same construction and project components as the Proposed Project and overlap a similar portion of existing recreation areas. Therefore, Impacts REC-1 through REC-4 would be similar to those under the Proposed Project. The CEQA significance determination would be the same as the Proposed Project. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative would overlap a larger portion of the Los Banos Creek Reservoir in comparison to the Proposed Project and would cross the designated Path of the Padres trail (described in Section 3.12). Due to the local importance of this event, recreationists may be more sensitive to changes in the setting within this area, resulting in a short-term moderate impact. Therefore, Impacts REC-1, REC-2, and REC-3 would be greater under this alternative. However, REC-4 would be the same as described under the Proposed Project as it is analyzed on a regional basis and the exact location of the transmission line within the recreation areas does not affect the intensity of this impact. The CEQA significance determination would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.12.5 No Action/No Project Under this alternative, construction and operation of the San Luis Transmission Line Project would not occur. Therefore, there would be no impacts to recreational resources. 4.13 Socioeconomics 4.13.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on socioeconomics if any activity associated with their construction or operation would result in: . Permanent displacement of existing residences or businesses (Impact SE-1); . Permanent and irreversible loss of work for any major sector of a community (Impact SE-2); . A substantial decrease in property values (Impact SE-3); . An increase in population that would create shortages of housing and place an excessive burden on local government and community facilities and services (Impact SE-4); . A need for new infrastructure systems, including power or gas utilities, communications systems, water and sewer services, or solid waste disposal systems (Impact SE-5); or . A long-term economic gain or loss benefit (a positive impact that could be considered significant) (Impact SE-6). 4.13.2 Environmental Protection Measures There are no EPMs applicable to Socioeconomics. 4.13.3 Proposed Project Impact SE-1 Permanent and irreversible loss of work for any major sector of a community. Proposed Project construction would be conducted in stages; therefore, personnel would not be working on all tasks simultaneously at a given location. Construction activities would require the employment of about 87 construction workers over an estimated 525 days. As shown in Table 3.13-3, a large civilian labor force is available within the study area. It is expected that this existing labor pool would be sufficient to meet the job opportunities generated by the Proposed Project. The creation of new jobs may help to lower the unemployment rate for the duration of the Proposed Project, thereby resulting in a temporary, minor, beneficial socioeconomic impact within the study area. This temporary, minor, beneficial impact on worker employment and income would indirectly benefit local businesses when workers buy gas and food or as some workers stay in local motels. Under CEQA, to the extent employment considerations affect the Proposed Project’s potential physical effects, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact SE-2 An increase in population that would create shortages of housing and place an excessive burden on local government and community facilities and services. The Project area is within commuting distance from residential communities in the area. Construction and maintenance workers not hired locally would be accommodated by the vacant housing or hotels in the study area (see Table 3.13-2). Construction and operation of the Proposed Project would not create a shortage of housing. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact SE-3 A need for new infrastructure systems, including power or gas utilities, communications systems, water and sewer services, or solid waste disposal systems. Due to the adequate supply of vacant housing and hotels in commuting distance from the Proposed Project and the corresponding lack of demand for additional housing, the Proposed Project would not create a need for new infrastructure systems, including power or gas utilities, communications systems, water and sewer services, or solid waste disposal systems. No direct or indirect impacts would occur. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact SE-4 Permanent displacement of existing residences or businesses. The Proposed Project would be constructed primarily within rural areas in Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties with the exception of moderate density development in the North Segment of the Proposed Project near the Tracy Substation and a small area northeast of the O’Neill Substation. Typically, Project components (e.g., towers) can be sited to avoid any displacement of existing homes and businesses and existing land uses within easements are able to continue. Although very unlikely, if permanent displacement of adjacent residences and businesses occurred, this impact would be significant. Mitigation Measures for Impact SE-4 MM SE-1 Acquire land rights. Where new easements are needed, Western would acquire land rights (easements) in accordance with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (P.L. 91-646), as amended. Generally, easements would be purchased through negotiations with landowners at fair market value. The landowner would normally retain title to the land and could continue to use the property in ways that would be compatible with the transmission line. Level of Significance after Mitigation In the event that businesses or residential structures would be displaced, Mitigation Measure SE-1 would require Western to acquire land rights in accordance with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (P.L. 91-646), as amended. With implementation of mitigation, this impact would be reduced to less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact SE-5 Substantial decrease in property values. Studies of the impact of power lines on property values have produced mixed findings. A recent publication, Towers Turbines and Transmission Lines Impact on Property Value (2013, Bond, Sims, & Dent) provides a comprehensive review of decades of studies of high-voltage transmission lines, cell towers, and wind farms in various countries. In particular, Chapter 6 of the book reviews studies of high-voltage transmission lines in North America. According to this publication, a number of factors are perceived to have the potential to diminish property values. These include concerns over whether there is a potential health and safety risk posed by the lines (see the discussion of EMF in Section 4.11), the visibility of the line from the subject property, and the potential for increased traffic, noise, and dust to occur during construction and operation activities. However, there are no definitive answers about the degree to which the presence of a transmission line may affect property value. Although it may be argued that the value of some individual properties is affected, there would be no perceptible change in property values overall. In addition, the Proposed Project would occur primarily adjacent to existing high-voltage transmission lines, resulting in negligible impacts to property values. Under CEQA, to the extent socioeconomic considerations affect the Proposed Project’s potential physical effects, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact SE-6 Long-term economic gain or lossbenefit. Transmission line construction would create new temporary jobs for construction workers and temporarily cause a positive increase in income and related economic activity in the affected counties. In addition, some material would be purchased to construct the transmission line in the local study area, which would increase revenue for some businesses and create a minor increase in the tax revenue received by local and State government. Electricity rates are anticipated to be lower for Reclamation and its customers served by the Proposed Project than by service under the CAISO Tariff. Therefore, this would result in a long-term economic benefit. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Substations Construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation could result in the permanent preclusion of up to one-third (50 acres) of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. If construction and operation of the substation occurs within the existing entrance to the OHV Use Area, a decrease or a permanent loss of access to the recreation area could occur (see Section 3.12 for a detailed description of the Jasper Sears OHV Area and Section 4.12 for a full discussion of impacts to recreation area access). This decrease in access could have the potential to substantially decrease the number of visitors to the OHV Use Area within the San Luis State Recreation Area, currently operated and maintained by California State Parks. Therefore, revenue to State Parks could decrease resulting in economic losses. Mitigation Measure for Impact SE-6 MM REC-2 Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Mitigation Measure REC-2 requires relocation of the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area in the case that the new Los Banos West Substation renders the existing entrance to the OHV Use Area unusable. Implementation of this measure would preserve access to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. However, implementation of Mitigation Measure REC-2 would be outside of the jurisdiction of Western and the Authority. Therefore, the agencies cannot conclusively determine whether such mitigation is feasible (i.e., capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, and other factors). Nonetheless, Mitigation Measure REC-2 is proposed to avoid or minimize economic loss to State Parks. The economic impacts of a project are not subject to CEQA; therefore, a CEQA significance determination is not provided for this impact. 4.13.4 Corridor Alternatives Impacts to socioeconomics would be the same for each alternative. Impacts SE-1 through SE-6 are based on a regional socioeconomic analysis within the study area, and therefore would be similar to that of the Proposed Project. CEQA significance determinations for each impact would be the same as the Proposed Project. 4.13.5 No Action/No Project Without the construction of the SLTP, Impacts SE-1 through SE-5 would not occur. It is also anticipated that rates would be higher for Reclamation and its customers under the No Action Alternative in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, Impact SE-6 (Long-term economic benefit) would not occur. 4.14 Trafic and Transportation 4.14.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on traffic and transportation if any activity associated with their construction or operation would result in: . Increased traffic that exceeds levels of service established by the California Department of Transportation, a county transportation agency, or city/town transportation department (Impact TRAFFIC-1); . Traffic delays on a primary transportation corridor (Impact TRAFFIC-2); . Inadequate emergency access (Impact TRAFFIC-3); . Road dust, severe road damage, or both at levels that create hazardous situations for motorists and pedestrians (Impact TRAFFIC-4); . Disruption to railways or bikeways during construction (Impact TRAFFIC-5); . Change in air traffic patterns, including alterations of flight paths and operations (Impact TRAFFIC-6); or . Conflicts with current or future federal, regional, State, and local airport plans (Impact TRAFFIC-7). 4.14.2 Environmental Protection Measures . Western will restrict all necessary lane closures or obstructions on major roadways associated with construction activities to off-peak periods to avoid substantial traffic congestion and delays. . Western will ensure that roads or sidewalks damaged by construction activities would be properly restored to their pre-construction condition. . Conform with safety requirements for maintaining the flow of public traffic and conduct construction and operations to minimize obstruction and inconvenience to public transportation. . Mark structures and/or shield wire with highly visible devices for identified locations, as required by applicable laws and regulations (for example, Federal Aviation Administration regulations). 4.14.3 Proposed Project Project effects on traffic and transportation would come from two sources: truck traffic for moving equipment, materials, and supplies as needed over the local road network, and workers commuting to the worksite daily. Changes in transportation are not expected to occur outside the immediate Project area; therefore, regional transportation beyond the four-county area of the project is not discussed. Unless otherwise specified, the impact discussion that follows applies to all segments of the Project. Impact TRAFFIC-1 Cause increased traffic that exceeds levels of service established by the California Department of Transportation, a county transportation agency, or city/town transportation department The Project would cause only minor, temporary increases in traffic and would have no effect on LOS ratings. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact TRAFFIC-2 Cause delays on a primary transportation corridor The road network in the area is described in Section 3.14.1.1 and shown in Figures 3.14-1a through 1d. Equipment, materials, and supplies for the Proposed Project would be moved to staging areas along the route using trucks of various sizes. Truck traffic would be sporadic, moving equipment and materials as needed, but would be scheduled to avoid peak hours, as well as avoid congested routes in general. Road restrictions may be needed to accommodate truck traffic, tower construction, or stringing of wires. Pursuant to EPMs, Western would restrict all necessary lane restrictions or obstructions on major roadways associated with construction activities to off-peak periods to minimize traffic congestion and delays. Nonetheless, it is expected that stringing of wires over highways, particularly I-5 and Highway 152, would cause delays on these primary transportation corridors. Therefore, this impact would be significant. Mitigation Measures for Impact TRAFFIC-2 MM TRAFFIC-1 Prepare and submit Traffic Control Plans. Prior to the start of construction, Western would submit traffic control plans to all agencies with jurisdiction of public roads that would be affected by construction activities. The plans will include details on work schedule, associated truck traffic, and commuter traffic for all portions of the project. Plan requirements include: . Coordinating with the affected jurisdictions on construction hours of operation. . Following guidelines of the local jurisdiction for road closures caused by construction activities. . Installing traffic control devices as specified in the California Department of Transportation’s (Caltrans’) Manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Works Zones (California Department of Transportation, 1996). . Notifying the public of road closures in the immediate vicinity of the construction zone and/or of temporary closures of bike lanes, and recreation trails. . Providing access to driveways and private roads outside the immediate construction zone. . Monitoring road and bike lane damage and repairing roads and bike lanes damaged during construction, or providing compensation for damage to roadways and bikeways. . Coordinating with Caltrans and the California Highway Patrol for stringing transmission line conductors and fiber over interstate or State highways, an activity that would require close coordination with these agencies to minimize hazards to workers and the public. Level of Significance after Mitigation Pursuant to Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-1, Western would submit traffic control plans prior to construction to all agencies with jurisdiction of public roads that would be affected by construction activities. These plans would include provisions for minimizing delays if traffic restrictions are needed while conducting work along or over roadways. With implementation of this mitigation measure, delays along primary transportation corridors would be less than significant. Impact TRAFFIC-3 Cause inadequate emergency access There are no emergency facilities along the Project routes, such as fire or police stations or hospitals. Project construction-related traffic is expected to be minor and temporary, and no extended closures of major transportation routes are anticipated. In coordination with affected jurisdictions, Western will develop and implement a traffic control plan, which will include an emergency access plan. The goal of the plan will be to reduce construction-related effects on the local roadway system and avoid hazardous traffic and circulation patterns during the construction period. All construction activities will follow the standard construction specifications and procedures of the appropriate jurisdictions. The emergency access plan would include provisions to allow for access into and adjacent to the construction zone for emergency vehicles. The emergency access plan requires coordination with emergency service providers before construction. It would provide effective traffic and navigation direction, substantially reducing the potential for disruptions to response routes. Therefore, the Project would have a negligible effect on emergency access. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact TRAFFIC-4 Cause road dust, severe road damage, or both at levels that create hazardous situations for motorists and pedestrians By following the Project EPMs and construction standards, the Project is not expected to cause dust that would create hazardous conditions for motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians in the area. As shown in Table 3.14-1, most of the paved public roads that would be used for construction access in the Project region are in Good to Excellent condition and likely will not be damaged by construction-related traffic. The one exception is Oak Flat Road, which is in Fair condition in the area of the Project and potentially could be damaged by construction-related truck traffic. In the unlikely event that roadways are damaged to the point that they represent a hazard to motorists or other users, EPMs require Western to ensure that roads or sidewalks damaged by construction activities would be properly restored to their preconstruction condition. This traffic and transportation impact would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact TRAFFIC-5 Disruption to railways or bikeways during construction Western would consult with UPRR for the proposed SLTP crossing near Patterson Pass Road. An encroachment permit would be needed, which would outline necessary setbacks and clearances to ensure that there are no disruptions to rail service, effects on the stability of the line, or changes in access for UPRR. Rail disruptions would be minor. Construction equipment may also need to traverse designated bikeways. This could result in minor temporary disruptions to the bikeways. This disruption would affect primarily the bikeway on Patterson Pass Road, and potentially to the California Aqueduct Bikeway. Construction would occur mostly during the work week, when bikeway use is minimal. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact TRAFFIC-6 Changes in air traffic patterns, including alterations of flight paths and operations Proposed Project structures would be as close as 2.1 miles to the Tracy Airport, and 3 miles to both the crop duster field near Westley and the closed airport near the community of Crows Landing. This distance is sufficient to minimize conflicts with the airports. Project structures would be located adjacent to existing transmission lines, and therefore would not present a new hazard that would cause changes in air traffic patterns. Effects would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact TRAFFIC-7 Cause conflicts with current or future federal, regional, State, and local airport plans Because the Project would be located a minimum of 2.1 miles from any active or planned airport, and because its structures would be located adjacent to existing transmission lines, it would not present a new hazard to air traffic in the region. Although hazards are not anticipated, EPMs require Western to notify the FAA and affected airports of any potential obstruction or hazard to aircraft operations near any airport, and implement actions required by the FAA, such as marking the towers. It would therefore not cause a conflict with current or future airport plans. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significantNo impact would occur. 4.14.4 Coridor Alternatives The Proposed Project and all corridor alternatives would have identical effects on traffic and transportation. CEQA determinations for all impacts to traffic and transportation from all alternatives would be the same as for the Proposed Project. 4.14.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built, traffic in the region would not increase, and there would be no impacts to traffic and transportation. 4.15 Visual Resources 4.15.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on visual resources if any activity associated with their construction or operation would result in: . Degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of a visually important landscape (Impact VIS-1); . Dominant visual changes in the landscape that are seen by highly sensitive viewer locations such as community enhancement areas or locations with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities that have been recognized as such through legislation or some other official declaration (Impact VIS-2); . Visual interruption that would dominate a unique viewshed or scenic view (Impact VIS-3); . A new source of substantial light or glare which would adversely affect day or nighttime views in the area (Impact VIS-4); or . Conflict with visual standards identified by a federal land management agency (Impact VIS-5). 4.15.2 Environmental Protection Measures There are no EPMs applicable to Visual Resources. 4.15.3 Proposed Project Two main issues were assessed in determining impact significance: (1) the type and extent of actual physical contrast that would be caused by the Project, and (2) the visibility of a given corridor segment or transmission structures. The intensity of adverse effects to visual quality depends upon the amount of visual contrast between the proposed facilities and the existing landscape. Because the Proposed Project and alternative corridors are adjacent to existing transmission line corridors, the assessment of visual resource impacts has focused on incremental impacts of the planned new facilities combined with the existing facilities. The visual effects of new access road construction are not discussed, as these roads would not be visible from any viewpoint, and therefore have no impact on visual resources. Operation and maintenance activities for the Proposed Project and all alternatives also would have no effect on visual resources, and therefore are not discussed in this section. Neither the Proposed Project nor any alternative would introduce a source of light or glare into the region (VIS-4). The public lands in the Project Area are managed by State agencies under agreement with the U.S. Department of the Interior, and therefore are not subject to any visual standard established by a federal land management agency (VIS-5). Even if applicable, the Project would not result in visual effects that would conflict with any visual standard identified by a federal land management agency. Thus, there would be no impacts under these two criteria for any route, and therefore these impacts are not discussed further. 4.15.3.1 North Segment New construction along the North Segment would result in minor incremental visual impacts. In general, this segment would be adjacent to existing transmission lines that dominate the landscape, and the area in general is highly disturbed by agricultural practices and the presence of two interstate highways, a large industrial area, several wind farms, the California Aqueduct, and the Delta-Mendota Canal. Except for small areas in rolling hills, the visual quality is moderate. This would result in a minor incremental change to visual character in this segment. Impact VIS-1 Cause degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of a visually important landscape. While some areas surrounding the Proposed Project in this segment are of moderate visual quality, there are no visually important landscapes in this area. Views of the Proposed Project area from the residences within the planned community of Mountain House are screened by fences and rows of trees along Green Valley Parkway. The only structures in the same viewshed as the Proposed Project for this segment are the existing transmission lines and wind turbines. These structures have changed the visual quality of the area substantially. Therefore, there would be no degradation of a visually important landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-2 Introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape that are seen by highly sensitive viewer locations such as community enhancement areas or locations with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities that have been recognized as such through legislation or some other official declaration. No known highly sensitive viewer locations exist along this segment of the Proposed Project. There are no public parks, scenic overviews, or scenic highways in the area, nor any identified place with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities. Therefore, there would be no degradation of a visually important landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-3 Cause visual interruption that would dominate a unique viewshed or scenic view. No unique viewshed or scenic view exists in the area surrounding this segment. Therefore, there would be no visual interruption that would dominate any valued viewshed or scenic view. Under CEQA, there would be no impact. 4.15.3.2 Central Segment Impact VIS-1 Cause degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of a visually important landscape. The viewshed along this segment is of high to very high visual quality. Most of the segment is of low sensitivity due to lack of access. However, the portions visible from I-5, which is designated as a Scenic Highway within this segment, have high visual sensitivity. The Project would also cross the Del Puerto Creek area, which is identified in the Stanislaus County General Plan as an important natural area with high scenic value due to the unusual rock outcrops that dominate the upper portions of the natural area, as well as rare sycamore groves and other natural features. The area is accessible by Del Puerto Canyon Road, which the County has listed as a potential scenic route. However, the portion of the Del Puerto Canyon that would be affected by the Project is in the lower portions of the canyon, near its entrance into the Central Valley. The views along the Proposed Project near the creek and road are mostly of vineyards and other agricultural operations, which are of moderate visual quality. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures into the region. However, they would be located adjacent to several existing transmission corridors, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new line adjacent to existing lines would be minor in all areas except the portions visible from I-5 and Del Puerto Canyon Road, where the Proposed Project would have a moderate incremental effect. In all cases, there would be no degradation of a visually important landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-2 Introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape that are seen by highly sensitive viewer locations such as community enhancement areas or locations with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities that have been recognized as such through legislation or some other official declaration. Other than the portions of the Proposed Project visible from I-5 and the Del Puerto Canyon area, no known highly sensitive viewer locations exist in this segment. There are no public parks or scenic overviews in the area, nor any other identified place with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities. Portions of the Proposed Project would be seen by travelers along I-5 between Khalsa Road and Zacharias Road in Stanislaus County; this 6-mile segment of I-5 is designated as a scenic highway due to views of the rolling hills of the Diablo Range to the west, and views of farmlands to the east. The Project would also cross Del Puerto Canyon Road, which is listed as a potential scenic route by the County and is used to access a valued natural area with high scenic value, though views in the area crossed by the Project are primarily of previously disturbed farm and ranchlands in the lower part of the canyon. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures into the region adjacent to existing transmission towers, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new line adjacent to these existing lines would be minor to moderate. Also, viewers driving on I-5 and on Del Puerto Road would view the Project for only a short time. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-3 Cause visual interruption that would dominate a unique viewshed or scenic view. Views of the Diablo Range are high to very high in visual quality but are not unique. Very similar views can be found all along the Coast Ranges and the foothills of the Sierra Nevada in California. The Proposed Project would not be seen from any scenic view overlook1 or public park in the area surrounding this segment. It would be seen from a 6-mile segment of I-5 that is designated as a scenic highway, and from a portion of Del Puerto Canyon Road, which is designated as a potential scenic route by the County. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures into the region adjacent to existing transmission towers, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new line adjacent to existing lines would be minor to moderate. Also, viewers driving on I-5 and on Del Puerto Canyon Road would view the Project for only a short time. Therefore, there would be no visual interruption that would dominate any valued viewshed or scenic view. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. 1 There are two scenic overlooks, a golf course and a rest stop along I-5 near this segment, but the Proposed Project would not be visible from these viewpoints. 4.15.3.3 San Luis Segment Impact VIS-1 Cause degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of a visually important landscape The viewshed along this segment is of high to very high visual quality. Much of the viewshed along this segment is of high sensitivity due to its visibility from important recreation areas, San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, and a scenic highway (SR 152). The Proposed Project route travels on the lesser-used east side of O’Neill Forebay, where the Project would be visible from a scenic overlook at the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery (3,300 feet from the Project), public golf course (1,800 feet from the Project), residences within Santa Nella Village (1,200 feet from the Project), a wildlife area, and travelers on Santa Nella Road and SR 152. The 322-acre National Cemetery is a highly sensitive land use. It includes a memorial to the soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines who died in combat in Korea, another memorial dedicated to the 11th Airborne Division, a third memorial dedicated to submariners of World War II, 15,000 gravesites, and 8,000 in-ground cremation sites. Funerals for deceased active duty and veteran service members are nearly a daily occurrence, and the facility is highly praised for its gardens and surrounding scenery, especially from an overlook above the facility, where a flag is flown at half-mast every day. The Proposed Project would not be visible from most of the National Cemetery, including the memorials, gardens, and gravesites. It would be visible from the scenic overlook, but would be more than 3,300 feet (0.6 mile) away, and therefore would not be prominent in the viewscape. Many structures are within the same viewshed as the Proposed Project for this segment, including the existing transmission lines, infrastructure associated with the San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay, nearby housing and retail developments, highways, and canals. These structures have changed the visual quality of the area substantially. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures into the region adjacent to two to four sets of existing transmission towers in most areas, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new line adjacent to existing lines would therefore be minor to moderate. There may be areas where the placement of new facilities constructed for the Project may not be located adjacent to existing transmission lines, such as within the wildlife areas on the east side of O’Neill Forebay. For example, in an effort to balance wildlife conservation values with aesthetics, Western chose to route the Proposed Project parallel to other infrastructure within the O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area (i.e., an aqueduct and Highway 33). Proposed Project corridors were designed to reduce effects to visual resources to the greatest extent feasible, often shielding the new structures from view behind natural landscape features, and placing new structures next to existing infrastructure to minimize visual contrast. As final design and engineering commence, Western will continue to refine tower locations to minimize impacts to visual resources while balancing impacts to other resources, consistent with the analysis in this EIS/EIR. As required by Mitigation Measure REC-1, this process will include coordination with affected land management agencies, including State Parks. Because project structures would be shielded using existing topography, and located adjacent to existing infrastructure to the greatest extent feasible, implementation of the Proposed Project would not degrade Therefore, there would be no degradation of a visually important landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-2 Introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape that are seen by highly sensitive viewer locations such as community enhancement areas or locations with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities that have been recognized as such through legislation or some other official declaration Many highly sensitive viewer locations are located in the area surrounding this segment, including from the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and the recreation areas around O’Neill Forebay, Santa Nella Village, and SR 152. However, the Proposed Project structures would be in the middle to background view of these viewpoints, except where the Proposed Project would cross SR 152, and often would be shielded from view by natural landscape features. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures adjacent to existing transmission towersinfrastructure, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. Final location of Project structures will be refined in coordination with affected land management agencies, such as USBOR and State Parks. The incremental effect of adding a new line adjacent to existing lines would be moderate. Also, viewers driving on SR 152 would view the Project for only a short time. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-3 Cause visual interruption that would dominate a unique viewshed or scenic view Views of the Diablo Range, O’Neill Forebay, San Luis Reservoir, and surrounding areas within this segment are high to very high in visual quality but are not unique. Very similar views can be found all along the Coast Ranges and the foothills of the Sierra Nevada in California. Visual sensitivity is also high to very high, due to the presence of a National Cemetery, recreation and residential land uses, and a scenic highway in the area. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures adjacent to existing transmission towersinfrastructure, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new line adjacent to existing lines infrastructure would be moderate. The Project would not be visible from most parts of the National Cemetery or the San Luis State Recreation Area, and would not cause a visual interruption of any viewshed that is designated as an important or unique scenic view. However, because Reclamation and State Parks have not yet completed the inventory of scenic views within the Recreation Area as called for in the 2013 Resource Management Plan/General Plan, Western will coordinate with affected land management agencies such as Reclamation and State Parks to refine final locations of Project structures. From the scenic overlook at the National Cemetery, the Project would be more than 3,300 feet (0.6 mile) away. Also, viewers driving on SR 152 would view the Project for only a short time. Therefore, there would be no visual interruption that would dominate any valued viewshed or scenic view. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. 4.15.3.4 South Segment Impact VIS-1 Cause degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of a visually important landscape The viewshed along this segment is of high to very high visual quality. Most of the segment is of low sensitivity due to lack of access. Portions are visible from I-5, which is not designated as a Scenic Highway within this segment area. Portions are also visible from several residences on Arburua Road, two residences near Los Banos Creek Reservoir, and a single residence near the Dos Amigos Substation and pumping plant. However, the view of the Proposed Project would be in the middle- to background from the interstate, and all the residence except one residence on Arburua Road. That residence, which is located approximately halfway between the Project and I-5, is surrounded by vegetation that blocks all views of the surrounding area. The Dos Amigos Substation and a single transmission tower adjacent to the substation dominate the views from the nearby residence, but views of the Proposed Project to the west across I-5 are screened by vegetation. Similarly, views toward the Proposed Project from one of the residences near Los Banos Substation are also screened by vegetation. The other residence in that area is below the Los Banos Creek Reservoir within the State recreation area, where the existing transmission lines span across the canyon for approximately 2,700 feet; the Proposed Project would be visible from this residence, but it would not dominate the view. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures adjacent to existing transmission towers that dominate views from I-5 because they are silhouetted against the sky. The new Project structures would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new transmission line adjacent to existing lines would be moderate. Therefore, there would be no degradation of the foreground character or scenic quality of the visually important landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-2 Introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape that are seen by highly sensitive viewer locations such as community enhancement areas or locations with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities that have been recognized as such through legislation or some other official declaration Highly sensitive viewer locations in this area that could be affected by the Proposed Project include a 4.6-mile stretch of I-5, the residences in the area described above, and the recreation area near the Los Banos Creek Reservoir dam. There are no officially declared scenic overviews in the area, nor any identified place with special scenic, historic, recreational, cultural, and/or natural qualities. I-5 is not designated as a scenic highway in this region. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures adjacent to existing transmission towers, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new transmission line adjacent to existing lines would be moderate. Also, viewers driving at interstate highway speeds would view the Project for only a short time. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not introduce dominant visual changes in the landscape. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. Impact VIS-3 Cause visual interruption that would dominate a unique viewshed or scenic view Views of the Diablo Range are high to very high in visual quality but are not unique. Very similar views can be found all along the Coast Ranges and the foothills of the Sierra Nevada in California. The Proposed Project would not dominate the view from any formally designated scenic view overlook or public park in the area surrounding this segment. The Proposed Project would introduce new structures adjacent to existing transmission towers, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new transmission line adjacent to two existing lines would be moderate. Therefore, there would be no visual interruption that would dominate any unique viewshed or scenic view. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. 4.15.4 Coridor Alternatives 4.15.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. It would be located approximately 1,000 feet farther from the few residences south of Patterson Pass Road that would have views of the Project, as well as from travelers along I-5, which is designated as a scenic highway for this segment. Therefore, this alternative would have somewhat reduced impacts to visual resources compared to the Proposed Project, though CEQA impact significance determinations are the same. 4.15.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would have the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. Impacts to visual resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context, though it would be closer to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery, recreation areas on the west side of the O’Neill Forebay, and at least one permanent residence near McCabe Road. Viewer sensitivity is higher than for the Proposed Project due the proximity of the National Cemetery and important recreation areas. The structures under this alternative would largely be shielded from view from the recreation areas along the shoreline of O’Neill Forebay by the hills to the west. The new structures would be visible from the San Luis Creek Campground, at a distance of 1,200 to 1,800 feet away, but the normal view pattern at this campground is towards the water rather than towards the existing transmission lines. Because Reclamation and State Parks have not completed their inventory of scenic overlooks within the San Luis Recreation Area, Western will coordinate with affected land management agencies such as Reclamation and State Parks to refine final locations of Project structures. Because of the importance of the National Cemetery as a highly sensitive land use, the scenic overlook above the National Cemetery was chosen as a KOP and a visual simulation of this alternative was prepared to assess potential impacts to visual resources. As shown in Figure 4.15-1, several sets of towers from two existing 500-kV transmission lines are visible from the KOP. The two towers on the left side of the Existing Conditions picture are 2,800 feet (0.53 mile) from the KOP. The next set is 3,600 feet away, and the third set (barely visible behind the hill beyond the row of Italian cypress trees in the middle of the picture) is 4,300 feet away. The final set visible from this KOP is 4,880 feet away. This alternative would introduce a fourth set of towers at each of these locations, as shown in the simulation photo of Figure 4.15-1. The structures would match the existing structures, and would not be a dominant feature in the landscape due to the distance from and similarity to the existing towers. The structures would not be visible from most of the National Cemetery grounds, including the memorials, gardens, and gravesites, or from most areas of the San Luis State Recreation Area. Impacts to visual resources from this alternative would be somewhat higher for this alternative compared to the Proposed Project, because of the highly sensitive nature of the National Cemetery and the Recreation Area, but the incremental effect of adding the new towers next to the existing towers would be moderate. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as for the Proposed Project. Figure 4.15-1, titled “KOP 1 - Butts Road Alternative Existing Conditions and Simulation,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would have six more support structures compared to the Proposed Project for this segment. Visual sensitivity is higher than for the Proposed Project, due to the presence of the National Cemetery. Existing and simulated views of this alternative from the same KOP used for the simulation of the Butts Road Alternative are shown in Figure 4.15-2. Structures for this alternative corridor would be approximately 2,000 feet away from the KOP, and approximately 700 feet away from the nearest gravesite. The background view in the area was significantly altered by cattle grazing of the hills, but the views towards this alternative corridor consist entirely of grasslands with no human made structures visible. The new structures would not be located next to existing transmission lines, and therefore would introduce new features that would have a high contrast with the landscape, and that would dominate the view from gardens, overlook, and especially the gravesites of the National Cemetery. This intrusion into a comparatively undisturbed landscape visible from a highly sensitive land use would constitute significant and unavoidable impacts under Impacts VIS-1, VIS-2, and VIS-3. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, but it is closer to the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery and important recreation facilities on the west side of O’Neill Forebay than the Proposed Project. It would be adjacent to two existing transmission lines in the same corridor as the Butts Road alternative described above. Structures for this alternative would be much smaller than the existing structures, and would be more than 3,300 feet away from the scenic overlook above the National Cemetery. They would not be visible from most of the National Cemetery grounds, including the gardens, memorials, and gravesites. The new structures would be visible from the San Luis Creek Campground with in the San Luis State Recreation Area, at a distance of 1,200 to 1,800 feet away, but the normal view pattern at this campground is towards the water rather than towards the existing transmission lines. This alternative therefore would result in a minor incremental impact. However, because of the proximity of the National Cemetery and existing recreation facilities, this alternative would have a somewhat greater adverse effect on visual resources compared to the Proposed Project. CEQA impact significance determinations are the same as the Proposed Project. 4.15.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, though it would be located approximately 1,000 feet farther to the west. No residences in the area would have views of the structures within this alternative corridor, and it would not be visible to travelers along I-5. Therefore, this alternative would have the same impacts to visual resources as the Proposed Project, and CEQA impact significance determinations are the same. Figure 4.15-2, titled “KOP 2 - West of Cemetery Alternative Existing Conditions and Simulation,” cannot be made fully Section 508 compliant. For help with its data or information, please contact Steven Blazek at Western Area Power Administration, (720) 962-7265.Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would have eight more support structures than the Proposed Project, and would permanently disturb 4 more acres of land. Impacts to visual resources from this alternative would be similar to that of the Proposed Project in type and context; however, the intensity would likely be slightly greater than the Proposed Project due to a greater number of support structures. The structures for this alternative would be located adjacent to two existing transmission lines, and therefore the incremental impact of this alternative would be minor. This alternative route would cross over portions of the State recreation area near the western end of Los Banos Creek Reservoir. This area is remote and is difficult to access, but is near areas of very high historical qualities and viewer sensitivity. This alternative would introduce new structures adjacent to existing transmission lines and towers, and therefore would not introduce high contrast to the viewshed. The incremental effect of adding a new transmission line adjacent to existing lines would be moderate. The area is also difficult to access, requiring a 5-mile plus hike or a boat ride the length of Los Banos Reservoir, but the immediate vicinity near the alternative corridor is highly altered due to the reservoir, and is of low interest to the few hikers who traverse the area to reach the Path of the Padres trail. Therefore impacts to visual resources under this alternative would be less than significant under CEQA. CEQA impact significance determinations for all other visual impacts on all portions of this alternative route are the same as those described for the Proposed Project. 4.15.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built; therefore, there would be no direct or indirect impacts to visual resources. 4.16 Water Resources and Flodplains 4.16.1 Thresholds of Significance The Proposed Project and alternatives would have significant, adverse effects on water resources and floodplains if any activity associated with their construction or operation would result in: . Violation of any water quality standards or waste discharge requirements (Impact WR-1); . Groundwater quality degradation that causes groundwater quality to exceed federal or State standards (Impact WR-2); . Groundwater depletion or interference with groundwater recharge that adversely affects existing or proposed uses of the groundwater aquifer (Impact WR-3); . Alteration of the existing drainage pattern of the site or area that would result in substantial on- or off-site erosion or siltation, or that would substantially increase the rate or amount of surface runoff in a manner that would result in flooding on or off site (Impact WR-4); or . Modification of a floodplain, which would impede or redirect flood flows that would result in property damage on or off site (Impact WR-5). 4.16.2 Environmental Protection Measures . At completion of work and at the request of the landowner/manager, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. . Erosion control measures will be implemented to prevent loss of soil. Construction will be in conformance with Western’s Integrated Vegetation Management Environmental Guidance Manual. . Excavated material or other construction materials will not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. . Non-biodegradable debris will be collected and removed from the easement daily and taken to a disposal facility. Slash and other biodegradable debris will be left in place or disposed of. . All soil excavated for structure foundations will be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Excess soil will be removed from the site and disposed of appropriately. Areas around structure footings will be reseeded with native plants. . Wherever possible, new structures and access roads will be sited out of floodplains. Bridges will be used at new stream crossings wherever possible. If avoidance is not possible, Western will consult with USACE and obtain permits as required. . Construction vehicle movement outside of the easements will be restricted (to the extent feasible) to approved access or public roads. . Where feasible, all construction activities will be rerouted around wet areas while ensuring that the route does not cross sensitive resource areas. . If wet areas cannot be avoided, Western will use vehicles, ground mats, and equipment that minimize ground impacts. . All instream work, such as culvert replacement or installation, bank recontouring, or placement of bank protection below the high-water line, will be conducted during no-flow or low-flow conditions and in a manner to avoid impacts to water flow, and will be restricted to the minimum area necessary for completion of the work. . Runoff from the construction and O&M sites will be controlled and meet RWQCB stormwater requirements and the conditions of a construction stormwater discharge permit. A stormwater pollution prevention plan will be prepared and implemented. . All equipment used below the ordinary high-water mark will be free of exterior contamination. . All contaminated discharge water created by construction and O&M activities (e.g., concrete washout, pumping for work area isolation, vehicle wash water, drilling fluids) will be contained and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, State, and local regulations. . All fill or rip-rap placed within a stream or river channel will be limited to the minimum area required for access or protection of existing Western facilities. . All equipment will be stored, fueled, and maintained in vehicle staging areas 300 feet or the maximum distance possible from any aquatic habitat (vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, seasonal wetland, seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh) and no closer than 200 feet unless a bermed (no ground disturbance) and lined refueling area is constructed and hazardous-material absorbent pads are available in the event of a spill. Vehicles and construction equipment will be inspected daily for fluid leaks before leaving staging areas during construction and O&M activities. Fluid leaks will be repaired before equipment is moved from staging areas. . If a pesticide label stipulates a buffer zone width for protection of natural resources that differs from that specified in a project mitigation measure or EPM, the buffer zone width that offers the greatest protection will be applied. . A hazardous-spill plan will be developed prior to construction and will remain in effect for all O&M activities. The plan will describe what actions will be taken in the event of a spill of toxic or hazardous materials. The plan will incorporate preventive measures to be implemented for vehicle and equipment staging, cleaning, maintenance, and refueling, and for containment management and storage of hazardous materials, including fuel. In the event of a contaminant spill, work at the site will immediately cease until the contractor has contained and mitigated the spill. The contractor will immediately prevent further contamination, notify appropriate authorities, notify Western’s regional environmental manager, and will mitigate damage as appropriate. Adequate spill containment materials, such as oil diaper mats and hydrocarbon cleanup kits, will be available on site at all times, as will containers for storage, transportation, and disposal of contaminated absorbent materials. 4.16.3 Proposed Project This impact analysis is based on an assessment of baseline conditions relevant to the Project area, including ambient water quality, beneficial uses identified in the Central Valley Regional Board’s Basin Plan, and existing impairments to waterbodies as listed on the CWA 303d list of impaired and threatened waters that have been identified and reported to the USEPA, which are presented in Section 3.16.1. Table 4.16-1 presents the number of National Hydrography Dataset named and unnamed streams that lie within the study area for each segment of the Proposed Project. These study areas are defined in Section 3.1 and include the Proposed Project corridor as well as a sufficiently large buffer to capture the potential impacts of new and improved access road construction as well as potential downstream impacts. Table 4.16-1. National Hydrography Dataset Streams Crossed By Segment Segment Named Streams and Canals Crossed Unnamed Streams Crossed North Segment 4 15 Central Segment 16 78 San Luis Segment 500-kV 4 17 San Luis Segment 70-kV 3 15 South Segment 5 56 The Proposed Project could affect water resources and floodplains through ground disturbance associated with construction and O&M activities, including operation of heavy equipment, grading and vegetation clearing for access roads, site leveling, auguring of transmission tower foundations, and other infrastructure excavations. These activities would have the potential to cause both direct and indirect adverse effects to water resources. The equipment used and the length of construction is discussed in detail in Section 2.1.3. Indirect impacts could include soil disturbance that leads to subsequent erosion and sedimentation following a storm event. Impact WR-1 Violate any water quality standards or waste discharge requirements. Construction of the Proposed Project would include soil-disturbing activities, such as leveling and excavation of the transmission tower sites as well as grading and improvement of existing access roads. This soil disturbance could lead to increased erosion and sedimentation. Additionally, potentially hazardous materials such as fuel, engine oil, and lubricants could be leaked or accidentally spilled onto the ground or into waterways during construction of the Proposed Project. Adverse effects to water resources could occur during O&M of the Proposed Project due to soil-disturbing activities such as regrading of access roads and vegetation removal. Major repair work, such as replacement of towers or conductors, would be nearly identical to that of new construction, as described in Section 2.1.3. Because adverse effects from such work would be similar to or less severe in nature and duration than that of new construction as described above, adverse effects to water resources would be negligible during the operation and maintenance phase of the Proposed Project. In conformance with Western’s EPMs and Construction Standard 13, all work areas except access roads will be scarified or left in a condition that will facilitate natural or appropriate vegetation, provide for proper drainage, and prevent erosion. Stockpiles of excavation material will be protected from erosion and protective measures will be taken to prevent and/or quickly respond to leaks or accidental spills of hazardous materials. All required permits will be obtained prior to commencement of construction activities in order to ensure protection of water quality within the Project area. Therefore, any potential impacts to water quality associated with construction of the Proposed Project would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact WR-2 Degrade groundwater quality such that State or federal standards are exceeded. A portion of the study area is underlain by areas of shallow groundwater. Dewatering may be required during tower footing excavation and tower installation. No dewatering is expected during routine O&M activities. In conformance with Western’s EPMs and Construction Standard 13, all required dewatering and discharge permits would be obtained prior to commencement of construction activities. Any water that is produced during dewatering activities will be tested and, if necessary, treated prior to discharge. In addition, any leaks or accidental spills of hazardous materials will be quickly contained and removed per Western’s Spill Prevention Notification and Cleanup Plan, and no hazardous materials would enter the groundwater. Therefore, any potential adverse effects to groundwater quality, associated with construction of the Proposed Project, would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact WR-3 Cause groundwater depletion or interference with groundwater recharge that adversely affects existing or proposed uses of the groundwater aquifer. Any water use for construction or O&M activities (such as for dust suppression or concrete mixing) will be purchased through an appropriate water provider or authority. Groundwater resources will not be depleted by construction or O&M of the Proposed Project. In addition, the creation of new impervious surfaces would be limited to tower footings, and would not interfere with groundwater recharge. Therefore, impacts to groundwater levels associated with construction and O&M of the Proposed Project would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact WR-4 Cause alteration of the existing drainage pattern of the site or area that would result in substantial on- or off-site erosion or siltation, or that would substantially increase the rate or amount of surface runoff in a manner that would result in flooding on or off site. Structures would be placed outside of stream channels and floodplains where possible. Transmission towers would be located and engineered so as not to block or substantially alter the natural drainage pattern. In accordance with Western’s EPMs and Construction Standard 13, culverts or bridges would be installed where needed to avoid surface water impacts during construction of transmission line structures. All construction activities would be conducted in a manner to avoid impacts to water flow. Excavated material or other construction materials would not be stockpiled or deposited near or on stream banks, lake shorelines, or other watercourse perimeters. All soil excavated for structure foundations would be backfilled and tamped around the foundations, and used to provide positive drainage around the structure foundations. Crossing of any stream or other waterway will occur in compliance with applicable laws, and with approval of applicable landowners and permitting agencies, thereby protecting waterways from being inappropriately altered or diverted. Therefore, impacts to the existing drainage patterns associated with construction and O&M of the Proposed Project would be negligible. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. Impact WR-5 Result in modification of a floodplain, which would impede or redirect flood flows that would result in property damage on- or off-site. The Proposed Project would place new structures outside of floodplains where possible. In areas where floodplains cannot be avoided, Western would engineer transmission towers to withstand a 100-year flood. Additionally, new structures would be located and designed so as not to impede flood flows. All construction within a designated 100-year floodplain will be undertaken in consultation with the USACE. No floodwater will be blocked, nor will floodwater be diverted outside of an existing floodplain. Therefore, construction and O&M of the Proposed Project will have a negligible impact on floodways and floodplains. Under CEQA, this impact would be less than significant. This impact would be the same in the North, Central, San Luis, and South segments. 4.16.4 Coridor Alternatives Table 4.16-2 presents the number of National Hydrography Dataset named and unnamed streams crossed by the study area for each Alternative. These study areas, as defined in Section 3.1, include the alternative corridor as well as a sufficiently large buffer to capture the potential impacts of new and improved access road construction as well as potential downstream impacts. Table 4.16-2. National Hydrography Dataset Streams Crossed by Alternative Alternative Named Streams and Canals Crossed Unnamed Streams Crossed Patterson Pass Road 16 86 Butts Road 4 25 West of Cemetery 5 32 West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV 3 11 San Luis to Dos Amigos 5 56 Billy Wright Road 5 82 4.16.4.1 Central Segment Patterson Pass Road Alternative This alternative has nine more miles of new access roads and the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project, but the alternative study area crosses eight more unnamed streams compared to the Proposed Project. Due to the increased amount of ground disturbance, this alternative would have slightly greater adverse effects to water resources and floodplains as the Proposed Project during construction and O&M. Direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be less than significant. 4.16.4.2 San Luis Segment Butts Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 0.5 mile longer than the Proposed Project, would have two more support structures, and would increase new access roads by 2.0 miles. The alternative study area crosses eight more unnamed streams compared to the Proposed Project. Soil disturbance would be increased compared to the Proposed Project. In addition, the number of receiving waters within the alternative study area would be more in comparison to the Proposed Project. Therefore, potential impacts to water resources and floodplains also would be more severe compared to the Proposed Project. Direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be less than significant. West of Cemetery Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.2 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have six more support structures, and would increase new access roads by 9.0 miles. The alternative study area crosses one additional named stream and 15 more unnamed streams compared to the Proposed Project. Soil disturbance would be increased compared to the Proposed Project, and the terrain would be slightly steeper than the Proposed Project study area for this segment, which would slightly increase the potential for erosion. This increased potential for erosion is coupled with the increased number of receiving waters within the alternative study area compared to the Proposed Project. Potential impacts to water resources and floodplains would be more severe compared to the Proposed Project. Direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be less than significant. West of O’Neill Forebay 70-kV Alternative This alternative is the same length, has the same length of new access roads, and has the same number of support structures as the Proposed Project. The alternative study area crosses four fewer unnamed streams compared to the Proposed Project. Due to the reduction in the number of receiving waters, this alternative would have slightly reduced impacts to water resources and floodplains during construction and O&M as the Proposed Project. Direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be less than significant. 4.16.4.3 South Segment San Luis to Dos Amigos Alternative This alternative has the same length of new access roads, the same number of support structures, and crosses the same number of named and unnamed streams as the Proposed Project, and therefore would have essentially the same impact to water resources and floodplains during construction and O&M. Direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be less than significant. Billy Wright Road Alternative This alternative corridor would be 1.5 miles longer than the Proposed Project, would have 8 more support structures, would need 3.0 miles of additional new access roads, and the alternative study area would cross 26 more unnamed streams compared to the Proposed Project. Additionally, the topography of this alternative corridor is slightly steeper than the Proposed Project corridor for this segment, and therefore, the potential for erosion would be increased slightly. Potential impacts to water resources and floodplains would be substantially more severe compared to the Proposed Project. However, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would remain minor. Under CEQA, direct and indirect impacts for WR-1 through WR-5 would be less than significant. 4.16.5 No Action/No Project Under the No Action/No Project Alternative, Western would not construct the SLTP. No new facilities would be built, and therefore no impacts to water resources and floodplains would occur. 4.17 Cumulative Effects Analysis Cumulative impacts are defined by the CEQ (40 CFR §1508.7) as “… the impact on the environment which results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency (federal or non-federal) or person undertakes such actions.” (See also CEQA Guidelines, § 15130.) Cumulative effects can result from individually minor but collectively significant actions taking place over a period of time.” 40 CFR §1508.7; see also CEQA Guidelines, § 15130. Under NEPA, both context and intensity are considered. Among other considerations when considering intensity is “[w]hether the action is related to other actions with individually minor but cumulatively significant impacts. Significance exists if it is reasonable to anticipate a cumulatively significant impact on the environment. Significance cannot be avoided by terming an action temporary or by breaking it down into small component parts.” 40 CFR §1508.27(b)(7) To determine the cumulative effects in the Project study area, a review was completed of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future projects in the vicinity of the Project area and an analysis made of their short- and long-term incremental effects on the local environment. Geographic Scope The project list includes those projects found within a geographic area sufficiently large to provide a reasonable basis for evaluating cumulative impacts. The area over which the cumulative scenario is evaluated may vary by resource, because the nature and range of potential effects vary by resource (e.g., air quality impacts tend to disperse over a large area or region while biological resources impacts are typically more location specific). This spatial area is identified as the geographic scope for the analysis of cumulative impacts related to a particular resource. The analysis of cumulative effects considers a number of variables including geographic (spatial) limits, time (temporal) limits, and the characteristics of the resource being evaluated. The geographic scope of the analysis is based on the nature of the geography surrounding the Project and the characteristics and properties of each resource and the region to which they apply. In addition, each project in a region will have its own implementation schedule, which may or may not coincide or overlap with the proposed SLTP schedule. This is a consideration for short-term impacts from the Proposed Project. However, to be conservative, the cumulative analysis assumes that all projects in the cumulative scenario are built and operating during the operating lifetime of the Proposed Project. Timeframe The timeframe of past, present, and probable future projects was determined as follows: . Past projects. Projects completed within the last 10 years. . Present projects. Projects that are active, producing, or in operation as of November 1, 2013. . Reasonably foreseeable future projects. Projects anticipated to have impacts within 5 years. List of Projects for Cumulative Analysis Table 4.17-1 lists the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future projects that may have impacts that could be combined with the impacts of the Proposed Project and alternatives to result in cumulative effects. Table 4.17-1. Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions that Occur in the Project Area Project Name/Applicant Project Description Status/ Schedule Project Location California High Speed Rail, California High Speed Rail Authority and Federal Rail Administration Proposed project to develop a 800-mile system of high-speed trains from southern to northern California; including two identified spurs at Altamont Pass or Pacheco Pass. Statewide Program EIR/EIS published August 2005. San Jose to Merced Section under project level environmental review; NOP published August 2009. The Altamont Pass spur would cross the SLTP in the San Luis Segment north of O’Neill Forebay. The Pacheco Pass spur would cross the SLTP in the North Segment near Tracy. Bay Delta Conservation Plan A 50-year conservation strategy to restore and protect the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta’s ecosystem health, water supply, and water quality. Environmental Review Process: Draft EIR/EIS published in December 2013 with an anticipated re-circulated draft in 2015. Consists generally of the statutory Delta, the Yolo Bypass north of the statutory Delta, and Suisun Marsh as well as the State Water Project and Central Valley Project export areas. The proposed underground tunnels terminate near the City of Tracy. Tracy Biomass Power Plant Project, GWF Energy LLC Construction, operation, and maintenance of a 169 MW simple-cycle power plant on a 40-acre site. Licensed; in compliance phase. Operational: June 1, 2003. Near the North Segment of SLTP in an unincorporated portion of San Joaquin County, east of the City of Tracy. Crow’s Landing Airport and Industrial Business Park, Stanislaus County Reuse of the former Crows Landing Naval Air Facility as a public-use, general aviation (GA) airport and mixedused development. Land Use Compatibility Plan published June 2013. Near the Central Segment of the SLTP in Stanislaus County, about 28 miles southeast of Tracy, and 42 miles west of San Jose. Quinto Solar Project, SunPower Corporation Proposed 110 megawatt (MW) solar photovoltaic (PV) energy generation facility on a 1,012-acre site. Includes the proposed construction, operation, and maintenance of a 4-acre, 230-kV switching station for interconnection. The project would be constructed over 16 months, starting in summer 2013, with full operation anticipated by late 2014. Near the San Luis Segment of the SLTP in southwestern Merced County, west of I-5, north of SR 152, and 1 mile northwest of the unincorporated community of Santa Nella. San Luis Reservoir Low Point Improvement Project, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation Proposed reservoir and system improvement project aimed to optimize the water supply benefits of San Luis Reservoir while reducing additional risks to water users as part of the Central Valley Project. NOI/NOP published in September 2008. Plan Formulation Report published in January 2011 as an interim feasibility study. Near the San Luis Segment of the SLTP at the San Luis Reservoir. B.F. Sisk (San Luis) Dam Corrective Action Project, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the California Department of Water Resources Proposed project to modify B.F. Sisk Dam to mitigate potential safety concerns identified in the ongoing Corrective Action Study (CAS). Environmental Review Process: Scoping Meetings held October 2009. Near the San Luis Segment of the SLTP on the east side of the San Luis Reservoir. Grassland Bypass Project, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the San Luis and Delta Mendota Water Authority Separation of unusable agricultural drainwater discharged from the Grassland Drainage Area from wetland water supply conveyance channels. Implementation and monitoring phase. Final EIS published September 2001. Near the Central Segment of the SLTP in southwestern Merced County, northwest of the City of Merced, the area surrounding the convergence of the San Joaquin River and the Merced River. Table 4.17-1. Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions that Occur in the Project Area Project Name/Applicant Project Description Status/ Schedule Project Location Wright Solar Park, Frontier Renewables Proposed 200-MW solar PV power plant located on 1,400 acres of leased and purchased agricultural lands in unincorporated Merced County. Draft Environmental Impact Report published July 2014. Near the South Segment of the SLTP in western Merced County about 4.5 miles southeast of Santa Nella, southwest of the intersection of I-5 and SRs 33/152, on the south side of Billy Wright Road. San Luis Renewables, LLC Solar Generation Project Solar generation facility. There may also be a 70-kV transmission line constructed north of Hwy 152, from the San Luis Gianelli Pumping Plant to the O’Neill Substation switchyard to accommodate the solar project. NOP not yet published. In the San Luis Segment, adjacent to the O’Neill Forebay. 500-kV transmission lines. Owners: Black Hills Energy, Pacific Gas and Electric Co., Western Area Power Administration Existing transmission lines and associated substations. Existing North Segment, Central Segment, San Luis Segment, South Segment. 230-kV transmission lines. Owners: Modesto Irrigation District, Pacific Gas and Electric Co., Sacramento Municipal Utility District, Western Area Power Administration Existing transmission lines and associated substations. Existing North Segment, Central Segment, San Luis Segment, South Segment. 115-kV transmission lines. Owners: Pacific Gas and Electric Co., City & County of San Francisco Existing transmission lines and associated substations. Existing North Segment, Central Segment, San Luis Segment. 69-kV transmission lines. Owners: Pacific Gas and Electric Co., Western Area Power Administration Existing transmission lines and associated substations. Existing North Segment, Central Segment, San Luis Segment, South Segment. 4.17.1 Planning Influences in the Project Area Table 4.17-2 lists the plans and programs that will influence development in the Project area. Table 4.17-2. Planning Influences in the Project Area Plan or Program Description Plan Area College Park at Mountain House Specific Plan III, San Joaquin County Plan for future development of about 816 acres within the 4,784-acre Mountain House Master Plan community. Located in San Joaquin County, west of Mountain House Parkway, North of I-205, south of Grant Line Road, and east of the Alameda County line. Table 4.17-2. Planning Influences in the Project Area Plan or Program Description Plan Area San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Resource Management Plan/General Plan and EIS/EIR, California Department of Parks and Recreation and the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. Proposed joint management plan for the development and management of the recreation resources and areas on land owned by the Bureau of Reclamation surrounding the San Luis Reservoir and Los Banos Reservoir. Final Draft was published in June 2014. Located in southwestern Merced County, west of I-5, north of SR 152. The plan area includes the San Luis Reservoir, O’Neill Forebay, Los Banos Reservoir and surrounding areas. The Villages of San Luis Community Plan, Merced County. Plan to guide growth and development of a 6,200-acre Specific Urban Development Plan. The plan includes a potential development of over 14,000 housing units and includes an urban reserve area held for the potential development of another 2,000 housing units. Plan approved in 2007. Located west of I-5 along SR-152 and SR-33 in western Merced County. Fox Hills Community Specific Plan Update, Merced County. Pan to expand the county’s range of housing stock, provide local serving commercial uses for new residential development, and expand on the recreation-oriented theme of the original Specific Plan. Includes land use designations of low and medium density residential (total capacity of 3,460 dwelling units), commercial mixed-use, general commercial, parks and trails, recreation, and open space for wildlife conservation and passive recreation. Plan approved in 1993. Located in western Merced County, east of I-5, west of the San Luis Canal, and just south of Pioneer Road. Tracy Hills Specific Plan, City of Tracy Plan including 6,175-acre site to enable comprehensive planning through the integration of multiple land uses, physical design features, and vehicle and pedestrian movement focused around an urban center. Southwest of the City of Tracy, along I-580. 4.17.2 Agriculture The Proposed Project is in compliance with Williamson Act and other local zoning authorities and would therefore not contribute to a cumulative impact in this regard. Cumulative impacts could result from the permanent conversion of Important Farmlands or the preclusion of agricultural activities. Agriculture operations would continue within the proposed SLTP easements and transmission infrastructure would be sited to avoid Important Farmlands. Furthermore, the Project’s construction and maintenance activities are short-term and spread out over a large geographic area. Therefore, the Proposed Project’s contribution to cumulative effects would be less than cumulatively considerable. 4.17.3 Air Quality and Climate Change Emissions from the Proposed Project would combine with the emissions of projects listed in Table 4.17.1 if construction work and emissions occur at the same time. In the cumulative setting, all emissions from existing sources in the region plus foreseeable changes to emissions associated with growth in the region would continue to contribute to nonattainment conditions for ozone, PM10, and PM2.5. Construction and operation of the Proposed Project, along with the projects listed in Table 4.17.1 could cause significant cumulative impacts to air quality. Project construction and operation activities would not individually result in exceedance of air quality or emissions standards in the region (Impact AQ-1), and the collective or combined air quality effect would be less than significant (Impact AQ-3). Similarly, the Project would be consistent with regional air quality plans that are in place to ensure progress towards attainment (Impact AQ-5), and the regional impact would be subject to mitigation to manage construction activities to achieve emission rates that are below the applicable thresholds (Impact AQ-6). In localized areas of impact, the incremental contribution of construction emissions would be limited to the Project construction duration of approximately 18 months and would not occur near any particular receptor for more than a few weeks (Impact AQ-2). The localized potential exposure of sensitive receptors to construction-related HAP emissions and pollutant concentrations would be negligible (Impact AQ-4). Project emissions would be sufficiently reduced through the implementation of the Project EPMs and mitigation such that any contribution would be minor and would not be cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative air quality impacts is necessary. Greenhouse gas emissions contribute, by their nature, to cumulative impacts. The analysis presented for Impact AQ-7 and Impact AQ-8 in Section 4.3 (Air Quality and Climate Change) is a cumulative impact assessment because GHG emissions contribute, by their nature on a cumulative basis, to the adverse environmental impacts of global climate change. Although the Project could combine with the effects of the GHG emissions from the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17.1 to cause significant cumulative GHG impacts, the incremental contribution of the Project would not generate substantial levels of GHG emissions during construction or over the longterm. Due to the limited levels of Project GHG emissions, the Project would not contribute in a cumulatively considerable manner to GHG emissions or global climate change. No additional mitigation for cumulative climate change impacts is necessary. Additionally, refer to the discussion under impacts AQ-7 and AQ-8 in Section 4.3 (Air Quality and Climate Change) regarding cumulative GHG emissions. 4.17.4 Biological Resources Past and present actions have resulted in extensive cumulative changes to native vegetation communities and the occurrence and distribution of plants and wildlife within the Project area and the region. Native vegetative communities in the general vicinity have been substantially altered by agricultural conversion, ranching, residential, and commercial uses, water impoundments and conveyance systems, road construction, and construction of the various utility infrastructure. Past and present actions such as water infrastructure, agriculture, ranching, transportation, and utility infrastructure are expected to continue in the region. In addition, energy development projects (including renewable energy projects), recreation area management, and future urban and residential development are reasonably foreseeable actions in the Project region that would adversely affect biological resources. Under Impact BIO-1, the Project’s effects to special-status plants and wildlife could include loss of individuals, loss or degradation of habitats (including designated critical habitat for the California redlegged frog and the delta smelt), and disturbance to wildlife from human activities. The Project’s impacts to native vegetation communities, including sensitive communities (Impact BIO-2) and jurisdictional wetlands (Impact BIO-4) could include direct loss and indirect effects such the spread of nonnative and invasive weeds, degradation of water quality, and erosion and sedimentation. Other projects in the region would have similar effects. Mitigation Measures BIO-1 though BIO-32 would minimize the Proposed Project’s impacts through a series of avoidance and minimization measures and compensatory mitigation for impacts that cannot be avoided. Therefore, the Proposed Project’s incremental contribution to adverse cumulative effects to special-status species and their habitats, native plant communities, and jurisdictional resources would not be cumulatively considerable. The CDFW commented during scoping that the area from the Los Banos Creek Reservoir to a point just north of San Luis Reservoir (in the San Luis and South segments) is a critical migration corridor for San Joaquin kit fox, and that creation of the San Luis Reservoir and O’Neill Forebay created a substantial barrier to movement (Impact BIO-3). Busy highways such as State Routes 152 and 33 and Interstate 5, as well as existing urban development, are additional major barriers to movement for this species. Other species in the region, such as Tule elk, are also impeded by these existing features. However, the Proposed Project’s impacts to habitat are primarily localized and short-term, the widely spaced Project towers would not create barriers to wildlife movement, and Project facilities would be engineered to current industry standards to minimize collision and electrocution risks to birds. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not contribute substantially to regional cumulative impacts resulting from interference with wildlife movement. The Proposed Project’s incremental contribution to adverse cumulative wildlife movement impacts would not be considerable. The Proposed Project would not conflict with any local policies or ordinances protecting biological resources (Impact BIO-5) or with the provisions of an adopted habitat conservation plan (Impact BIO-6), and therefore would not contribute to cumulative impacts for these issues. Although the Project would cross several conservation easements, impacts within easements would be avoided to the extent feasible (Mitigation Measure BIO-2), and Western would comply with all applicable requirements within conservation easements (Mitigation Measures BIO-28 and BIO-31). In addition, Mitigation Measure BIO-33 requires measures to minimize impacts within existing conservation easements and coordinate with easement holders to ensure Project activities adhere to individual conservation easement deeds and approved management plans. Therefore, the Proposed Project’s incremental contribution to adverse cumulative impacts to conservation easements would not be considerable. Affected biological resources are similar between corridor alternatives, and no corridor alternative would introduce a new impact not already considered for the Proposed Project. The differences between alternatives are in the magnitude of impacts. Cumulative impacts to biological resources would be similar across all alternatives. 4.17.5 Cultural Resources Loss of cultural resources is a concern in San Joaquin Valley and the Diablo Range foothills. Very few archaeological resources have been investigated in this area and loss of any intact cultural deposits without data recovery is significant. Future agricultural, infrastructural, and urban development projects may result in similar direct and indirect impacts to cultural resources, including damage, degradation to, or loss of resources. These may be unique archaeological resources as defined by CEQA or resources of archaeological, tribal, or historical value that is listed, or eligible for listing, on the National Register or California Register. Individually minor but collectively significant actions (usually in the form of ground disturbance) may have a cumulatively considerable impact on cultural resources. Types of resources that are generally not considered eligible to the National or California Registers may become eligible as impacts from this and future projects make them rarer. When considered together with the SLTP, these projects may result in a significant cumulative impact. Due to the Project EPMs and MM CUL-1, the contribution from the SLTP to cumulative impacts to National Register– or California Register–eligible resources or unique archaeological resources would be minor. Under CEQA, the project’s contribution to impacts on cultural resources would not be cumulatively considerable. To date, no human remains or burials have been identified within the Proposed Project corridor; therefore, there would be no disturbance to these remains. However, investigation or earth-disturbing activities performed prior to construction could reveal the presence of human remains. Impacts to human remains would be mitigated through MM CUL-2. Therefore, there would be no adverse effects on such resources and the project’s contribution to this impact would not be cumulatively considerable. However, if human remains are discovered and the disturbance was an issue with the descendant community, it may be cumulatively significant. 4.17.6 Environmental Justice The Proposed Project would not contribute to cumulative impacts to environmental justice communities in the Project area. Currently, the study area contains one census block group with a minority population greater than 50 percent and no low-income population that exceeds the minimum threshold. The high minority population is located in the North Segment of the Project area. The past, present, and foreseeable future developments in the Project area, presented in Table 4.17-1, do not overlap with this portion of the Project corridor. Although other projects in the cumulative analysis study area could result in adverse effects to socioeconomics, the Proposed Project was not found to result in any adverse effects to socioeconomics and therefore would not combine with the adverse effects of other projects to result in disproportionate cumulatively considerable effects to minority or low-income populations. 4.17.7 Geology, Soils, and Mineral Resources Past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future agricultural, urban development, infrastructure, and energy development projects may result in exposure of people or structures to geologic hazards, soil loss and accelerated sedimentation, direct and indirect impacts to soil productivity and vegetative cover, direct and indirect impacts to locally important mineral resource recovery sites, and direct and indirect impacts to structural stability due to unstable soils. However, because the EPMs and mitigation measures listed herein would reduce the geology, soils, and mineral resources impacts of the Proposed Project to less than significant, the incremental contribution of the Proposed Project to any cumulative impact would be minor. The cumulative impact of the Proposed Project combined with past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future projects would remain minor. Under CEQA, the project’s contribution to this impact would not be cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative impacts is necessary. 4.17.8 Land Use Land use in the project vicinity has incrementally changed due to cumulative past and present development, and this would be expected to continue with the cumulative future development identified in Table 4.17-1. Past and present actions have cumulatively established the current land use patterns in Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties. These actions have introduced predominantly agricultural (mainly crops and livestock grazing) and rural residential uses throughout the area, with commercial and residential uses near the San Luis Reservoir and the community of Mountain House. Land use in the area also has been cumulatively affected by development of transportation and utility infrastructure throughout the area, including numerous roads, railroads, pipelines, and transmission lines. More recently, wind energy development has occurred in the Altamont Pass area, a biomass power plant was built near Tracy, and several solar power projects are planned or under construction near the San Luis Reservoir. Continued renewable energy development, including new solar panels, wind turbines, transmission lines, substations, and roads that would be built for these facilities, could result in the permanent conversion of thousands of acres of mainly agricultural land to an energy production use. While agricultural uses could largely continue in areas around these facilities, renewable energy development is a significant cumulative change in land use in the project vicinity. The Proposed Project would have less-than-significant impacts under impacts LU-2, LU-3, and LU-6. With regard to Impact LU-1, the Proposed Project would widen the total width of existing utility corridors along the entire route. An additional utility corridor would be compatible with existing land uses, allowing continued use as farming and ranching lands. Construction of a transmission project may not be compatible with the terms of some conservation easements, but Western will coordinate with the parties involved in the easement to ensure that impacts are adequately minimized or compensated for, as required by Mitigation Measures LU-1 and BIO-33. The addition of the Proposed Project would effectively reduce the amount of land available for some other types of land uses, especially residential development; but residential development would be an incompatible use within the lands zoned for agricultural use in the four counties affected by the Project, and therefore increased residential or commercial development within the area is not anticipated in the near term. However, conditions and land use planning could change, and future residential development could occur in the Project Area. Given the amount of land available in the Project region for conversion to other land uses, the relatively small amounts of land that would be restricted from conversion for residential development would have only a minor effect on the counties’ ability to change land uses to allow other types of development, if they conclude that doing so is appropriate. Therefore, the Project would not contribute to cumulatively considerable impacts under current planning guidelines. The Proposed Project would result in significant and unavoidable impacts to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area under Impacts LU-1 and LU-4 from construction and operation of the new Los Banos West Substation. The addition of the new substation within the established Jasper Sears OHV Use Area would result in an incompatibility with the provisions of the existing SLRSRA RMP/GP. Therefore, the Proposed Project would contribute to cumulative impacts to similar land uses and designations. Mitigation to modify existing facilities at the OHV Use Area to maintain existing operations would minimize conflicts. However, this mitigation would be implemented by agencies other than Western or the Authority; therefore, its feasibility is uncertain and the impacts remains cumulatively considerable. Regarding the other potential impacts to land use, the Proposed Project would be located adjacent to existing transmission lines, which are an existing and allowed use in all areas of the Project. The Project would not block movement of people and animals through these lands, conflict with the land management objectives of the administrating agency, or result in nuisance impacts, and all disturbances will be restored to pre-project conditions, at the discretion of the landowner. Therefore, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects would be less than cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative impacts is necessary. 4.17.9 Noise Cumulative noise impacts in the Project vicinity typically occur when noise receptors are exposed to noise from sources at about the same time. There could be cumulative noise impacts if these actions are undertaken simultaneously and close to each other. Construction noise from the Proposed Project would temporarily add to noise from other activities in the immediate vicinity of portions of the Proposed Project, such as traffic on nearby roads. In addition, if similar projects are constructed at the same time in the immediate vicinity of the Proposed Project, the construction noise for these projects could be cumulatively additive with construction noise from the Proposed Project. The Project thus could contribute incrementally to adverse cumulative impacts to noise on a temporary basis during construction. Implementation of Mitigation Measures NOISE-1 and NOISE-2 would reduce the project’s contribution, but it would still be considerable if local noise standards are violated. Once the line is built, corona generated noise from the transmission line also could contribute incrementally, though in a relatively minor way, to cumulative noise impacts in areas near the line. The Project’s contribution to cumulative noise levels during operation would not be cumulatively considerable. 4.17.10 Paleontological Resources Although the effects of the Proposed Project could combine with those of the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1 to constitute significant cumulative impacts to paleontological resources under Impact PALEO-1, the incremental contribution of the Proposed Project would generally be limited to small amounts of new disturbances near existing utility corridors. Potential impacts to paleontological resources would be sufficiently reduced through the implementation of the mitigation measures described in this document such that any contribution would be minor and would not be cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative impacts is necessary. 4.17.11 Public Health and Safety Most of the cumulative projects identified in Table 4.17-1 would result in use and disposal of hazardous materials. However, the incremental quantities of materials used as a result of the Proposed Project would be very small in comparison with other cumulative projects, and the applicable regulation of hazardous material handling would govern appropriate use of such materials for all projects. Construction and operation of the Proposed Project, along with the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1, could cause significant cumulative impacts to public health and safety, including interference with emergency response capabilities or resources (Impact H&S-1) or creation of hazards to workers or others in the area (Impact H&S-2). The incremental contribution of the Proposed Project, however, would be generally limited to temporary construction activities completed by workers trained in safety and hazardous materials handling and cleanup. These activities are unlikely to interfere with emergency response capabilities or resources, or create hazards to workers or others in the area; impacts to public and worker safety and health would be sufficiently reduced through the implementation of the mitigation measures described in this document such that any contribution would be minor and would not be cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative impacts is necessary. 4.17.12 Recreation Past, present, and future development in the study area may cause similar direct or indirect impacts that conflict with established, designated, or planned recreation areas and activities. In particular, there are several projects listed in Table 4.17-1 within the SLRSRA that contribute to regional cumulative effects. Construction and maintenance activities associated with the Proposed Project could temporarily impact the setting within recreation areas and conflict with established areas or activities by causing indirect impacts to air quality, noise, and visual resources. Mitigation measures in this document would reduce the severity of these impacts to minimize the potential for conflict to recreational resources. Construction and maintenance activities would also conflict with planned facility management identified in the SLRSRA RMP/GP. Construction of the new Los Banos West Substation would result a substantial loss of recreation resources identified by the SLRSRA RMP/GP. The feasibility of mitigation is uncertain as it would be implemented by agencies other than Western and the Authority. Therefore, the Project’s contribution to conflicts with established or planned recreation areas would be cumulatively considerable (Impact REC-1). Past, present, and future development in the study area may cause similar direct or indirect impacts that result in changes that alter the physical landscape of the recreation areas listed above. Temporary alterations caused by Proposed Project construction and maintenance activities would be restored and therefore, would not contribute to cumulative impacts. However, the presence of permanent transmission lines within the viewshed of the recreation areas would contribute to cumulative impacts. In addition, the permanent installation of facilities associated with the new Los Banos West Substation would substantially alter the physical setting of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. As described above, the feasibility of mitigation is uncertain; therefore, the Project’s contribution to physical alteration of established and planned recreation areas would be cumulatively considerable (Impact REC-2). Past, present, and future development in the study area may cause similar direct or indirect impacts to accessibility of recreation areas. Accessibility impacts caused by Proposed Project construction and maintenance activities would be temporary and minimized through proper signage and coordination with the public and would not contribute to cumulatively considerable impacts. However, the installation of permanent facilities associated with the construction of the new Los Banos West Substation may result in decreased accessibility to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. As described above, the feasibility of mitigation is uncertain; therefore, the Project’s contribution to decreased accessibility of established and planned recreation areas would be cumulatively considerable (Impact REC-3). Future development in the study area may cause similar direct or indirect impacts that would contribute to a demand for recreational resources. However, due to the temporary nature of this impact and the abundance of recreational opportunities in the study area, the contribution would be negligible. Under CEQA, this contribution would not be cumulatively considerable (Impact REC-4). 4.17.13 Socioeconomics Past, present, and future development in the study area may cause similar direct or indirect impacts that result in the permanent or irreversible loss of work for a major sector of a community. A large workforce is available within the four county region that encompasses the Proposed Project. Impacts associated with a temporary increase in construction jobs would not contribute to cumulatively considerable impacts as the total number of local workers is not anticipated to be substantial compared the total workforce. Cumulative projects may cause similar direct or indirect impacts resulting in an increase in population that would create shortages of housing. Existing availability of housing in the region would accommodate the temporary increase in population associated with the Proposed Project. Therefore, the Proposed Project’s contribution to housing shortages or a need for new infrastructure systems, including power or gas utilities, communications systems, water and sewer services, or solid waste disposal systems would be minor. Beneficial impacts associated with a temporary increase in construction jobs would not contribute to cumulatively considerable impacts as the total number of workers is not substantial compared to the total population. Although other projects in the cumulative analysis study area could result in adverse effects to socioeconomics, the Proposed Project was not found to result in any socioeconomic adverse effects and therefore would not combine with the adverse effects of other projects to result in a cumulative considerable effects to socioeconomics. 4.17.14 Traffic and Transportation While the Proposed Project could combine with the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1 to cause significant cumulative impacts to traffic and transportation under Impact TRANS-1 through TRANS-7, the incremental contribution of the Proposed Project to local traffic conditions would be limited at peak construction times to no more than approximately 100 temporary or contract workers who would commute to and from various project locations during construction, and the average workforce would generally be less than half that amount. Road closures are not expected during construction of the Project or alternatives, and therefore the project would not cause delays on local roadways (Impact TRANS-2) or block emergency vehicle travel (Impact TRANS-3); and even in combination with the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1, associated traffic would not cause exceedance of established level of service guidelines (Impact TRANS-1). Construction activities will not create hazards to drivers (Impact TRANS-4), or disrupt use of railways of bikeways (Impact TRANS-5). Construction and operation of the Project or alternatives also will not cause changes in flight paths (Impact TRANS-6) or conflict with a current or future airport plan. The effects of Project traffic and construction would therefore be sufficiently reduced through the implementation of Western’s Environmental Protection Measures and the mitigation measures described in this document such that any contribution would be minor and would not be cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative impacts is necessary. 4.17.15 Visual Resources Cumulative impacts to visual resources would occur where new electric transmission facilities occupy the same field of view as other landscapes developed by cumulative projects. Cumulative projects would occur in the vicinity of the activities and components associated with construction and operation of the Proposed Project, such as near the solar projects planned in the San Luis area, and the effects upon visual resources brought about by cumulative projects would be significant in this area. To the extent that construction under the Proposed Project would affect views near one or more of the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1, the visual character would temporarily change due to the visible presence of construction equipment, vehicles, materials, and personnel from the cumulative projects. However, these visual impacts of Proposed Project construction would be temporary and would not be cumulatively considerable. Much of the Proposed Project and alternative routes are in remote areas with limited access, and therefore construction activities and the permanent structures associated with the Project in these areas would not disrupt visually important landscapes (Impact VIS-1), or be visible from highly sensitive viewer locations (Impact VIS-2). The Project Study Area is not in a unique scenic viewshed, and Project structures would not dominate established scenic views (Impact VIS-3), with one important exception, at the San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. Of the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1, only the Quinto Solar Project has potential to create cumulatively considerable impacts to visual resources in combination with the Proposed Project or alternatives, as it would be located near one of the few important designated scenic views that are affected by the Project or alternatives. This solar project is reportedly under construction and is located on a 1,012-acre site bifurcated by McCabe Road and adjacent to the east side of the Butts Road alternative corridor. It reportedly will use landscaping to screen views of the solar panels from the cemetery, but when completed it would be visible from the scenic overlook above the cemetery, as would be the structures of the Proposed Project or the Butts Road alternative route. Though the structures of the Proposed Project when considered as a stand-alone project would not create a significant impact to visual resources from this viewpoint, depending upon the ultimate location and design of the solar project, the combination of the solar facility and the Proposed Project could present a cumulatively considerable and unavoidable impact to visual resources from this scenic viewpoint. Also, construction of the West of Cemetery alternative would cause significant and unavoidable impacts under VIS-1, VIS-2 and VIS-3 at this viewpoint, which would also be cumulatively considerable under CEQA. Other than at the National Cemetery, there are no established viewpoints or important scenic views that would be affected by a combination of the Proposed Project or alternatives with the cumulative projects listed in Table 4.17-1. As a result, impacts on visual resources from the proposed transmission lines and substations would not be cumulatively considerable other than at San Joaquin Valley National Cemetery. 4.17.16 Water Resources and Floodplains Past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future agricultural, urban development, infrastructure, and energy development projects may result in similar direct and indirect impacts to water resources and floodplains, including soil disturbance, increased erosion and sedimentation, and accidental discharge of hazardous materials, direct and indirect impacts to groundwater quality and levels, direct and indirect impacts to the existing drainage pattern, and direct and indirect impacts to the water conveyance capacity of the local floodplains. Individually minor, but collectively significant actions, may have a cumulatively considerable impact on water resources and floodplains. However, compliance with applicable water quality regulations would ensure that the cumulative impact of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future projects (including the Proposed Project) would remain minor. Under CEQA, the cumulative impact of the Proposed Project in combination with other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable projects in the area would be less than cumulatively considerable. No additional mitigation for cumulative impacts is necessary. 4.18 Unavoidable Adverse Impacts NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1502.16) require that an EIS identify the adverse environmental impacts that cannot be avoided if the Proposed Project and mitigation measures are implemented. The Proposed Project would result in significant and unavoidable impacts (and contribute to cumulatively considerable impacts) to the following resource areas: . Noise. Construction would result in more than a 5 dBA Leq increase at sensitive receptors near the Project, which in turn would exceed local noise standards near residences (Impacts NOISE-1 and NOISE-3). Refer to Section 4.9.3 for complete descriptions of these impacts. . Recreation. Construction of the proposed new Los Banos West Substation would result in conflicts with, physical alterations of, and decreased accessibility to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area (Impacts REC-1, REC-2, REC-3). Refer to Section 4.12.3 for complete descriptions of these impacts. . Land Use. Construction of the proposed new Los Banos West Substation would result in conflicts with the designated recreational use under the SLRSRA RMP/GP for the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area (Impacts LU-1 and LU-4). Refer to Section 4.8.3 for complete descriptions of these impacts. 4.19 Shortterm Uses Versus Longterm Productivity Pursuant to NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1502.16), this section identifies the relationship between shortterm uses of the environment attributable to the Proposed Project and the maintenance and enhancement of its long-term productivity. The construction phase of the proposed SLTP would result in a total of 471 acres of temporary (shortterm) disturbance (refer to Appendix E). After construction, Western would restore any temporarily disturbed areas. Permanent impacts are considered those that would be present over the 50- to 60-year life of the SLTP transmission line. Permanent impacts include 41.5 acres for transmission structures and 417.4 acres for access roads (new and improvements to existing). After Project decommissioning, all Project facilities would be removed and the permanent disturbance areas would be restored, thereby re-establishing the long-term productivity of these areas. Short-term adverse impacts to biological resources, visual resources, land use, agriculture, cultural resources, noise, transportation and traffic, public health and safety, air quality, water resources, geology, mineral resources and soils, and socioeconomics would result from construction activities as described in Sections 4.2 through 4.16. Adverse effects to air quality would be short-term and localized. During construction, emissions would exceed the NOx, VOC, and PM10 regulatory thresholds. However, construction activities may be phased to reduce emission levels, as recommended in mitigation. Adverse effects to biological resources, including special-status species and sensitive habitats, would primarily be long-term and caused by habitat removal or alteration. Temporary habitat disturbance would be restored to pre-Project conditions. Restoration and recovery would vary by habitat type and special-status plant species. Any adverse effects to cultural or paleontological resources during construction would last beyond the life of the Project, as these resources are non-renewable. Implementation of Project EPMs would avoid impacts to known resources. Effects to agriculture would be long-term at the locations of transmission support structures and access roads. Agricultural practices could continue within the right-of-way. Any reduction in productivity within the Proposed Project area would be negligible over the life of the Project. Long-term additive effects to visual resources would result from the presence of new transmission lines. 4.20 Irreversible/Irretrievable Commitment of Resources Pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section 15126.2(C), this section addresses significant irreversible environmental changes and irretrievable commitments of resources that would be caused by a proposed project. These changes include uses of nonrenewable resources during construction and operation, longterm or permanent access to previously inaccessible areas, and irreversible damages that may result from project-related accidents. Construction vehicles, equipment, and helicopters would consume fuel. Construction would also require the manufacture of new materials, some of which would not be recyclable upon Project decommissioning. The energy required for manufacturing construction materials would result in an irretrievable commitment of natural resources. The equipment, vehicles, and materials required for construction of the Proposed Project are presented in Chapter 2. Implementation of the Proposed Project would result in permanent loss of a maximum of 558.9 acres of vegetation. If any of these areas support special-status species or are considered sensitive habitat, impacts would be offset with compensatory habitat, as required by biological resources mitigation measures. Existing access roads would be used wherever feasible. Up to 35 miles of new access roads would be constructed, primarily adjacent to existing transmission corridors with access roads. Access roads no longer needed after construction would be removed and restored to preconstruction condition to the extent possible. New public access to previously accessible areas would be negligible. Hazardous materials used or encountered during construction and operation of the Proposed Project would be used, stored, and handled in accordance with Project EPMs and applicable federal and State regulations to avoid any Project-related accidents. Some of the electricity transported by the proposed transmission lines would be generated by natural gas (a non-renewable resource). 4.21 Growth Inducement NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1508.8(b)) require that an EIS discuss the growth-inducing impacts of a project. Additionally, CEQA Guidelines (15126.2(d)) require that an EIR discuss the ways in which a proposed project may foster economic or population growth, or the construction of additional housing, either directly or indirectly, in the surrounding environment. The discussion must address how a proposed project may remove obstacles to growth or encourage and facilitate other activities that could significantly affect the environment, either individually or cumulatively. Typically, the growth-inducing potential of a project would be considered significant if it fosters growth or a population concentration above what is assumed in local or regional land use plans, or in projections made by regional planning authorities. Significant growth impacts could also occur if a project provides infrastructure or service capacity to accommodate growth levels beyond those permitted by local or regional plans and policies. The Proposed Project would provide electricity to Reclamation so that it can continue to efficiently pump, store, release, convey and deliver federal water resources to its contractors for municipal, industrial, and irrigation purposes at reasonable cost. The Proposed Project could cause indirect impacts by removing a potential obstacle to growth through the additional increased capacity of electric power that it would make available. However, the SLTP would not affect the allocation or delivery of water and is not intended to supply power related to growth for any particular development, either directly or indirectly. In addition, local city and county jurisdictions will often approve developments regardless of the presence or absence of electrical infrastructure and the Proposed Project would not modify land use or zoning designations to permit new residential or commercial development. Therefore, the Proposed Project would not foster growth, remove direct growth constraints, or add a direct stimulus to growth. It is expected that the labor force for construction, operation, and decommissioning of the Proposed Project would be Western employees, local contractors, or commuting contractors; the required labor force would not be relocating. Therefore, construction of additional housing to support the Proposed Project would not occur. Under the No Action Alternative, the Proposed Project would not be constructed. Growth-inducing impacts would not occur. 4.22 Energy Conservation In order to assure that energy implications are considered in public agency decisions, CEQA requires that an EIR include a discussion of the potential energy impacts of proposed projects, with particular emphasis on avoiding or reducing inefficient, wasteful and unnecessary consumption of energy (see Public Resources Code section 21100(b)(3)). According to Appendix F of the State CEQA Guidelines, the goal of conserving energy implies the wise and efficient use of energy including: (1) decreasing overall per capita energy consumption; (2) decreasing reliance on natural gas and oil; and (3) increasing reliance on renewable energy sources. Some aspects of the energy use analysis are limited by the CEQA Guidelines (Section 15145), which recognizes that the lead agency may find that certain impacts may be too speculative for evaluation. The Proposed Project would provide electricity for Reclamation so that it can continue to efficiently pump, store, release, convey and deliver federal water resources to its contractors for municipal, industrial, and irrigation purposes at reasonable cost. The SLTP is not intended to supply power related to growth for any particular development and would not contribute directly to a significant change in overall per capita energy consumption. The No Action/No Project Alternative would increase electricity rates for Reclamation and its customers who would be served from the Proposed Project. Implementation of the Proposed Project would result in the consumption of energy in the form of fuel needed for vehicles and equipment used during construction. Additional energy would be required for the manufacture of new materials for the Project, some of which would not be recyclable at the end of the Proposed Project’s lifetime. The anticipated equipment, vehicles, and materials required for construction of the Proposed Project are detailed in Section 2.1.3 (Construction of the Proposed Project). Addressing some aspects of air quality impacts and traffic congestion also reduces energy consumption. Western would follow EPMs for Air Quality and requirements under Mitigation Measure AQ-1, as described in Section 4.3.2, that would reduce engine idling and require construction and maintenance vehicles and equipment to maintain appropriate emissions control equipment. In addition, Western would be required to submit a Traffic Control Plan (Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-1), which will include methods of reducing construction-related traffic. No significant increases in inefficiencies or unnecessary energy consumption are expected to occur as a direct or indirect consequence of the Proposed Project. Energy conservation measures are included in the EIS/EIR as components of the Project. Western would implement these aforementioned measures to reduce wasteful, inefficient, and unnecessary consumption of energy. No increases in inefficiencies or unnecessary energy consumption are expected to occur as a direct or indirect consequence of the Project. Therefore, no mitigation measures above those previously identified in this EIS/EIR would be necessary. Under the No Action Alternative, electricity rates are anticipated to be higher for Reclamation and its customers. Therefore, energy consumption may be lower under the No Action Alternative in comparison to the Proposed Project. Chapter 5 Consultation and Coordination Table 5-1 provides a list of federal, State, and local agencies and organizations contacted during preparation of the EIS/EIR. Table 5-1. EIS/EIR Information Contacts Agency/Organization Name and Title Federal U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, San Joaquin Valley Division Thomas Leeman, Division Chief Hunter Kunkel, Biologist State California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Regions 3 and 4 Annee Ferranti, Senior Environmental Scientist Jim Vang, Environmental Scientist Marcia Grefsrud, Environmental Scientist Craig Bailey, Environmental Scientist California Department of Parks and Recreation, Central Valley District Liz Stellar, District Services Manager Jack Harper Jess Cooper California Geological Survey, Mineral Resources and Mineral Hazards Mapping Program John Clinkenbeard, Mineral Hazards Supervisor and Senior Geologist California Highway Patrol Chuck Enterg, Officer California Farm Bureau Karen Mills, Public Utilities Director Local and Other Merced County Community and Economic Development Department James Holland, Senior Planner Stanislaus County Planning and Community Development Department Jami Aggers, Director Environmental Resources and Parks and Recreation City of Tracy Bill Dean, Assistant Development Services Director San Joaquin Delta College, South Campus at Mountain House Public Information Office NHPA Section 106 Consultation State Historic Preservation Officer On November 3, 2014, Western sent a letter (Appendix H) to the California SHPO, Carol Roland-Nawi, to initiate consultation pursuant to Section 106 of the NHPA and its implementing regulations, 36 CFR Part 800 Protection of Historic Properties, regarding the Proposed SLTP Undertaking. Pursuant to 36 CFR 800.2(a)(2), Western is designated Lead Federal agency for the purposes of Section 106 consultation. Western is conducting ongoing consultation with the California SHPO and Office of Historic Preservation. This is in regard to the area of potential effects from the Proposed SLTP Undertaking, the nature and organization of future survey and evaluation, the eligibility of resources present within the corridors, and the resolution of any effects to eligible resources. The primary contacts within the Office of Historic Preservation are Jessica Tudor, Associate State Archaeologist in the Archaeology and Environmental Compliance Unit, and Kathleen Forrest, State Historian II in the Architecture and Environmental Compliance Unit. Native American Consultation By letter of January 22, 2014, Western contacted the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) and requested a current contact list of all Native American groups who might have an interest in the Project area. Western also requested that NAHC conduct a search of their Sacred Lands file to determine the presence of any sacred sites or traditional cultural properties and landscapes within the APE. By letter of January 29, 2014, NAHC responded with a list of contacts and a negative result of the Sacred Lands search. By letter of March 3, 2014, Western contacted all Native American groups on the list provided by NAHC. Western received one response from the California Valley Miwok Tribe who stated they have no issues, but requested to be notified in the event of any inadvertent discoveries associated with Miwok artifacts and/or human remains. Another individual contacted Western with suggestions for mitigation measures if the SLTP would impact sites or areas important to Native Americans, specifically, the Miwok Tribe. Western will continue to keep all of the Tribal contacts informed of any changes to the Proposed SLTP Undertaking and will continue to be responsive to any future requests for consultation. The Proposed SLTP Undertaking does not cross tribal reservations or Native American Trust territories. Chapter 6 Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program 6.1 Introduction Western and the Authority included a series of EPMs as part of the Proposed Project to minimize potential environmental impacts during construction, operation, and maintenance. In addition, mitigation measures were formulated that would avoid, minimize or compensate for impacts identified in this EIS/EIR. This Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (MMRP) is intended to be used by Western to ensure that each mitigation measure, adopted as a condition for project approval, is implemented. The MMRP meets the requirements of NEPA and is consistent with the CEQA, as amended (Guidelines Section 15074(d)) for the implementation of mitigation. 6.2 Mitigation Implementation and Monitoring Western will be responsible for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures (listed in Table 6-1). Western will designate specific personnel to implement and document all aspects of the MMRP. Western will ensure that the designated personnel have authority to enforce mitigation requirements and will be capable of terminating project construction activities found to be inconsistent with mitigation objectives. Western will demonstrate compliance with applicable permit conditions to appropriate regulatory agencies. It will also be responsible for ensuring that construction personnel understand their responsibilities for adhering to the performance requirements of the mitigation plan and other contractual requirements related to the implementation of mitigation as part of Proposed Project construction. Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM AQ-1: Reduce or offset construction equipment emissions. Western will specify that construction contractors should: . Use alternative fueled or catalyst-equipped diesel construction equipment or construction equipment powered by engines meeting, at a minimum, Tier 3 or higher emission standards, as set forth in §2423 of Title 13 of the California Code of Regulations, and Part 89 of Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations. . Minimize heavy equipment use, trips, and unnecessary idling time (e.g., 5 minute maximum). . Maintain and tune engines per the manufacturer’s specifications. . Prohibit any tampering with engines and require adherence to manufacturer’s recommendations. . Locate construction equipment and staging zones away from sensitive land uses that include children, the elderly, and the infirm. . Limit the hours of operation of heavy duty equipment and/or the amount of equipment in simultaneous use. . Replace fossil-fueled equipment with electrically driven equivalents (provided they are not run via a portable generator set). . Stabilize open storage piles and disturbed areas by covering and/or applying water or chemical/organic dust palliatives where appropriate. These dust suppressants should remain effective on inactive and active sites during all phases of construction. . Install wind breaks or fencing at windward sides of substation sites and staging areas. . When hauling material and operating non-earthmoving equipment, prevent spillage. . Limit traffic speeds on unpaved roads to 15 miles per hour and limit speed of earth-moving equipment to 10 miles per hour. . Install wheel washers or wash off all trucks and equipment leaving substation sites. . Curtail construction during periods of high ambient pollutant concentrations; this may include ceasing of construction activity during the peak-hour of vehicular traffic on adjacent roadways. . Implement construction activity management (e.g., rescheduling activities to reduce short-term impacts). The construction activity management strategy should include cost-effective commitments to use newer on-highway vehicles, non-road vehicles and equipment meeting or exceeding Tier 4 standards, and advanced technology demonstration and deployment, for example for plug-in hybrid-electric vehicles and battery-electric vehicles. Prior to commencing construction, the construction contractors shall submit the construction activity management strategy and schedule to Western for review and approval. . Periodically inspect activities to ensure that construction adheres to the controls required by this measure, California’s anti-idling requirements, and the construction activity management schedule. During construction, the construction contractors shall submit monthly construction activity reports and inspection records to Western for review and approval. . Upon completion of detailed engineering plans for the SLTP and prior to commencing construction, Western will conduct a detailed air quality analysis of the construction phase of the project to determine the feasibility and necessity of finance and verify implementation of ing additional off-site emission reduction programs to offset SLTP construction emissions. Western commits to enter into an agreement or other legally binding instrument with the SJVAPCD to implement 60 tons of NOx and 82 tons of PM10 criteria pollutant emission reductions, as necessary for the Agency Preferred Alternative. To achieve measurable and enforceable emission reductions, the SJVAPCD may administer the emission reduction projects on the behalf of Western, and Western may require the SJVAPCD to prepare a report demonstrating that the emission reduction projects have achieved 60 tons of successful and actual NOx reductions to levels that are less than the EPA demonstrate General Conformity thresholds. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Report results of air quality analysis Effectiveness Criteria Construction equipment emissions are reduced or offset Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction, Construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-1: Conduct surveys for special-status plants and sensitive habitats. Prior to construction, an agency-approved botanist will survey Project areas during appropriate blooming periods for listed and special-status plant species and sensitive habitats. Special-status vegetation communities and species will be reported to the USFWS and/or CDFW. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Report special-status vegetation communities and species to the USFWS and/or CDFW Effectiveness Criteria Special-status plants and sensitive vegetation communities will be mapped Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-2: Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status plants and vegetation communities. The following measures will be implemented during construction and O&M activities for special-status plants and vegetation communities. Special-status plants include federal and state listed plant species (large-flowered fiddleneck, Hoover’s spurge, Delta button-celery, Contra Costa goldfields, Mason’s lilaeopsis, Hartweg’s golden sunburst, and Greene’s tuctoria), and all CRPR special-status plants. During construction activities: . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until an agency-approved botanist has surveyed the site. . Ground-disturbing activities will require a bloom season survey by an agency-approved biologist to flag any existing plant populations. Ground disturbance will be prohibited within the flagged boundary unless further consultation with USFWS or coordination with CDFW (as appropriate) is completed. Flagging or other field markers such as temporary fence posts, or other markers that will last for the construction season, will be placed in the prohibited area to ensure that no disturbance occurs at that location. Populations of special-status plants will also be mapped and located in the field using a GPS so that they are clearly identified at all times of the year and construction workers can easily identify areas to be avoided. The area where special-status plants are being preserved will be avoided by workers doing construction activities at all times of the year. After construction is completed the flagging and markers can be removed. . During Project construction, a biological monitor will be present when work occurs within 100 feet of a flagged listed plant population. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all ground-disturbing activities to prevent impacts to special-status plants and vegetation communities. . Where impacts to special-status plants cannot be avoided, and mitigation cannot be achieved through the purchase of credits at a mitigation or conservation bank, the top 4 inches of topsoil will be removed and salvaged and applied to an appropriate on-site or off-site restoration area. When this topsoil is replaced, compaction will be minimized. Soil will not be stockpiled for more than one year to maintain seed viability. . Western will comply with conditions of any affected existing conservation easement, and will avoid and minimize impacts within conservation easements to the extent feasible. During O&M activities: . From March 1 to August 31, vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads until an agency-approved biologist has surveyed the site. . If vegetation management activities are proposed between March 1 and August 31, an agency-approved biologist will mark special-status plant populations, including a 50-foot (15-meter) buffer zone, prior to construction and O&M activities. Within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the marked area, the following work area limits will be provided: (1) only manual clearing of vegetation will be allowed within 50 feet of the edge of the flagged area, (2) mechanical treatment of all kinds (including mowers, tractors, chippers, dozers) will be prohibited, and (3) herbicide use will be prohibited at all times with the exception of direct application to target vegetation. . Workers will refer to maps that show the location of mapped populations of special-status plants so that these areas can be avoided. . Standard erosion- and sediment-control measures will be installed for all ground-disturbing activities to prevent impacts to plants. . Where impacts to special-status plants cannot be avoided, and mitigation cannot be achieved through the purchase of credits at a mitigation or conservation bank, the top 4 inches of topsoil will be removed and salvaged and applied to an appropriate on-site or off-site restoration area. When this topsoil is replaced, compaction will be minimized. Soil will not be stockpiled for more than one year to maintain seed viability. . Western will comply with conditions of any affected existing conservation easement, and will avoid impacts within conservation easements to the extent feasible. Location Special-status plant populations and sensitive vegetation communities Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag and map sensitive resources for avoidance, conduct biological monitoring Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Effectiveness Criteria Effects to special-status plants and sensitive vegetation are avoided or minimized Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-3: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to special-status plants. Western will purchase credits in an appropriate mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank for the plants species to be impacted as appropriate. If a mitigation bank is not available Western will contribute in-lieu fees to a mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank that can provide appropriate mitigation for the special-status plant species affected. Western will work with the appropriate resource agency (USFWS and/or CDFW) to ensure adequate compensation. Mitigation ratios will be sufficient to achieve the performance criterion of no net loss of the affected plant species. If mitigation cannot be achieved by purchase of credits in a mitigation or conservation or by in-lieu fees, then Western will prepare a mitigation plan that describes the compensatory mitigation measures that will be implemented for special-status plants. The mitigation plan will be submitted to the USFWS for approval for federal listed plants and to CDFW for state-listed and CRPR plants. The mitigation plan will include the mitigation measures, which are adopted from the CNPS Policy on Mitigation Guidelines Regarding Impacts to Rare, Threatened and Endangered Plants (CNPS, 1998); or equally effective alternative measures. Location Special-status plant species habitats Monitoring/Reporting Action Submit plan that describes avoidance or compensatory mitigation measures; report permanent and temporary habitat loss and compensation including habitat location and status Effectiveness Criteria Special-status plants are avoided or compensated for Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-4: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to federally listed branchiopod habitat. If effects to branchiopod habitats cannot be avoided, Western will compensate for effects through one of the following: (a) affected pools will be restored on site after construction is complete, (b) credits will be acquired from an agency-approved conservation bank, (c) funds will be deposited into an approved in-lieu fee program, or (d) a conservation easement will be purchased. Compensation amounts will be approved by USFWS. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. If it is necessary for cysts to be salvaged to restore affected pools and with concurrence from the USFWS, an agency-approved biologist will salvage soils from local sites that are known to support vernal pool branchiopods at least 2 weeks before the onset of construction, or during the preceding dry season if pools are anticipated to hold water when construction begins. The salvaged soil samples will be stored and used to inoculate restored pools. Location Branchiopod habitats Monitoring/Reporting Action Track the development of habitat conditions that are conducive to the establishment of vernal pool branchiopods; submit plan that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation Effectiveness Criteria Size, vegetation species present, date of initial ponding, ponding duration, and wildlife usage Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-5: Avoidance and minimization measures for valley elderberry longhorn beetle. The following measures will be implemented during construction and O&M activities to protect valley elderberry longhorn beetle. During construction activities: . If the Project may affect valley elderberry longhorn beetle, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations for this beetle, which could include but may not be limited to the following: – A 100-foot (30.5-meter) no-disturbance buffer fence will be installed and maintained around the perimeter of elderberry shrubs. No grading or any other ground-disturbing activities will be conducted within the fenced area without prior verification that the requirements of the USFWS have been satisfied including the issuance of any necessary permits or authorizations. – Contractors will be briefed on the status of the beetle, the need to protect its elderberry host plant, the need to stay out of this 100-foot buffer, and the possible penalties for not complying with these requirements. – Signs will be erected every 50 feet (15 meters) along the edge of avoidance areas with the following statements: “This area is habitat of the valley elderberry longhorn beetle, a threatened species, and must not be disturbed. This species is protected by the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. Violators are subject to prosecution, fines, and imprisonment.” The signs will be clearly readable from a distance of 20 feet (6 meters), and will be maintained for the duration of construction. – Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of elderberry plants. During O&M activities: . Prior to initiating vegetation clearance with elderberry plants present, qualified personnel will clearly flag or fence each elderberry plant with a stem measuring 1 inch (2.54 centimeters) or greater in diameter at ground level. If an elderberry plant meeting this criterion is present: – A minimum buffer zone of 20 feet (6 meters) outside of the dripline of each elderberry plant will be provided during all routine O&M activities within which all O&M activities except manual clearing will be prohibited. – No insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers, or other chemicals will be used within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of an elderberry plant, except direct application to target vegetation. – Trimming, rather than removal of shrubs, will be used where feasible. Directional felling of trees and manual-cutting trees prior to removal will be used to minimize impacts to elderberries. – Replacement of existing conductor or installation of additional lines will be performed by pulling the line from tower to tower without touching the vegetation in areas where elderberry plants are present. Location Elderberry shrubs Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag or fence for avoidance, conduct biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Elderberry shrubs are avoided or compensated for Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-6: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to elderberry plants. If complete avoidance (100 feet) of elderberry plants is not feasible during construction, a mitigation plan will be developed in accordance with the most current USFWS mitigation guidelines (currently USFWS, 1999) that will include provision for compensatory mitigation. The mitigation plan will include, but may not be limited to, relocating elderberry shrubs, planting elderberry shrubs, establishing success criteria, monitoring relocated and planted elderberry shrubs to ensure success, and an adaptive management plan in the event that mitigation is not successful. Location Elderberry shrubs Monitoring/Reporting Action Submit plan that describes avoidance or compensatory mitigation measures; report number of affected shrubs and associated compensation including habitat location and status Effectiveness Criteria Elderberry shrubs are avoided or compensated for Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-7: Avoidance and minimization measures for Alameda whipsnake. Western will minimize or avoid effects to Alameda whipsnake and its habitats by implementing the following measures. . If suitable Alameda whipsnake habitat will be impacted by the proposed project, Western will consult with the USFWS and coordinate with CDFW. Applicable take authorization/permits will be obtained, as necessary. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations, which could include but may not be limited to the following: – If habitat for Alameda whipsnake will be impacted by project activities, Western will develop and implement a protection and monitoring plan for Alameda whipsnake that will be approved by USFWS and coordinated with CDFW. Measures in this plan will include, but may not be limited to, a procedure for conducting preconstruction surveys and/or trapping surveys before the onset of initial ground-disturbing activities in areas with high-quality habitat that cannot be avoided, surveying before construction and/or restoration begins each day that these activities will occur, and direct monitoring by an agencyapproved biologist of the occupied or potentially occupied grassland/scrub/mosaic habitats in the Project area that will be directly affected by Project construction. Location Alameda whipsnake habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Submit protection and monitoring plan Effectiveness Criteria Alameda whipsnakes and their habitat are avoided or minimized Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-8: Avoidance and minimization measures for blunt-nosed leopard lizard. To protect blunt-nosed leopard lizard, Western will implement the following for both construction and O&M activities. . An agency-approved (USFWS and CDFW) biologist will conduct blunt-nosed leopard lizard surveys for each ground disturbance site in blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat per the 2004 Approved Survey Methodology for the Blunt-nosed Leopard Lizard (CDFG, 2004) or currently approved methodology. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are not detected during surveys, a flashing barrier or other short-term or longer-term fencing plan approved by CDFW will be installed when feasible and necessary around the work area to prevent blunt-nosed leopard lizards from entering the work area. Fencing options may be shorter term (temporary for just a few hours) or longer term (days or weeks) and may include but would not be limited to a 36 inches (0.9 meters) tall barrier, buried 6 inches (15 centimeters) deep, and reinforced with rebar or T-posts, and may include escape ramps of silt-fencing material, wood, or soil to allow any undetected blunt-nosed leopard lizard to exit the site. Fencing plans and types may be altered based on length of time the fence is to remain in place, terrain, and Project needs. Fencing will be removed upon Project completion. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are subsequently found within the fenced work area, a section of fence may be removed so that the lizard may leave the exclusion zone. The agency-approved biologist will monitor the location of the blunt-nosed leopard lizard to ensure that it has moved outside of the work area. The fencing will be immediately replaced to exclude the lizard from the construction area. When all observed blunt-nosed leopard lizards have exited the site, additional surveys will be implemented during appropriate conditions for detection for at least five survey days before construction begins to ensure that no more blunt-nosed leopard lizards inhabit the work-area exclusion zone. . If blunt-nosed leopard lizards are detected during surveys, any active burrow within a 200-foot radius of activity sites will be flagged and marked with a burrow number prior to construction or O&M activities. Flagged, 50-foot (15-meter) exclusion zones will be established around any potentially active burrow. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this exclusion zone. A flashing barrier or appropriate fencing approved by CDFW will be established between burrow(s) and work sites. The barrier or fencing will be established at least 180 degrees around the burrow site and will flare out at the ends to direct lizards away from the activity sites. The barrier or fencing will not enclose an active burrow site. . An agency-approved biological monitor will monitor all vehicular traffic within 200 feet (61 meters) of active burrows by escorting all vehicles through this zone on foot. The monitor will walk in front of the vehicle to ensure that no blunt-nosed leopard lizards are in the road or path of travel. All personnel vehicles or other vehicles not needed for construction activities will park at least 200 feet (61 meters) from the flagged burrow site and crews will walk into the work area. . An agency-approved biological monitor will be on site for any activities within suitable blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat. Prior to construction or O&M activities each day within suitable blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site during appropriate conditions for detection to verify that no blunt-nosed leopard lizards are visible within the site. The agency-approved biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect Project activities in coordination with the project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of blunt-nosed leopard lizards. The agency-approved biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Vehicle speed limit of 15 mph (24 kph) will be enforced during construction and O&M activities on all nonpublic Project access roads within blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat and outside of blunt-nosed leopard lizard flagged areas. Vehicle speeds within 200 feet (61 meters) of flagged blunt-nosed leopard lizard areas (known presence) will be contingent upon the walking speed of biological monitor. Location Blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Install exclusion fencing, flag burrows for avoidance, conduct biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Blunt-nosed leopard lizards and their habitat are avoided or compensated for Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-9: Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status reptiles. To protect California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake, Western will implement the following measures during construction and ground-disturbing O&M activities. . A preconstruction survey for California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, and San Joaquin whipsnake will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist in all suitable habitats where tower construction, new access roads, or ground-disturbing O&M activities will affect suitable sandy grassland, scrub, sycamore, or sandy wash habitats. The survey will be conducted within 14 to 30 days of the onset of construction. If individuals of these species are not found, no further action will be required. . If California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, or San Joaquin whipsnake are found, occupied habitat as well as other suitable habitats will be avoided to the extent feasible. An agency-approved biologist will conduct daily surveys in suitable habitats during construction and O&M activities and will attempt to capture or otherwise move animals out of harm’s way when necessary. Location Special-status reptile habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag habitat for avoidance, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Special-status reptiles are avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-10: Avoidance and minimization measures for giant garter snake. Western will implement the following measures to protect giant garter snake during construction and O&M activities in Los Banos Creek and adjacent uplands below the dam impounding Los Banos Creek Reservoir. During construction activities: . A preactivity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before construction activities begin, and an agency-approved biologist will be on site during all activities in potential giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitats. Preactivity surveys will be repeated whenever a lapse in construction activity of two weeks or longer occurs. The biologist will have the authority to stop construction if a giant garter snake is encountered; construction may resume when the snake has been seen to leave the area on its own or the agency-approved biologist confirms the snake will not be harmed. Only personnel with a USFWS 10(a)(1)(A) recovery permit will have the authority to capture and/or relocate giant garter snakes encountered in project area. All sightings and incidental take will be reported to the Western Natural Resources Department, who will report to the USFWS. During Category A O&M activities (Appendix D): . Implement EPMs. During Category B O&M activities (Appendix D): . With the exception of direct application, use of herbicides within 200 feet (61 meters) of potential giant garter snake habitat will be prohibited at all times. . Giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitats will be flagged as environmentally sensitive areas by an agency-approved biologist within or adjacent to the disturbance footprint. Only manual vegetation removal will be allowed within the flagged area. . An agency-approved monitor will be present for O&M activities within the flagged area. Ground-disturbing activities will be avoided within 200 feet (61 meters) from the banks of giant garter snake aquatic habitat. If this were not feasible, O&M activities will be conducted between May 1 and September 30, the giant garter snake active period, and all potentially affected aquatic habitats will be dewatered prior to any ground disturbance. Dewatered areas will remain dry with no puddled water remaining for at least 15 consecutive days prior to excavation or filling of that habitat. If a site could not be completely dewatered, prey items will be netted or otherwise salvaged if present. . If it is not feasible to conduct O&M activities between May 1 and September 30, the Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office will be contacted, and the following actions will be performed: – A preactivity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before construction activities begin, and an agency-approved biologist will be on site during all activities in potential giant garter snake aquatic and upland habitat. Preactivity surveys will be repeated whenever a lapse in construction activity of two weeks or longer occurs. The biologist will have the authority to stop construction if a giant garter snake is encountered; construction may resume when the snake has been seen to leave the area on its own or the agency-approved biologist confirms the snake will not be harmed. Only personnel with a USFWS 10(a)(1)(A) recovery permit will have the authority to capture and/or relocate giant garter snakes encountered in project area. All sightings and incidental take will be reported to the Western Natural Resources Department, who will report to the USFWS – Any temporary fill and debris that might provide habitat for giant garter snakes will be immediately removed and disturbed areas will be restored to pre- Project conditions after completion of O&M activities. Restoration work could include replanting species removed from banks or replanting emergent vegetation in the active channel. Filter fences and mesh will be of a material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians. Erosion-control blankets will be used as a last resort because of their tendency to biodegrade slowly and trap reptiles and amphibians. No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near aquatic features. During Category C O&M activities (Appendix D): . Follow all measures listed for Category A and B activities above. Prior to site mobilization, Western will provide notification to appropriate agencies. Location Los Banos Creek and adjacent uplands below the dam impounding Los Banos Creek Reservoir Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Monitoring/Reporting Action Biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Giant garter snakes and their habitat are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-11: Avoidance and minimization measures for western pond turtle. Western will implement the following measures to protect western pond turtle during construction and O&M activities. During construction activities: . A preconstruction survey for western pond turtles will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist in all construction areas identified as potential nesting or dispersal habitat located within 1000 feet (305 meters) of potential aquatic habitat. The survey will be conducted within 48 hours prior to initiation of construction activities. If a western pond turtle is found during preconstruction surveys in an area where it may be affected by construction, an agencyapproved biologist will relocate it with permission from CDFW to a site that is a suitable distance from construction activities as necessary. If a nest is found within the construction area, construction will not take place within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the nest until the turtles have hatched and have left the nest or can be safely relocated, as determined through coordination with CDFW. . Because attempting to locate pond turtle nests will not necessarily result in detection, after completion of preconstruction surveys and any necessary relocation, exclusion fencing will be placed around all construction sites adjacent to suitable aquatic habitats during the nesting season to eliminate the possibility of nest establishment in uplands adjacent to aquatic areas, as necessary. . If construction activities occur near aquatic areas where turtles have been identified during preconstruction or other surveys, a biological monitor will be present during construction. If a turtle is found, it will be relocated, if necessary, to a site a suitable distance from construction activities. . If a pond turtle is encountered on the Project site, any construction activity that could result in harm of the turtle will immediately cease and will not resume until the agency-approved biologist has moved the turtle to a safe location. During O&M activities: . For Category A activities (Appendix D): follow standard EPMs. . For Category B and C activities (Appendix D): From April 15 to July 15, any ground-disturbing activity within 400 feet (122 meters) of a permanent pond, lake, creek, river, or slough that could affect the bed, bank, or water quality of any of these features will be prohibited OR an agency-approved biologist will inspect the Project area. If adult or juvenile pond turtles are present, an agency-approved biologist will monitor Project activities to ensure that no turtles are harmed. If the biologist determines that nests could be adversely affected, potential nesting areas will be avoided between June 1 and October 31. Location Western pond turtle habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag habitat for avoidance, install exclusion fencing during nesting season, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Western pond turtles, nests, and habitat are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-12: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to special-status reptiles. If habitat for listed or other special-status reptiles cannot be avoided, Western will provide compensatory mitigation as follows: . Alameda Whipsnake. Western will compensate for permanent and temporary loss of upland scrub habitats that could support Alameda whipsnake by (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved inlieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. . Blunt-Nosed Leopard Lizard. Western will provide compensation for permanent and temporary impacts to blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat by (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved inlieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. . Other Special-Status Reptiles. If California legless lizard, coast horned lizard, or San Joaquin whipsnake are found during preconstruction surveys and avoidance of habitats is not feasible, Western will restore habitats temporarily affected. Surveys, fencing, and compensatory mitigation for blunt-nosed leopard lizard habitat and upland habitat for California red-legged frog and California tiger salamander will benefit these species as well. Location Habitat for Alameda whipsnake, blunt-nosed leopard lizard, and other special-status reptiles Monitoring/Reporting Action Submit plan that describes avoidance or compensatory mitigation measures; report permanent and temporary habitat loss and compensation including habitat location and status Effectiveness Criteria Habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to Construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-13: Avoidance and minimization measures for California red-legged frog. Western will implement the following measures to protect California red-legged frog during construction and O&M activities. During construction activities: . California red-legged frog presence will be assumed in all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted in the year prior to construction. Uplands within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) will be assumed to be occupied around all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted. . If the Project may affect California red-legged frog, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations, which could include but may not be limited to the following. – Transmission towers and new access roads will be sited as far from aquatic habitats as is feasible. – To the extent feasible, construction activities will take place during the dry season (generally June 1 through September 30) within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. If construction extends into the wet season (generally October 1 through May 31), temporary exclusion fencing will be installed 100 feet (30.5 meters) out from work areas to prevent California red-legged frogs from entering construction areas as necessary. – Escape ramps will be constructed in all trenches or excavations to allow wildlife to escape. – Biological monitoring will be provided by a USFWS-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. The biological monitor will identify, capture, and relocate sensitive amphibians present in work areas if necessary. – A 300-foot (91-meter) setback, incorporating both riparian vegetation and uplands, will be provided on all sides of aquatic habitats identified as occupied or assumed occupied by red-legged frogs as feasible. A setback may be reduced or expanded through consultation with the USFWS depending on whether it would (a) affect habitat or (b) result in adverse impacts to the species or the biological values of the habitat. Setbacks will maintain existing vegetation free of disturbance and new construction, equipment storage, vehicle parking, and other activities that might compact or disturb soils or vegetation or that could introduce contaminants into aquatic habitats. Setbacks will be clearly delineated during the construction. – Water quality will be maintained through implementation of appropriate erosion-control measures to reduce siltation and contaminated runoff from Project sites by maintaining vegetation within buffers and/or through the use of hay bales, filter fences, vegetative buffer strips, or other accepted equivalents. – Construction and other ground disturbances will be prohibited within setbacks. The use of insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides, and pesticides will occur in accordance with USEPA guidelines addressing the use of these materials in occupied California red-legged frog habitat. – Where aquatic sites cannot be avoided by 300 feet (91 meters) on all sides, a USFWS-approved biologist will survey the work site immediately prior to construction activities. If California red-legged frogs, tadpoles, or egg masses are found, the approved biologist will contact USFWS to determine whether moving any of these life-stages is appropriate. In making this determination USFWS will consider whether an appropriate relocation site exists. If USFWS approves moving animals, the approved biologist will be allowed sufficient time to move California red-legged frogs from the work site before work activities begin. Only USFWS-approved biologists will participate in activities associated with the capture, handling, and monitoring of California redlegged frogs. Bare hands will be used to capture California red-legged frogs. USFWS-approved biologists will not use soaps, oils, creams, lotions, repellents, or solvents of any sort on their hands within two hours before and during periods when they are capturing and relocating individuals. To avoid transferring disease or pathogens from handling the amphibians, USFWS-approved biologists will follow the Declining Amphibian Populations Task Force Fieldwork Code of Practice. During O&M activities: . A USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential California red-legged frog breeding habitat within the vicinity of O&M activities, and will flag a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer. The following restrictions will apply within the buffer: (1) only manual vegetation removal will be allowed; (2) only direct (e.g., injection and cut-stump) herbicide application methods will be allowed, except when otherwise restricted; (3) no ground disturbance (e.g., digging or auguring) will be allowed; and (4) erosion-control devices will be of a material that will not entrap amphibians. Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program . If it is not feasible to follow the above-stated measures, a pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before Project O&M activities begin. If ground disturbance is required, an USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential California red-legged frog upland refuge habitat within disturbance areas. Areas that may provide suitable upland refuge will be avoided to the extent feasible. Ground disturbance will not occur in California red-legged frog aquatic/ breeding habitat. If an area that provides suitable upland refuge must be impacted, a USFWS-approved biologist will determine if California red-legged frogs are present using visual surveys, an endoscope, or other accepted detection method. If California red-legged frogs are detected, the area will be avoided using a buffer determined appropriate by the biologist, and a USFWS-approved monitor will remain on site to ensure that California red-legged frogs are not impacted during Project activities in the vicinity. A USFWS-approved biologist will remain on site during all activities to ensure protection of California redlegged frog or an exclusion barrier will be constructed around the work site using USFWS-approved methods and materials. Exclusion materials will be removed at the end of the work activity. Crews will inspect any trenches left open for more than 24 hours for trapped animals. Only a USFWS-approved biologist will remove trapped animals. . To comply with the California red-legged frog injunction for herbicide applications, Western will ensure that, in the counties named in the injunction, there will be no ground application of any of the chemicals named in the injunction (http://www.epa.gov/espp/litstatus/redleg-frog/steps-info.htm). Currently, the nouse buffer is 60 feet (18 meters) from any aquatic feature, aquatic breeding habitat, non-breeding aquatic habitat, and upland habitat. Location California red-legged frog habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag habitat for avoidance, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria California red-legged frogs and their habitat are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-14: Avoidance and minimization measures for California tiger salamander and western spadefoot. To protect California tiger salamander and western spadefoot, Western will implement the following measures. During construction activities: . California tiger salamander presence will be assumed in all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted in the year prior to construction. Uplands within 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) will be assumed to be occupied around all aquatic habitats for which protocol surveys have not been conducted . If the Project may affect California tiger salamander, take authorization/permits will be obtained from the USFWS. Upon completion of the authorization/permit process, Western will implement the terms and conditions of the authorizations. . Transmission towers and new access roads will be sited as far from aquatic habitats as is feasible. . To the extent feasible, construction activities will take place during the dry season (generally June 1 through September 30) within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. If construction extends into the wet season (generally October 1 through May 31), temporary exclusion fencing will be installed 100 feet (30.5 meters) out from work areas to prevent California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots from entering construction areas as necessary. . Escape ramps will be installed in all trenches or excavations to allow wildlife to escape. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1.24 miles (2 kilometers) of aquatic habitats. The biological monitor will identify, capture, and relocate sensitive amphibians present in work areas if necessary. . A 300-foot (91-meter) setback, incorporating both riparian vegetation and uplands, will be provided on all sides of aquatic habitats identified as occupied or assumed occupied by California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots. A setback may be reduced or expanded in consultation with the USFWS depending on whether it would (a) affect habitat or (b) result in adverse impacts to the species or the biological values of the habitat. Setbacks will maintain existing vegetation free of disturbance and new construction, equipment storage, vehicle parking, and other activities that might compact or disturb soils or vegetation or that could introduce contaminants into aquatic habitats. Setbacks will be clearly delineated during the construction. . Water quality will be maintained through implementation of appropriate erosion-control measures to reduce siltation and contaminated runoff from Project sites by maintaining vegetation within buffers and/or through the use of hay bales, filter fences, vegetative buffer strips, or other accepted equivalents. . Construction and other ground disturbances will be prohibited within setbacks. The use of insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides and pesticides will occur in accordance with USEPA guidelines addressing the use of these materials in occupied California tiger salamander and western spadefoot habitat. . Where aquatic sites cannot be avoided by 300 feet (91 meters) on all sides, an agency-approved biologist will survey the work site immediately prior to construction activities. If California tiger salamanders, larvae, or eggs are found, the approved biologist will contact USFWS to determine whether moving any of these life-stages is appropriate. In making this determination USFWS will consider whether an appropriate relocation site exists. If USFWS approves moving animals, the approved biologist will be allowed sufficient time to move California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots from the work site before work activities begin. Only USFWS-approved biologists will participate in activities associated with the capture, handling, and monitoring of California tiger salamanders. Bare hands will be used to capture salamanders and toads. USFWS-approved biologists will not use soaps, oils, creams, lotions, repellents, or solvents of any sort on their hands within two hours before and during periods when they are capturing and relocating individuals. To avoid transferring disease or pathogens from handling the amphibians, agency-approved biologists will follow the Declining Amphibian Populations Task Force Fieldwork Code of Practice. During O&M activities: . A USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential California tiger salamander breeding habitat in the vicinity of O&M activities, and will flag a 500-foot buffer. The following restrictions will apply within the buffer: (1) only manual vegetation removal will be allowed; (2) only direct (e.g., injection and cutstump) herbicide application methods will be allowed, except when otherwise restricted; (3) no ground disturbance (e.g., digging or augering) will be allowed; and (4) erosion-control devices will be of a material that will not entrap amphibians. Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program . If it is not feasible to follow the above-stated measures, a pre-activity survey will be conducted no more than 24 hours before O&M activities begin. If ground disturbance is required, a USFWS-approved biologist will identify potential CTS aestivation habitat (burrows, rock piles) within disturbance areas. CTS aestivation habitat will be avoided to the extent feasible. Ground disturbance will not occur in CTS breeding/aquatic habitat. If a burrow or other potential aestivation habitat must be impacted, a USFWS-approved biologist will determine if CTS are present within the burrow using an endoscope or other accepted detection method. If CTS are detected, the burrow will be avoided using a buffer determined appropriate by the biologist and a USFWS-approved monitor will remain on site to ensure that CTS are not impacted during Project activities in the vicinity. A USFWS-approved biologist will remain on site during all activities to ensure protection of CTS or an exclusion barrier will be constructed around the work site using USFWS-approved methods and materials. Exclusion materials will be removed at the end of the work activity. Crews will inspect any trenches left open for more than 24 hours for trapped animals. Only a USFWS-approved biologist will remove trapped animals. Location California tiger salamander and western spadefoot habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag habitat for avoidance, conduct biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria California tiger salamanders and western spadefoots and their habitat are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-15: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to listed amphibians. Western will provide compensation for permanent and temporary construction impacts to California tiger salamander and California red-legged frog aquatic and upland habitat through one or more of the following: (a) purchasing credits at a conservation bank approved by CDFW and USFWS, (b) purchasing a conservation easement, (c) donating funds to an approved inlieu fee program, or (d) restoring habitats affected by the Project. For onsite creation or restoration, Western will develop and implement a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan with input from and approval by regulatory agencies that outlines performance standards and success criteria for ensuring longterm success of mitigation. If Western intends to eliminate aquatic habitat including wetlands, ponds, springs, and other standing water sources, and to create new, onsite habitat, then the newly created habitat will be created and filled with water prior to dewatering and destroying the existing habitat. Dewatering and relocation of aquatic habitats should occur outside of the breeding season for red-legged frogs (approximately January through June). If Western intends to eliminate aquatic habitat including wetlands, ponds, springs, and other standing water sources, and will not create new, onsite habitat, then dewatering of existing habitat should occur prior to commencement of construction and other site-disturbing activities. Dewatering and relocation of aquatic habitats should occur outside of the breeding season for red-legged frogs (approximately January through June). Preserve lands acquired to offset impacts to the red-legged frog must have occupied habitat of at least equal habitat value as determined by the USFWS. Location California tiger salamander and California red-legged frog aquatic habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Report permanent and temporary habitat loss and compensation including habitat location and status Effectiveness Criteria Habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-16: Avoidance and minimization measures for burrowing owl. Western will protect burrowing owls by implementing the following methods derived from the CDFW Staff Report on Burrowing Owl Mitigation (CDFG, 2012). During construction activities: . In coordination with CDFW, a burrowing owl protection and monitoring plan will be developed following guidelines in the updated CDFW staff report (CDFG, 2012). It will include but may not be limited to (a) conducting a protocol survey of the Project area the year before construction begins to identify sites of wintering and breeding activity, (b) identifying measures to avoid and minimize impacts, (c) identifying restrictions on construction activities and buffer distances related to time of year, (d) determining whether burrow exclusion or closure will be necessary, and developing a plan for implementation, (e) developing mitigation measures and a compensation plan for unavoidable impacts, (f) conducting a preconstruction survey, and (g) developing a mitigation and monitoring plan to ensure success of mitigation. Compensatory mitigation could include habitat restoration or contribution to a conservation bank. During O&M activities: . From February 1 to August 31, Project construction, herbicide application (with the exception of direct application), and other O&M activities will be prohibited within 250 feet (76 meters) of potential burrowing owl nesting dens (ground squirrel burrows, culverts, concrete slabs, debris piles that could support nesting burrowing owls). From September 1 through January 31, disturbance will be prohibited within 160 feet (49 meters) of potential burrowing owl dens. . OR a qualified biologist will conduct nesting and wintering surveys using methods described in California Burrowing Owl Consortium 1993, CDFG 2012, or currently accepted method. If nesting or wintering activity is detected, a CDFW-approved biologist will mark and monitor an appropriate non-disturbance buffer in the vicinity of burrows that have been active within the last three years. . Within the buffer zone, all Project construction and O&M activities and herbicide applications will be prohibited from February 1 to August 31. Location Burrowing owl habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Submit plan that describes avoidance or compensatory mitigation measures Effectiveness Criteria Burrowing owls and their habitat are avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-17: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to occupied burrowing owl habitat. For unavoidable impacts to burrowing owl habitat known to be occupied within the last 5 years, compensatory mitigation will be required. Compensation may take the form of (a) acquiring and dedicating lands into conservation easements; (b) purchasing mitigation credits at compensation ratios that have been approved by the CDFW; or (c) preserving area contiguous or near the acreage lost. To prevent hazards attributable to interactions between wildlife and aviation, the location of any conservation easement or habitat restoration for burrowing owl shall be located outside of any established Airport Influence Area. Location Burrowing owl foraging and nesting habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Report habitat loss and compensation status Effectiveness Criteria Habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-18: Avoidance and minimization measures for California fully protected birds. To protect the California fully protected golden eagle and whitetailed kite, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting period for these species is March 1 through August 15. . For ground-breaking activities that begin outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all ground-breaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a CDFW-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey in suitable habitats for each species no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) in all directions from construction areas. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . During construction, if a golden eagle or white-tailed kite nest is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a 0.5-mile (0.8-kilometer) no-disturbance buffer around the nest or center of activity. The buffer will be maintained until a CDFW-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged or the nest is no longer active. If this buffer cannot feasibly be implemented, Western will contact and coordinate with CDFW well in advance of ground-disturbing activities (CDFW in litt. 2014c). . During O&M, if a golden eagle or white-tailed kite nest is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within 0.25 mile (0.4 kilometer), Western will establish a 0.25-mile (0.4-kilometer) no-disturbance buffer around the nest or center of activity; a smaller buffer may be established if a qualified biologist determines that the O&M activity will not adversely affect adults or young. . When construction or O&M activities begin in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. Location Golden eagle and white-tailed kite habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag nests for avoidance, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Golden eagles and white-tailed kites are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-19: Avoidance and minimization measures for least Bell’s vireo. To protect least Bell’s vireo, Western will implement the following measures. . Where any construction-related activity will take place within 1000 feet (305 meters) of potential least Bell’s vireo habitat during the nesting season (mid- March through September), a protocol survey will be conducted by an agency-approved biologist, in coordination with the USFWS. If nesting least Bell’s vireos are not detected, no further action is required for this species. If nesting is detected, Western will establish a clearly marked no-disturbance buffer of 1000 feet (305 meters) around the nest, or center of activity if the nest cannot be detected. The buffer will be maintained until the agency-approved biologist has determined that the nest is no longer active or that the young have fledged. . Biological monitoring will be provided by an agency-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 1000 feet (305 meters) of occupied habitat. The biological monitor will ensure that construction activities do not disturb nesting vireos. Location Least Bell’s vireo habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag nests for avoidance, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Nesting least Bell’s vireos are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-20: Avoidance and minimization measures for Swainson’s hawk. To protect nesting Swainson’s hawks, Western will implement the following measures pursuant to guidelines from CDFW (CDFG, 1994) and the Swainson’s Hawk Technical Advisory Committee (SWTAC, 2000); and pursuant to informal consultation for the Project initiated January 2014 (CDFW in litt. 2014c). The nesting season for Swainson’s hawks, which encompasses the courtship and nest initiation phase, is considered by CDFW to be February 1 through September 15. During construction activities: . An agency-approved biologist will conduct preconstruction surveys according to guidelines presented in SWTAC 2000, which establishes five survey periods. During the first period (January 1 to March 20) potential nest locations are identified. During the second period (March 20 to April 5) Swainson’s hawks are returning to traditional nesting territories during a time when most nest trees are leafless and birds and their activities are easier to detect. During the third period (April 5 to April 20) pair bonding, courtship, and nest construction are taking place and while nests may be more difficult to see, they can be inferred from increased activity. During the fourth period (April 20 to June 10) nests are difficult to detect and activity is low because adults are incubating. Surveys should not be initiated during the fourth period. During the fifth period (June 10 to July 30), young birds may be active and visible, and both adults are making many visits to the nest with prey. Three surveys will be completed in at least at least two of the survey periods immediately prior to Project imitation. Surveys will encompass the area within 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) of construction activities. . In addition, if ground-disturbing activities are to take place during the breeding season (February 1 through September 15), the CDFW recommends that additional preconstruction surveys for active nests be conducted by a CDFW-approved biologist no more than 10 days prior to the start of construction. . If an active Swainson's hawk nest is found, a 0.5-mile (0.8-kilometer) no-disturbance buffer will be established around the nest. If such a buffer cannot feasibly be implemented, coordination with CDFW will occur well in advance of ground-disturbing activities and the acquisition of a state incidental take permit pursuant to Fish and Game Code section 2081(b) may be warranted. During O&M activities: . From February 1 to September 15, a 0.25-mile buffer zone will be established and maintained around potential Swainson’s hawk nest trees, within which there will be no intensive disturbance (e.g., use of heavy equipment, power saws, chippers, cranes, or draglines). This buffer may be adjusted, as assessed by a qualified biologist, based on changes in sensitivity exhibited by birds over the course of the nesting season and the type of O&M activity performed (e.g., high noise or human activity such as mechanical vegetation maintenance versus low noise or human activity such as semi-annual patrols), or a qualified biologist will conduct nest surveys using methods described in SHTAC 2000 (or more current protocol) to determine absence. . Within 0.25 mile of an active nest, routine O&M activities will be deferred until after the young have fledged or until it is determined by a CDFW-approved biologist that the activities will not adversely affect adults or young. Location Swainson’s hawk habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag nests for avoidance, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Nesting Swainson’s hawks are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-21: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat. Compensatory mitigation will be required for loss of Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat using compensation ratios provided in CDFG 1994 (or more current document) or a ratio determined through coordination with CDFW. As provided in CDFW 2014c, compensatory mitigation for Swainson’s hawk will also be required for loss of nest trees. To prevent hazards attributable to interactions between wildlife and aviation, the location of any compensatory mitigation for Swainson’s hawk shall be located outside of any established Airport Influence Area. Location Swainson’s hawk foraging and nesting habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Report habitat loss and compensation status Effectiveness Criteria Habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-22: Avoidance and minimization measures for tricolored blackbird. Tricolored blackbird nests colonially in a variety of densely vegetated habitats. The nesting season for tricolored blackbird is March 1 through August 15. During construction activities: . For ground-breaking activities that begin or take place outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all groundbreaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a biologist experienced with tricolored blackbirds and their range of habitats will conduct a preconstruction survey no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 500 feet (152 meters) in all directions from construction areas. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . If nesting is detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within 500 feet (152 meters) of a construction or laydown area, Western will establish a clearly marked 500-foot (152-meter) no-disturbance buffer around the outer edges of the habitat. The buffer will be maintained until a CDFW-approved biologist has determined that the colony is no longer active. . If tricolored blackbirds begin nesting near construction or laydown areas after construction has started, a clearly marked no-disturbance buffer will be established around the colony that is the maximum feasible size for the circumstances. The buffer will be maintained until the colony is no longer active. . Biological monitoring will be provided by a CDFW-approved biologist during construction in all areas within 500 feet (152 meters) of occupied habitat. The biological monitor will ensure that construction activities do not disturb the colony. . When construction begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. During O&M activities: . From March 1 to August 15, herbicide application (with the exception of direct application) and vegetation clearing/disturbance will be prohibited in marshes, willows, and blackberry thickets OR a qualified biologist will conduct a nesting survey prior to O&M activities. If nesting activity is detected, a qualified biologist will mark and monitor an appropriate buffer zone around the nesting colony within which all O&M activities and herbicide applications will be prohibited from March 1 to August 15. Location Tricolored blackbird habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag breeding colonies for avoidance, biological monitoring Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Effectiveness Criteria Tricolored blackbird breeding colonies are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-23: Avoidance and minimization measures for other special-status and native birds. To protect loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, yellow-headed blackbird, and other non-listed birds protected by the MBTA and California Fish and Game Code, Western will implement the following measures. The nesting season for these species is March 1 through August 31. . For ground-breaking activities that begin or take place outside the nesting season, a preconstruction nesting survey will not be necessary. For all groundbreaking activities that begin during the nesting season, a CDFW-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey in suitable habitats for each of these species no more than 10 days prior to construction. The survey will encompass 250 feet (76 meters) in all directions from construction areas for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and 500 feet (152 meters) for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl. For species covered by the MBTA and California Fish and Game Code, but with no other special status, the survey area will encompass a sufficient area around the work site to identify nests that are present and determine their status. A sufficient area means any nest within an area that could potentially be affected by the Project. If no nesting is detected, no further action will be required. . During construction, if nests of loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, or yellow-headed blackbird are detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within this survey distance, Western will establish a clearly marked 250-foot (76-meter) no-disturbance buffer around each nest or center of activity for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer around each nest or center of activity for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl. Buffers will be maintained until a CDFW-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged or the nest is no longer active. . During O&M, if nests of loggerhead shrike, long-eared owl, Modesto song sparrow, northern harrier, short-eared owl, and/or yellow-headed blackbird are detected, or if it is determined that courtship and nest initiation are underway within the survey distance, Western will establish a clearly marked 250-foot (76-meter) no-disturbance buffer around each nest or center of activity for loggerhead shrike, Modesto song sparrow, and yellow-headed blackbird, and a 500-foot (152-meter) buffer around each nest or center of activity for long-eared owl, northern harrier, and short-eared owl; a smaller buffer may be established if the biologist determines that the O&M activity will not adversely affect adults or young. . Identified nests will be surveyed prior to construction or O&M activities to establish a behavioral baseline. Once work commences, all nests of MBTA- and Fish and Game Code–covered birds that are not designated as any other special status will be monitored during work activities to detect any behavioral changes as a result of the Project. If behavioral changes are observed, the work causing that change will cease and CDFW and USFWS will be contacted for additional avoidance and minimization measures. OR, if monitoring of identified nests by an agency-approved wildlife biologist is not feasible, CDFW and USFWS recommend a minimum no-disturbance buffer of 250 feet (76 meters) around active nests of non-listed passerine-type bird species and a 500-foot (152-meter) no-disturbance buffer around the nests of non-listed raptors until the breeding season has ended, or until an agency-approved biologist has determined that the young have fledged and are no longer reliant upon the nest or parental care for survival. Variance from these no-disturbance buffers may be implemented when there is compelling biological or ecological reason to do so, such as when Project activities would be concealed from a nest site by topography. Any variance from these buffers will be supported by an agency-approved biologist and it is recommended that CDFW and USFWS be notified in advance of implementation of a no-disturbance buffer variance. . When construction or O&M begins in a new area during the nesting season, another preconstruction survey will be completed as described above. Location Nesting bird habitats Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag nests for avoidance, biological monitoring, notify CDFW and USFWS of no-disturbance buffer variances Effectiveness Criteria Nesting birds are avoided Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-24: Avoidance and minimization measures for American badger. To protect American badger, Western will implement the following measures. . Concurrent with other required surveys (e.g., kit fox and burrowing owl), a CDFW-approved biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey to identify the presence of American badgers. If this species is not found, no further action will be required. If badgers are identified, they will be passively relocated using burrow exclusion (e.g., installing one-way doors on burrows) or similar CDFW-approved exclusion methods. In unique situations it might be necessary to actively relocate badgers (e.g., using live traps) to protect individuals from potentially harmful situations. Such relocation will be performed with advance CDFW coordination and concurrence. When unoccupied dens are encountered outside of work areas but within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of proposed activities, vacated dens will be inspected to ensure they are empty and temporarily covered using plywood sheets or similar materials. . If badger occupancy is determined at a given site within a construction area, construction will be halted. Depending on the den type, reasonable and prudent measures to avoid harming badgers will be implemented and may include seasonal limitations on Project construction near the site (i.e., restricting the construction period to avoid spring-summer pupping season), establishing a construction exclusion zone around the identified site, or resurveying the den a week later to determine species presence or absence. Location American badger habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag active dens for avoidance, biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Badgers and active dens are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-25: Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status bats. To protect Townsend’s big-eared bat and other special-status bats, Western will minimize impacts by performing preconstruction surveys and creating no-disturbance buffers around active bat-roosting sites, especially maternity roosts and especially during the bat pupping season (April 1 through August 15) for Project construction and O&M activities using the following measures. . Before construction or O&M activities within 250 feet (76 meters) of trees, cliffs, or caves, a CDFW-approved bat biologist will survey for special-status bats. If no evidence of bats (i.e., direct observation, guano, staining, or strong odors) is observed, no further mitigation will be required. If evidence of bats is observed, Western will implement the following measures to avoid potential impacts on breeding populations: – A no-disturbance buffer of 250 feet (76 meters) will be created around active bat roosts or occupied roosting habitat during the pupping season (April 1 through August 15). Bat roosts initiated during construction will be presumed to be unaffected by the indirect effects of noise and construction disturbances. However, the direct take of individuals will be prohibited without further coordination with CDFW. – Removal of trees showing evidence of active bat use will occur during the periods least likely to affect bats in winter hibernacula or maternity roosts, as determined by a CDFW-approved bat biologist (generally between August 15 and October 15, and between February 15 and April 1). If the exclusion of bats from potential roost sites is necessary to prevent indirect impacts due to construction noise and adjacent human activity, bat exclusion activities (e.g., installation of netting to block roost entrances) will be conducted by a CDFW-approved biologist. Location Active bat roosts Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag active roosts for avoidance, biological monitoring, exclude bats from potential roost sites Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Effectiveness Criteria Active bat roosts are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-26: Avoidance and minimization measures for special-status kangaroo rats. Western will either assume presence of giant and short-nosed kangaroo rats and implement measures to avoid or minimize impacts, or conduct research to assess habitat potential. Research could take the form of (a) evaluating the Project area using a model based on satellite imagery currently being applied to giant kangaroo rat habitats throughout their range (T. Bean pers. comm.) or other habitat models or (b) conducting protocol trapping in potentially suitable areas immediately prior to construction. If research indicates that kangaroo rats are not likely to be present, no further action will be required. If Western either assumes presence or research indicates that either kangaroo rat species could be present, Western will implement the following measures. . Prior to construction or O&M activities, any active burrows in the vicinity of work sites will be flagged and marked with a burrow number. Exclusion zones with a 30-foot (9-meter) radius will be established around any active burrow. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this exclusion zone. . A biological monitor will be on site for all activities within suitable kangaroo rat habitat. Prior to construction or O&M activities each day within suitable habitat, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site to verify that no kangaroo rats are present within the site. The biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect Project activities in coordination with the project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of giant kangaroo rats. The biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Installation of barrier fencing around the work site may be used to further limit the risk of direct impacts to kangaroo rats where necessary. Barrier fencing will at no time inhibit the kangaroo rat’s ability to move between its den and other habitats that allow breeding, feeding, and sheltering. All barriers will be removed at the end of Project activities. . If giant kangaroo rats are detected within a disturbance site, through coordination with USFWS and if necessary, they may be relocated to a suitable site away from Project activities but as close to the disturbance site as feasible. Relocation methods will follow the recommendations in Tennant et al. (2013) or other USFWS-approved methods. Location Giant kangaroo rat and short-nosed kangaroo rat habitats Monitoring/Reporting Action Report results of research assessing habitat potential, flag active burrows for avoidance, install barrier fencing to exclude animals from work areas, biological monitoring, submit daily reports summarizing activities and environmental compliance Effectiveness Criteria Giant kangaroo rats and short-nosed kangaroo rats and their active burrows are avoided Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-27: Avoidance and minimization measures for San Joaquin kit fox. To protect San Joaquin kit fox, Western will implement the following measures. . To the extent feasible, Western will avoid Project construction and O&M activities that require ground disturbance or off-road travel between December 1 and May 31, the kit fox breeding/pupping season. . Prior to Project construction or O&M activities that involve ground disturbance, off-road travel, or vegetation management in suitable kit fox habitat, an agency-approved biologist will conduct habitat/den surveys in accordance with the “Small Projects” recommendations in the 2011 USFWS Standardized Recommendations for Protection of the Endangered San Joaquin Kit Fox Prior to or During Ground Disturbance (USFWS, 2011c). Any suitable den (i.e., burrow with an entrance greater than 4 inches in diameter) will be monitored for evidence of kit fox use by placing either a tracking medium or wildlife monitoring cameras at the entrance for at least three consecutive nights. Active dens will be marked with a 100-foot (30.5-meter) buffer and natal or pupping dens (December 1 through May 31) will be marked with a 1,000-foot (305-meter) buffer. Construction activities, with the exception of essential vehicle operation on existing roads and foot travel, will be prohibited within this buffer area. . If activities must occur within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of an active den, San Joaquin kit foxes will be excluded from the den. Methods will follow those outlined in USFWS 2011c. The den will be monitored for at least five consecutive nights from initial observation to allow the animal to move to another den during its normal activity. Use of this den may be discouraged by partially plugging the den in such a manner that any resident animal can easily escape but may be discouraged from re-entering. Once the kit fox has abandoned the den or is still present after five or more consecutive days of partial plugging and monitoring, the den will be plugged or excavated (by hand as feasible) when the qualified biologist determines that the animal is absent due to normal activities. Natal dens will not be destroyed or disturbed during breeding/pupping season (December 1 through May 31). . A biological monitor will be on site for any work activities within suitable kit fox habitat. Prior to construction activities each day, the monitor will conduct a brief ground survey of the site to verify that no kit foxes are present. The biological monitor will have the authority to stop and/or redirect Project activities in coordination with the project manager and Western’s natural resources staff to ensure the protection of kit foxes. The biological monitor will complete daily reports/logs summarizing activities and environmental compliance. . Installation of barrier fencing around the work site may be used to further limit the risk of direct impacts on kit fox. If necessary, barrier fencing will be used to prevent kit foxes from entering the work site and getting injured or killed by equipment but will at no time inhibit the kit fox’s ability to move between its den and other habitats that allow breeding, feeding, and sheltering. All barriers will be removed at the end of construction or O&M work. . Any excavated, steep-walled holes or trenches more than 2 feet (0.6 meter) deep will be covered at the close of each working day with plywood or similar materials or escape ramps will be installed in the hole or trench. Before any hole or trench is filled, it will be inspected for trapped animals. . All construction pipes, culverts, or similar structures with a diameter of 4 inches (10 centimeters) or more that are stored at a construction site overnight will be thoroughly inspected for kit foxes before the pipe is buried, capped, or moved. If a kit fox is discovered inside a pipe, that section of pipe will not be moved until the kit fox has left the pipe. . Use of rodenticides and herbicides in the Project area will be limited to the extent feasible. Use of any such compounds will observe label and other restrictions mandated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, California Department of Food and Agriculture, and other state and federal legislation. If rodent control must be conducted, zinc phosphide will be used as feasible because it presents a lower risk to kit foxes. Location San Joaquin kit fox habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag habitat and dens for avoidance, biological monitoring, install exclusion fencing, submit daily reports summarizing activities and environmental compliance Effectiveness Criteria San Joaquin kit fox and dens are avoided; habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-28: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to San Joaquin kit fox. Compensatory mitigation will be required for temporary and permanent impacts to San Joaquin kit fox habitat. Compensation may take the form of (a) acquiring and dedicating lands into conservation easements or (b) purchasing mitigation credits at compensation ratios that have been approved by state and federal agencies. Impacts within conservation easements may require compensatory mitigation at higher ratios than impacts outside of easements, and mitigation will be consistent with the requirements of the easement. Location San Joaquin kit fox habitat Monitoring/Reporting Action Report habitat loss and compensation status Effectiveness Criteria Habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-29: Avoidance and Minimization Measures for Vernal Pool and Seasonal Wetland Habitats. During construction and O&M activities in the vicinity of vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands, Western will implement the following measures. During O&M Category A Activities (see Appendix D): . Vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads unless soils are dry. Soils will be considered sufficiently dry for vehicle access when they resist compaction, and after annual plants have set seed (generally June 1 to September 30, or as determined by qualified personnel based on personal observation of the soils). For patrolling the ROW off of established roads in a pickup truck, or for inspecting hardware on structures with a bucket truck, vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands will be avoided by 50 feet (15 meters) during the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31). No avoidance will be necessary if soils are completely dry. During construction and O&M Category B and C activities (Appendix D) in the vicinity of vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands: . Vehicle access will be permitted only on well-established roads unless soils are dry. Soils will be considered sufficiently dry for vehicle access when they resist compaction, and after annual plants have set seed (generally June 1 to September 30, or as determined by an agency-approved biologist based on personal observation of the soils). If vegetation management activities were proposed within 250 feet ((76 meters) of a vernal pool, vernal pool grassland, or seasonal wetland, an agency-approved biologist will be present at all times to ensure the protection of the work-area limits below OR qualified personnel will clearly flag or fence the limits of the work area, according to limits presented in the following, prior to the maintenance activity. (The herbicide restriction measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database supersede those below where they are different.) . Mixing or application of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals will be prohibited. . Herbicide application to target vegetation with hand-held applicator (cut-stump treatment) will be prohibited within 25 feet (7.6 meters) in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31) and allowed up to the edge of the pool or seasonal wetland in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). . Herbicide application with power sprayers for spot treatment and selective elimination of target species will be prohibited within 100 feet (30.5 meters) in any season. . Broadcast herbicide application by vehicle with boom for treating large or dense areas of the ROW will be prohibited within 150 feet (45.7 meters) in any season. . Manual clearing of vegetation (chainsaw, axe, clippers) will be allowed up to the edge of the pool or seasonal wetland in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31); a buffer will not be necessary in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). . Mechanical clearing of vegetation (heavy-duty mowers, crawler tractors, or chippers) will be prohibited within 100 feet (30.5 meters) in the wet season (generally October 1 to May 31); a buffer will not necessary in the dry season (generally June 1 to September 30). Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program . For ground-disturbing activities, a 50-foot (15-meter) wet season or 25-foot (7.6-meter) dry season buffer zone from the edge of the vernal pool or wetland will be maintained and the vernal pool or wetland will be protected from siltation and contaminant runoff by use of erosion control. Erosion-control materials will be of a tightly woven natural fiber netting or similar material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians (e.g., coconut coir matting). No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near vernal pools and seasonal wetlands. Erosion-control measures will be placed between the outer edge of the buffer and the activity area. All fiber rolls and hay bales used for erosion control will be certified as free of noxious weed seed. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. . For activities such as installation or repair of underground components (water, power, communication, or ground electrical line) or soil borings, a 250-foot (76-meter) buffer zone will be maintained. A smaller buffer could be approved after a site assessment by an agency-approved biologist, but must include silt fencing or other sediment control, to be established no less than 50 feet (15 meters) from the wetland boundary. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. Location Vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag for avoidance, conduct biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Effects to vernal pools, vernal pool grasslands, and seasonal wetlands are avoided or minimized Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-30: Avoidance and Minimization Measures for Sensitive Wetland Habitats. During construction and O&M activities in the vicinity of seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, and marshes, and their associated habitats, Western will implement the following measures. During O&M Category A activities (see Appendix D): . The following activities will be prohibited at all times within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, and their associated habitats: – vehicle access, except on existing access and maintenance roads – dumping, stockpiling, or burying of any material – mixing of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals – open petroleum products During construction and O&M Category B and C activities (see Appendix D): . The following activities will be prohibited at all times within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of a seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, and their associated habitats: – vehicle access, except on existing access and maintenance roads – dumping, stockpiling, or burying of any material, except as required for specific O&M activities such as rip-rap – mixing of pesticides, herbicides, or other potentially toxic chemicals – open petroleum products . For vegetation management or maintenance within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of any seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, or marsh, or any of their associated habitats, the following work-area limits will be provided (the herbicide restriction measures generated by the PRESCRIBE database supersede those below where they are different): – Only manual clearing of vegetation will be permitted – Foliar application of herbicides will be prohibited. Only cut-stump treatments of target vegetation will be allowed using herbicide approved for aquatic use by the EPA and in coordination with the appropriate land manager. . For ground-disturbing activities, a 100-foot (30.5-meter) buffer zone will be maintained from the edge of the seep, spring, pond, lake, river, stream, marsh, or their associated habitats for protection from siltation and runoff of contaminants by use of erosion-control measures. If work must occur within the buffer, the disturbance will not alter the hydrologic integrity of the wetland. Erosion-control materials will be of a tightly woven natural fiber netting or similar material that will not entrap reptiles and amphibians (e.g., coconut coir matting). No monofilament plastics will be used for erosion control near seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or marshes. Erosion-control measures will be placed between the outer edge of the buffer and the activity area. All fiber rolls and hay bales used for erosion control will be certified as free of noxious weed seed. . Western will obtain applicable section 404 discharge and 401 water-quality permits prior to any maintenance activities that must take place within jurisdictional wetlands or other waters of the U.S. These will be coordinated with USACE and RWQCB as needed. . Dewatering work for maintenance operations adjacent to or encroaching on seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or marshes will be conducted to prevent muddy water and eroded materials from entering the water or marsh. . All stream crossings will be constructed such that they reduce the potential for stream flows to result in increased scour, washout, or disruption of water flow. To the extent feasible, stream crossings will be located in stream segments without riparian vegetation, and structure footings will be installed outside of stream banks. Should Western need to modify existing access roads or install new access roads, they will be built at right angles to streams and washes to the extent feasible. Trees providing shade to water bodies will be trimmed only to the extent necessary and will not be removed unless they presented a specific safety concern. Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program . Trees that must be removed will be felled to avoid damaging riparian habitat. They will be felled out of and away from the stream maintenance zone and riparian habitat, including springs, seeps, bogs, and any other wet or saturated areas. Trees will not be felled into streams in a way that will obstruct or impair the flow of water, unless instructed otherwise. Tree removal that could cause streambank erosion or result in increased water temperatures will not be conducted in and around streams. Tree removal in riparian or wetland areas will be done only by manual methods. Location Seeps, springs, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, and marshes, and their associated habitats Monitoring/Reporting Action Flag for avoidance, conduct biological monitoring Effectiveness Criteria Effects to sensitive wetlands habitats are avoided or minimized Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM BIO-31: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to sensitive plant communities. Western will purchase credits in an appropriate mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank for the vegetation community to be impacted. If a mitigation bank is not available Western will contribute in-lieu fees to a mitigation bank or habitat conservation bank that can provide appropriate mitigation for the vegetation type. Western will work with the appropriate resource agency (USFWS or CDFW) to ensure adequate compensation. If no mitigation bank, conservation bank, or in-lieu-fee compensation is available then Western will prepare a mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan that describes the compensatory mitigation measures that will be implemented for these vegetation communities. The mitigation plan will be submitted to the CDFW for approval and will outline performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. Impacts within conservation easements may require compensatory mitigation at higher ratios than impacts outside of easements, and mitigation will be consistent with the requirements of the easement. Location Special-status vegetation communities Monitoring/Reporting Action Report habitat loss and compensation status Effectiveness Criteria Habitat is avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM BIO-32: Provide compensatory mitigation for impacts to wetlands and waters. Compensation for loss of wetlands and waters will depend on habitat value and integrity, and may take the form of creation, restoration, enhancement, or preservation. Federal and state agencies have a no-net-loss of wetlands policy, which requires that any permanent loss of wetlands be mitigated. Mitigation can be accomplished through purchase of credits in an approved wetland mitigation bank or contribution of in-lieu fees to a conservation bank or other conservation organization that will create the wetlands as mitigation/ compensation for impacts from the Project. If these options are not available then mitigation will be accomplished by the creation of new wetlands on site or in an appropriate off-site location. For creation of new wetlands, Western will develop and implement a wetland mitigation, monitoring, and reporting plan in compliance with USACE and RWQCB guidelines. The plan will outline performance standards and success criteria for ensuring long-term success of mitigation. All newly created wetlands must be monitored and maintained for a minimum of 5 years to ensure achievement of performance standards and success criteria. Annual reporting to the USACE and RWQCB are required as part of monitoring. Location Wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State Monitoring/Reporting Action Report habitat loss and compensation status Effectiveness Criteria Wetlands and waters of the U.S. and State are avoided or compensated Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM BIO-33: Minimization measures for conservation easements. Western will consult with easement holders and implement measures to avoid or minimize impacts to any existing or pending conservation easements along the Project alignment, to ensure that the Project does not conflict with the provisions of any conservation easements or otherwise impair or interfere with the conservation values of the easement property. For both construction and O&M activities, Western will minimize ground disturbance and will provide compensation at the required ratios for each easement, as applicable. Minimization measures can include, but not be limited to, siting staging and storage areas outside of easement boundaries, limiting ground disturbance to the minimum feasible area, limiting Project personnel within the easement property to only those actively required at any given time during both construction and O&M, and minimizing the duration of work within the easement during construction and O&M. Where a conservation easement prohibits new ground disturbance, Western will minimize impacts by attempting to span covered areas, routing around easement boundaries, or other methods developed through consultation with the easement holder, including amending the easement agreement to allow and compensate for construction, operation and maintenance of the Proposed Project. Location Existing or pending conservation easements Monitoring/Reporting Action Minimize impacts to conservation easements and/or amend agreement Effectiveness Criteria Project is consistent with easement agreement Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM CUL-1: Prepare and Implement Archaeological Resource Management and Treatment Plan for Unique Archaeological Resources. In the case of the inadvertent discovery of a unique archaeological resource, Western will have a Secretary of Interior –qualified archaeologist prepare and implement an Archaeological Resource Management and Treatment Plan that specifies the treatment of the resources. Prior to implementation, this document shall be submitted for review to the Authority as CEQA Lead Agency. This plan shall be tailored to the specific needs of the project area and the particular resources present there. The proposed Archaeological Resources Management and Treatment Plan must minimally address the following: . A general research design shall be developed that: – Charts a timeline of all research activities. – Recapitulates any existing paleoenvironmental, prehistoric, ethnohistoric, ethnographic, and historic contexts to create a comprehensive historic context for the project vicinity. – Poses research questions and testable hypotheses specifically applicable to the resource types encountered. – Clearly articulates why it is in the public interest to address the research questions that it poses. . Artifact collection, retention/disposal, and curation policies shall be discussed, as related to the research questions formulated in the research design. These policies shall apply to archaeological materials and documentation resulting from evaluation and data recovery of unique archaeological resources. . Person(s) expected to perform each of the tasks, their responsibilities, and the reporting relationships between project construction management and the mitigation and monitoring team shall be identified. . The manner in which Native American observers or monitors shall be included, the procedures to be used to select them, and their roles and responsibilities shall be described. . All impact-avoidance measures (such as flagging or fencing) to prohibit or otherwise restrict access to sensitive resource areas that are to be avoided during ground disturbance, construction, and/or operation shall be described. Any areas where these measures are to be implemented shall be identified. The description shall address how these measures would be implemented prior to the start of ground disturbance and how long they would be needed to protect the resources from project-related impacts. . The commitment to curate of all archaeological materials retained as a result of the archaeological investigations (survey, testing, data recovery), in accordance with CEQA Lead Agency requirements and the California State Historical Resources Commission’s Guidelines for the Curation of Archaeological Collections (HRC, 1993), into a retrievable storage collection in a public repository or museum shall be stated. Location Area surrounding archaeological materials. Monitoring/Reporting Action Notify Western’s Regional Preservation Officer (RPO), prepare and implement archaeological resource management and treatment plan. Effectiveness Criteria Treatment and reporting of archaeological resource completed in accordance with best practices and the standards set forward by the California Office of Historic Preservation in “Guidelines for Archaeological Research Designs” and the Secretary of the Interior’s “Standards for Archeological Documentation.” Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM CUL-2: Treatment of Inadvertent Discovery of Human Remains. If human remains are encountered, Western’s Regional Preservation Official (RPO) and the relevant county coroner shall be notified within 24 hours of the discovery. No further excavation or disturbance of the site or any nearby area reasonably suspected to overlie potential remains shall occur until the relevant county coroner has determined the appropriate treatment and disposition of the human remains. If the coroner determines that the remains are or are believed to be Native American, they will contact the NAHC, who will notify a designated most likely descendant (MLD). The MLD will inspect the site and will determine, in consultation with the property owner and Western’s RPO, the disposition of the remains. Location Area surrounding human remains. Monitoring/Reporting Action Perform appropriate treatment of human remains in accordance with professional ethics and California regulations. Effectiveness Criteria . The removal of the human remains performed in a scientific manner that minimizes damage to the remains. . The process of removing the remains and eventual disposition of the remains occurs in a way that satisfies all involved parties. Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Mitigation Measure MM GEO-1: Conduct Geotechnical Investigations and Implement Project Design Recommendations. A California-registered Professional Geotechnical Engineer shall evaluate the potential for geotechnical hazards and unstable slopes on the centerline route and areas of new road construction or widening of roads with slopes with more than a 15 percent gradient. Geological hazards shall be evaluated during final design specification for each structure location and road construction area. Project design recommendations will include measures to stabilize and protect Project structures from geologic hazards. Geologically unstable sites will be avoided or stabilized prior to construction. Additionally, expansive soils (such as vertisols) will be avoided or stabilized prior to tower installation. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Report results of geotechnical investigations. Effectiveness Criteria Geotechnical hazards and unstable slopes are avoided or stabilized Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM LU-1: Minimize impacts within conservation easements and/or amend conservation easements. Prior to commencing construction on any parcel protected by a conservation easement, Western will consult with the governmental agencies or non-governmental organizations involved in managing the parcel to determine whether construction, maintenance or operation of the Proposed Project is a compatible use within the conservation easement. The consultation shall include the agency that is managing the easement (easement grantee, such as the California Department of Fish and Wildlife), the agency or organization charged with management of the properties (easement grantor, such as CCWD or the Nature Conservancy) and any other agency involved in assuring that the conservation values of the properties are not significantly impacted (participating agencies, such as the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). If such activities are deemed incompatible with the provisions of the conservation easement agreement, Western will attempt to minimize conducting any prohibited activities on the property, or work with the grantor, grantee and participating agencies to amend the agreement to allow and compensate for any significant impact to conservation values resulting from construction, operation and maintenance of the Proposed Project. Location Existing or pending conservation easements Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Monitoring/Reporting Action Minimize impacts to conservation easements and/or amend agreement Effectiveness Criteria Project is consistent with easement agreement Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM NOISE-1: Provide construction notification. Notice shall be mailed no less than 15 days prior to construction to all residents, property owners, businesses, and public agencies that have facilities within 500 feet of the project area. The notice shall state the type of construction activities that will be conducted, and the location and duration of construction. Location Within 500 feet pf the Project Area. Monitoring/Reporting Action Notify affected parties. Effectiveness Criteria All parties are notified 15 days prior to construction. Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction Mitigation Measure MM NOISE-2: Implement Best Management Practices for construction noise. Western shall implement the following noise-suppression techniques during construction and major maintenance activities to avoid violations of local noise ordinances and minimize exposure of noise-sensitive receptors. . Confine construction noise to daytime, weekday hours (7:00 AM to 7:00 PM) or an alternative schedule established by the local jurisdiction or land manager in areas within 1,000 feet of a sensitive receptor. . All vehicles and equipment would be equipped with noise suppression devices that are no less effective than those originally installed by the manufacturer. . Place construction equipment and route construction traffic away from sensitive receptors where feasible. . Minimize unnecessary construction vehicle use and idling time. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Report compliance and construction schedule to the appropriate local jurisdictions. Effectiveness Criteria Local noise ordinances are not violated. Responsible Agency Western Timing Construction and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM PALEO-1: Conduct Preconstruction Survey. A qualified paleontologist will be retained to conduct a field reconnaissance survey of the Project area prior to any ground-disturbing activities. Any required permits will be obtained prior to the survey. Survey areas will include the entire corridor right-of-way, plus any additional easements, such as for substations, work or storage areas, or access roads. The purpose of the field survey will be to visually inspect the ground surface for exposed fossils or traces thereof and to evaluate geologic exposures for their potential to contain preserved fossil material at the subsurface. Only Project areas (as defined above) classified as having a PFYC Class 3 or higher will be subject to a pedestrian survey. Particular attention will be paid to rock outcrops, both inside and in the vicinity of the Project area, where accessible, and any areas where geologic sediments are well exposed. Areas determined to have a PFYC Class 1 or 2, or areas that are heavily disturbed or otherwise obscured by heavy vegetation will not require a field survey. Where possible, activities and structures should be located in areas of lower sensitivity for encountering paleontological resources. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Document results of field reconnaissance surveys and permit acquisition. Effectiveness Criteria Impacts to scientifically important paleontological resources are avoided during ground-disturbing activities. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction, Construction Mitigation Measure MM PALEO-2: Document all Finds. All fossil occurrences observed during the course of fieldwork, significant or not, will be documented and recorded at the time of discovery. The data collected for each fossil occurrence should include, at a minimum, the following information: Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates, approximate elevation, description of taxa, lithologic description, and stratigraphic context (if known). In addition, each locality will be photographically documented with a digital camera. If feasible, with prior consent of the landowner(s), all significant or potentially significant fossils will be collected at the time they are observed in the field. If left exposed to the elements, fossil materials are subject to erosion and weathering. If the fossil discovery is too large to collect during the survey (e.g., a dinosaur skeleton or bone bed) and requires a large-scale salvage effort, then it will be documented and a mitigation strategy will be devised pursuant to SVP (2010) guidelines. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Document and record fossil occurrences at the time of discovery. If feasible and with prior consent, collect fossils at the time they are observed. Effectiveness Criteria Impacts to scientifically important paleontological resources are avoided during ground-disturbing activities. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction, Construction Mitigation Measure MM PALEO-3: Conduct Worker’s Environmental Awareness Training. Prior to the start of Project activities, all field personnel will receive worker’s environmental awareness training on paleontological resources. The training will provide a description of the fossil resources that may be encountered in the Project area, outline steps to follow in the event that a fossil discovery is made, and contact information for the Project Paleontologist and on-site monitor(s). The training will be developed by the Project Paleontologist and may be conducted concurrent with other environmental training (e.g., cultural and natural resources awareness training, safety training, etc.). Location Designated training facility Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Monitoring/Reporting Action Document completion of training for each field personnel. Effectiveness Criteria All field personnel receive adequate worker’s environmental awareness training on paleontological resources. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction, Construction, and O&M Mitigation Measure MM PALEO-4: Conduct Paleontological Mitigation Monitoring. Prior to the commencement of ground-disturbing activities, a qualified and professional paleontologist will be retained to prepare and implement a Paleontological Resource Mitigation Plan for the Project. Initially, full-time monitoring will be required during ground-disturbing activities in the areas of the Project with a recommended paleontological resource potential of Class 4 or higher (i.e., Panoche Formation, Moreno Formation, Oro Loma Formation, Briones Formation, Neroly Formation, Tulare Formation, and Quaternary older alluvium). Parttime monitoring or spot checking will occur in areas of the Project underlain by geologic units with a recommended paleontological resource potential of Class 3. In addition, spot checking will also occur in Project areas underlain by Quaternary alluvial deposits in order to determine if underlying sensitive geologic units are being impacted by construction, and at what depth. Monitoring will entail the visual inspection of excavated or graded areas and trench sidewalls. In the event that a paleontological resource is discovered, the monitor will have the authority to temporarily divert the construction equipment around the find until it is assessed for scientific significance and collected. Monitoring will include matrix screening for the presence of microfossils and the frequency of which will be determined by the Project Paleontologist. Monitoring is largely a visual inspection of sediments; therefore, the most likely fossils to be observed will be macrofossils of vertebrates (bones, teeth, tusk) or invertebrates (shells). At the discretion of the Project Paleontologist, the monitor will periodically screen sediments to check for the presence of microfossils that can be seen with the aid of a hand lens (i.e., microvertebrates). Should microvertebrate fossils be encountered during the screening process, then bulk matrix samples will be taken for processing off site. For each fossiliferous horizon or paleosol, a standard sample (4.0 cubic yards or 6,000 pounds) will be collected for subsequent wet-screening per SVP (2010) guidelines. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Document preparation and implementation of Paleontological Resource Mitigation Plan. Document and report results of monitoring. Effectiveness Criteria Impacts to scientifically important paleontological resources are avoided during ground-disturbing activities. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction, Construction, and O&M Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Mitigation Measure MM PALEO-5: Procedures for Fossil Preparation, Curation, and Reporting. Upon completion of fieldwork, all significant fossils collected will be prepared for curation. Preparation will be done in a properly equipped paleontology laboratory and will include the removal of excess matrix from fossil materials, and stabilizing and repairing specimens, as necessary. Following laboratory work, all fossil specimens will be identified to the lowest taxonomic level, cataloged, analyzed, and curated. The fossil specimens must be delivered to the accredited museum repository identified on the permit and receipt(s) of collections will be submitted to Western. This delivery will be made as soon as practical but no later than 60 days after all fieldwork is completed. The cost of curation is assessed by the repository and will be the responsibility of Western. At the conclusion of laboratory work and museum curation, a Paleontological Mitigation Report will be prepared describing the results of the paleontological mitigation monitoring efforts associated with the Project. The report will include a summary of the field and laboratory methods, an overview of the Project area geology and paleontology, a specimen inventory of all taxa recovered (if any), an analysis of fossils recovered (if any) and their scientific significance, the signed receipt of confirmation of museum deposition, and recommendations. The report will be submitted to the designated repository, Western, and any other interested state or federal agencies involved within 45 days following completion of monitoring and laboratory work. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Obtain permit and deliver all significant fossils collected to the accredited museum repository identified on the permit. Submit Paleontological Mitigation Report to the designated repository and any other interested state or federal agencies involved within 45 days following completion of monitoring and laboratory work. Effectiveness Criteria Proper treatment of significant fossils is maintained upon completion of all fieldwork. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction, Construction, and O&M Mitigation Measure MM REC-1: Coordinate with local agencies to identify tower locations. Western shall coordinate with the CDPR regarding transmission line structure locations within the SLRSRA boundary to minimize conflicts with planned recreation areas and facility management. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Provide project design specifications to affected local agencies and incorporate recommendations from affected agencies to the extent possible. Effectiveness Criteria Conflicts with proposed recreation or facility management are avoided or minimized. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM REC-2: Modify existing facilities within and relocate, if necessary, the entrance to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. Western shall coordinate with Reclamation and CDPR to identify modifications to existing facilities within the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area necessary to facilitate continued operation of the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area. In the case that the new Los Banos West Substation renders the existing entrance to the OHV use area unusable, Western shall coordinate with Reclamation and CDPR to relocate the entrance to provide continued access to the OHV use area. Modifications to the Jasper Sears OHV Use Area, including a new entrance as necessary, shall be operational before construction begins within the OHV use area. Location Jasper Sears OHV Use Area Monitoring/Reporting Action Provide project design specifications to affected local agencies and incorporate necessary modifications to existing facilities to the extent possible. Table 6-1. Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program Effectiveness Criteria Jasper Sears OHV Use Area continues to operate Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction Mitigation Measure MM TRAFFIC-1: Prepare and Submit Traffic Control Plans. Prior to the start of construction, Western would submit traffic control plans to all agencies with jurisdiction of public roads that would be affected by construction activities. The plans will include details on work schedule, associated truck traffic and commuter traffic for all portions of the project. Plan requirements include: . Coordinating with the affected jurisdictions on construction hours of operation. . Following guidelines of the local jurisdiction for road closures caused by construction activities. . Installing traffic control devices as specified in the California Department of Transportation’s (Caltrans’) Manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Works Zones (California Department of Transportation, 1996). . Notifying the public of road closures in the immediate vicinity of the construction zone and/or of temporary closures of bike lanes, and recreation trails. . Providing access to driveways and private roads outside the immediate construction zone. . Monitoring road and bike lane damage and repairing roads and bike lanes damaged during construction, or providing compensation for damage to roadways and bikeways. . Coordinating with Caltrans and the California Highway Patrol for stringing transmission line conductors and fiber over interstate or state highways, an activity that would require close coordination with these agencies to minimize hazards to workers and the public. Location Entire Project area Monitoring/Reporting Action Submit traffic control plans to all agencies with jurisdiction of public roads that would be affected by construction activities. Effectiveness Criteria Traffic-related impacts are avoided or minimized through implementation of Traffic Control Plans. Responsible Agency Western Timing Prior to construction  Chapter 7 Preparers and Reviewers A consultant team headed by Aspen Environmental Group prepared this document under the direction of Western and the Authority. Table 7-1 presents the agency preparers and technical reviewers of this document and their qualifications. Table 7-2 presents the preparers for the Aspen consultant team. Table 7-1. Agency Preparers and Reviewers Agency/Office Name and Title Education Years Exp. Specialty/Expertise Western Western Sierra Nevada Region Don Lash, NEPA Document Manager M.S., Soil, Water, and Environmental Science 15 NEPA Document Manager Russell Knight, Power Operations Advisor B.S., Civil Engineering 32 Power Operations Management Joe Oloriz, Project Manager B.S., Architecture, PMP 20 Project Management Gerald Robbins, Natural Resources Manager M.S., Geology 28 Natural Resources Management Heidi Miller, Lands and Rights of Way Manager B.S., Business 23 Lands Rights of Way Latisha Saare, Biologist M.S., Biology 12 Biology Cherie Johnston-Waldear, Regional Preservation Official/Tribal Liaison M.A., Classical Archeology 25 Cultural Resources Kristen Dalldorf, Environmental Protection Specialist M.S., Natural Resources and Environmental Science 8 Environmental Compliance Western Corporate Services Office Matthew Blevins, Environmental Manager M.S., Environmental Engineering B.S., Chemistry 15 NEPA Steve Blazek, NEPA Specialist M.S., Environmental Policy and Management B.S., Natural Resources Management 28 NEPA San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority Frances Mizuno, Assistant Executive Director B.S., Civil Engineering 25 Project Management Engineering and Planning Department Bob Martin, Department Manager B.S., Civil Engineering 26 Design, Operations, and Maintenance U.S. Bureau of Reclamation Division of Power Operations Barry Mortimeyer, Chief, Power Operations Division B.S., Electrical Engineering 40 Power Operations Division of Environmental Affairs Russell Grimes, Chief, Environmental Compliance and Conservation M.S., Environmental Management B.A., Environmental Studies 23 NEPA  Table 7-2. EIS/EIR Preparers Firm Personnel by Name and Title Education Years Exp. Specialty/Expertise Aspen Environmental Group Tom Murphy, Vice President M.A., Physical Geography B.A., Earth Science 21 EIS/EIR Project Manager Heather Blair, Senior Associate M.S., Conservation Biology B.S., Ecology 11 EIS/EIR Deputy Project Manager Matthew Long, Environmental Scientist Master of Environmental Science Master of Public Policy 7 Geology, Minerals, and Soils; Water Resources and Floodplains Jennifer Lancaster, Biologist M.S., Biology B.S., Biology 13 Biological Resources Moselle DiPane, Environmental Scientist B.A., Geography 2.5 Agriculture; Recreation; Environmental Justice; Socioeconomics Evan Elliott, Cultural Resources Specialist M.A., Cultural Resources Management, B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 10 Cultural Resources Mathew Trask, Senior Associate B.A., Science and Investigative Journalism 18 Air Quality, Noise, Visual Resources, Land Use, Public Health and Safety, Traffic and Transportation, Paleontological Resources Beth Bagwell, Cultural Resources Group Manager Ph.D., Anthropology (Archaeology), M.A., Anthropology (Archaeology), B.A., Anthropology and Creative Writing 20 Cultural Resources Brewster Birdsall, Senior Associate M.S., Civil Engineering B.S., Mechanical Engineering 22 Air Quality, Noise EcoBridges Environmental Consulting Anne Wallace, Senior Biologist M.S., Wildlife Science B.S., Wildlife Biology 30 Biological Resources Pacific Legacy John Holson M.A., Anthropology (Archaeology), B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 38 Cultural Resources Robert Jackson M.A., Anthropology (Archaeology), B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 38 Cultural Resources Lisa Holm Ph.D., Anthropology (Archaeology) MSC, Computer Sciences (Archaeology) B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 18 Cultural Resources Elena Reese M.A., Archaeology B.A., Ancient History 25 Cultural Resources Hannah Ballard M.A., Cultural Resources Management, B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 18 Cultural Resources Rhea Sanchez M.A., Anthropology (Archaeology), B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 11 Cultural Resources Shanna Streick M.A., Creative Writing B.A., English 6 Cultural Resources Amy Kovak M.A., Anthropology (Archaeology), B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 12 Cultural Resources Starla Lane M.A., Historical Archaeology, B.A., Anthropology (Archaeology) 8 Cultural Resources 7.1 Contractor Disclosure Statement Pursuant to 40 CFR 1506.5(c), we Aspen Environmental Group, headquartered at 5020 Chesebro Road, Suite 200, Agoura Hills, California 91301, do hereby certify that neither we nor any of our subconsultants have any financial or other interests in the execution or outcome of the Proposed Project identified in this EIS/EIR, nor any financial or other interests in other developments related to this transmission line project or to Western Area Power Administration or the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority; nor any financial or other interests in any mitigation requirements associated with the Project. Signed disclosure statements from each EIS/EIR preparer listed in Table 7-2, with the exception of those no longer employed by Aspen Environmental Group, are presented in Appendix J (Consultant Disclosure Statements). Chapter 8 Recipients of the Draft EIS/EIR The following sections provide a list of agencies, organizations, and individuals to whom notification of availability of the Final EIS/EIR was sent. 8.1 Agencies and Organizations ADESA Golden Gate Akopiantz Aphrodite Trust AKT Developments LLC Alameda County Allen Matkins LLP Anatolia LLC Arnaudo Brothers LP B and V Incorporated Banta-Carbona Irrigation District Bay Area Air Quality Management District Beltran Farms Bidart Bros Corporation Bureau of Reclamation, Mid-Pacific Region Business Development International Butler Amusements Inc. Byron Bethany Irrigation District Byron Highway Energy Center LLC CAK LP California Cattlemen’s Association California Department of Fish and Wildlife California Department of Parks and Recreation California Department of Water Resources California Farm Bureau Federation California Highway Patrol California Native Plant Society California State Horseman’s Association California Striped Bass Association Caltrans District 10 Caltrans District 4 Central California Irrigation District Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board Chacopulos G Survivors Trust Chevron Corporation Christy Concrete Productions Inc. City of Gustine City of Los Banos City of Newman City of Patterson City of Tracy CK Investment Company LLC Clarot Farms Inc CM Trinkle LLC Connolly Ranch Contra Costa County Contra Costa Water District County of Alameda County of Merced County of Stanislaus Cubiburu Livestock Inc. David E Wood Living Trust Defenders of Wildlife Del Puerto Water District Delta-Mendota Canal Dompe Lands Inc Drainage Management South-Central California Area Duke Energy E and C Farms LLC Elfers Hills LLC Elworthy and Son Environmental Defense Fund Environmental Protection Agency Filbin Land and Cattle Company First Industrial Realty Fred Beltran Jr and Sons Partnership Frontier Renewables LLC Gibson Vail LLC Gnesa Living Trust Granite Construction Company Griffith Family Properties LLC Grissom Land and Cattle GTB Consulting Hetch Hetchy Water and Power HMV Farms LLC I-5 City LLC Iacopi Lenz and Company Jackson Land and Cattle Jackson Land Holdings LP Jo E Mitchell Trust Joe Borba and Sons John and Bill Jensen Farms Kemp Family Trust Khaira Investments L Davis 2009 Trust Los Banos Chamber of Commerce Los Banos Chamber of Commerce Los Banos Sequoia LLC Mangini 1998 Trust Merced County Merced County Farm Bureau Modesto Irrigation District Modesto Radio Control Club Mountain House School Nasa Ames Research Center Native American Heritage Commission Natural Resources Defense Council Nature Conservancy Obanion Ranches Pacific Gas and Electric Company Park and Sell LLC Parkway South Incorporated Patterson Irrigation District PCCP Mountain House LLC Planning and Conservation League Pombo Ranch Estates LLC Ray and Dorothy Mallonee 2005 Trust Rec Fishing Alliance Recreational Fishing Alliance Red Bear Property Management Rishwain and Rishwain River East Holdings LLC Riverview Capital Advisors Robert Houret Construction Corporation San Benito County San Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board San Joaquin Council of Governments San Joaquin County San Joaquin County Department of Public Works San Joaquin Delta Community College San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority San Luis National Wildlife Refuge San Luis Sailboard Safety Patrol San Luis Water District San Pablo Bay Pipeline Company LLC Santa Clara County Santa Nella Chamber of Commerce Santa Nella County Habitat Conservation LLC Santa Nella County Water District Schropp-Alameda LP Shea Mountain House LLC Sherwood Family Trust Sierra Club Stanislaus County State Historic Preservation Office State of California Aqueduct Studley Company Sun Power Corp Sunset Hills Development LLC Teixeira and Sons The Desilva Group LLC The Freda Hansen Family Trust Thomas Law Group Tracy Chamber of Commerce Tracy Hills Project Owner LLC Transmission Agency of Northern California Travel Centers of America LLC Turlock Irrigation District Union Pacific Railroad Company United Anglers of California United States Bureau of Land Management United States Bureau of Reclamation United States Department of Veterans Affairs United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Veteran Administration Valley Crop Dusters Vieira Family LP Vieira Family LTD PTP West Side Irrigation District West Stanislaus Irrigation District Wildlands Inc. Wright Solar Park LLC 8.2 Individuals Abdul Wazid and Marielena Calderon San Jose, CA 95127 Adil M Altamimi and Gloria Aguon-Wilgus Santa Nella, CA 95322 Al and Catherine Vieira Santa Clara, CA 95050 Albert D and Catherine H Mangini San Jose, CA 95124 Alexander G Armstrong Santa Barbara, CA 93101 Amador and Mary Zabalbeascoa Los Banos, CA 93635 Angela M Givart Patterson, CA 95363 Anne Marie Whitehurst Fresno, CA 93711 Antemio A and Rosa R Preciado Santa Clara, CA 95054 Arian A Mongeon Santa Clara, CA 95050 Arnold Alfred Davis Tracy, CA 95377 Awni Michael and Nawal Hindy Hoady Hayward, CA 94542 Bernard Elissagaray McMinnville, OR 97128 Bert C Murphy Sonoma, CA 95476 Bert Verrips Los Banos, CA 93635 Bill Langford Tracy, CA 95377 Billy Dene Grissom Hilmar, CA 95324 Brain C Vail Sacramento, CA 95816 Brent Tadman Walnut Grove, CA 95690 Charles A Wisely and Laura L Sheppard Livermore, CA 94550 Charles F and Claudia T Curran Pleasanton, CA 94566 Cork Mcisaac West Sacramento, CA 95691 Cosme Lozano Los Banos, CA 93635 Cynthia Balatti Roelofs Los Banos, CA 93635 Dan Stadtler Gustine, CA David and Elizabeth Lopez Santa Nella, CA 95322 David A Cole Santa Cruz, CA 95063-2340 David J and Vickie Nervino Hilmar, CA 95324 David M Walker Tracy, CA 95391 David R and Cathleen M Gould Los Banos, CA 93635 David Wood Fresno, CA 93711 Dennis Bridgman San Jose, CA 95123 Dolores and Gary Kuhn Byron, CA 94514 Dominique Arotzarena Jr Danville, CA 94526 Dominique Arotzarena Jr Los Banos, CA 93635 Don Wagenet Folsom, CA 95630 Donn Campion Saratoga, CA 95070 Douglas J and Geraldine P Mathews Roseville, CA 95747 Dwayne D and Charlene P Sylva Santa Nella, CA 95322 Eduardo S and Graciela S Kneler Fremont, CA 94539 Enos R Mallonee Los Banos, CA 93635 Eric J and Sandra G Zehnder Folsom, CA 95630 Eugene and Shirley Sparks Tracy, CA 95377 Everett Barid Forest Knolls, CA 94933 Fern Ingeborn Vieira Stockton, CA 95212 Francisco G and Delfina Padilla Westley, CA 95387 Frank M Dompe Crows Landing, CA 95313 Frank M Dompe Jr Crows Landing, CA 95313 Fred Beltran Jr Crows Landing, CA 95313 Freddie L and Obie J Clark Tracy, CA 95391 Gary A and Joan M Uznay Addy, WA 99101 Gerald Thomas and Christine Emily Nola Stockton, CA 95215 Harold and Marilyn Bogard San Martin, CA 95046 Harold V and Caroline N Hoagland Capitola, CA 95010 Helen A Cabral Newman, CA 95360 Henry and Anita Franco Byron, CA 94514 Honorine Arbelbide Los Banos, CA 93635 Ignacio and Eva Romero San Jose, CA 95121 Iqbal S and Inderjit K Sandhu Tracy, CA 95304 James Obanion Dos Palos, CA 93620 Jeffrey Arambel Patterson, CA 95363 Jim Bassett Gustine, CA 95322 Jim Cox Westley, CA 95357 Jim F and Constance S Barletta Patterson, CA 95363 Joan Jess Byron, CA 94514 Joan Shea Stockton, CA 95207 Joe Ten Berge Los Banos, CA 93635 John A and John J Roffoni Pismo Beach, CA 93449 John A Bidart Bakersfield, CA 93312 John and Marie Jackson Livermore, CA 94551 John C and Lesley A Kemp Folsom, CA 95630 John David Moitozo3 Gustine, CA 95322 John R and Beverly J Mancebo Dos Palos, CA 93620 Jose Elias Roberto Cintora Sr Los Banos, CA 93635 Jose J and Elizabeth Nunez Oakdale, CA 95361 Joseph O and Kelli R Souza Gustine, CA 95322 Julio Medina Byron, CA 94514 Justin Fredrickson Sacramento, CA 95833 Karnail S and Ranbir K Sandhu Tracy, CA 95304 Larry Vernon Freeman Los Banos, CA 93635 Lee HuuNgo and Thi Tamee Los Banos, CA 93635 Leon and Grace Urrutia Los Banos, CA 93635 Leonard Bidart Bakersfield, CA 93312 Linda Lyons Irvine, CA 92602 Lisa Davis Stanford, CA 94305 Luis Torres San Jose, CA 95126 Maninder S Sandhu Tracy, CA 95304 Manuel S and Virginia De La Cerda Santa Nella, CA 95322 Manuel S Sousa Turlock, CA 95380 Marilyn K Fullenwider Byron, CA 94514 Mark Overby and Melanie Bettencourt Tracy, CA 95377 Mark Zucca Alameda, CA 94501 Mary Draper Patterson, CA 95363 Mary L Serpa Tracy, CA 95304 Megan Norris Los Banos, CA 93635 Mei Hong Su and Michael Wen Liang Pleasanton, CA 94588 Michael J and Wendy M Gilbert Tracy, CA 95391 Michael John Moitozo Gustine, CA 95322 Michael S Brandon Denver, CO 80202 Nell L Jess Byron, CA 94514 Nia and Sussan Hossein Anaheim, CA 92808 Nyla Fornaciari Stockton, CA 95204 Patricia Cavender San Marino, CA 91108 Patricia Chacopulos Newport Beach, CA 92660 Patricia L Bowles Lodi, CA 95242 Paul and Shirley Rose Los Banos, CA 93635 Paul Callahan Salt Lake City, UT 84106 Pedro and Cristina Perez Santa Nella, CA 95322 Peter W and Jennifer Evans Tracy, CA 95391 Phil Sancher Rancho Cordova, CA 95670 Phil Sanchez Folsom, CA 95630 Phuc D Ngo and Susanna Ng Santa Nella, CA 95322 Phyllis H Castello Tracy, CA 95391 Pinderjit S Sandhu Tracy, CA 95304 Rajendra F Patel Modesto, CA 95356 Rajvir and Parminder Gillon Tracy, CA 95377 Ralph Pombo Tracy, CA 95377 Ranbir S and Shashi K Dhanota Santa Nella, CA 95322 Raymond A and Teresa Talbot Los Banos, CA 93635 Robert J Gallo Modesto, CA 95353 Robert M and Diana Pfitzer Los Banos, CA 93635 Robert Sullivan Bakersfield, CA 93312 Robert and Janice Sherwood Los Banos, CA 93635 Rose Marie Mendonca Lodi, CA 95240 Rowena J Ward Fair Oaks, CA 95628 Salvador Ruiz Gustine, CA 95322 Satnam S and Manjeet K Sandhu Tracy, CA 95304 Simon Tanlos Fremont, CA 94536 Stanley J Gnesa Patterson, CA 95363 Steve Droszegi Gustine, CA 95322 Steven D and Heather A Perez Morgan Hill, CA 95037 Steven Hansen Redding, CA 96003 Steven J Sharp Vancouver, WA 98685 Susan Lenz Stockton, CA 95212 Suzanne Hewitt Tracy, CA 95304 Swadesh Rai Gustine, CA 95322 Sylvia Lettlo Tracy, CA 95304 Ted Vieira Stockton, CA 95219 Thomas D and Robin M Westrope Los Banos, CA 93635 Thomas J and Laura L Balatti Los Banos, CA 93635 Thomas M and Bette L Reese Newman, CA 95322 Thomas W Dompe Crows Landing, CA 95313 Tien Thuy Luong Santa Nella, CA 95322 Tony Bonda Los Banos, CA 93635 Travis and Karen R Large Los Banos, CA 93635 Victor and Peggy Joann Zabala Los Banos, CA 93635 Victor Lopez Los Banos, CA 93635 Vidal A and Alicia Preciado Santa Clara, CA 95056 Vonnie and Patricia A Crites Tracy, CA 95377 Warren Fink Patterson, CA 95363 Wiiliam S and Katherine R Cox Westley, CA 95387 William C Prentiss Anaheim, CA 92807 Ygnacio Rubio Hollister, CA 95023 Zazacher and Azaza Shahbaz Santa Nella, CA 95322 8.3 Elected Oficials Jim Beall California State Senate Sacramento CA 95814 Barbara Boxer United States Senate Washington DC 20510 Anthony Cannella California State Senate Sacramento CA 95814 Anthony Cannella California State Senate Merced CA 95340 Ellen Corbett California State Senate Sacramento CA 95814 Jim Costa United States Congress Fresno CA 93721 Jim Costa United States Congress Merced CA 95340 Jeff Denham United States Congress Washington DC 20515 Jeff Denham United States Congress Modesto CA 95356 Mark DeSaulnier California State Senate Sacramento CA 95814 Mark DeSaulnier California State Senate Walnut Creek CA 94597 Susan Talamantes Eggman California State Assembly Stockton CA 95202 Diane Feinstein United States Senate Fresno CA 93721 Diane Feinstein United States Senate Washington DC 20510 Cathleen Galgiani California State Senate Modesto CA 95354 Cathleen Galgiani California State Senate Stockton CA 95202 Adam Gray California State Assembly Merced CA 95340 Adam Gray California State Assembly Sacramento CA 94249 Hannah-Beth Jackson California State Senate Sacramento CA 95814 Zoe Lofgren United States Congress San Jose CA 95112 Bill Monning California State Senate Sacramento CA 95814 Jerry McNerney United States Congress Stockton CA 95207 Jerry McNerney United States Congress Washington DC 20515 Zenet Negron California State Assembly Stockton CA 95201 Kristin Olsen California State Assembly Modesto CA 95356 Eric Swalwel United States Congress Washington DC 20515 David Valadao United States Congress Hanford CA 93230  Chapter 9 References AC (Alameda County). 2012. Cities of Alameda County. https://www.acgov.org/about/cities.htm. Accessed 12 June 2014. ACHP (Advisory Council on Historic Preservation). 2013. “Section 106 Regulations Summary.” http:// www.achp.gov/106summary.html. Accessed 21 May 2015. Airnav.com. 2014a. Los Banos Municipal Airport. http://www.airnav.com/airport/KLSN. Accessed 19 June 2014. _____. 2014b. Gustine Airport. http://www.airnav.com/airport/3O1. Accessed 19 June 2014. Ballard, Hannah, Rhea Sanchez, Starla Lane, Elena Reese, John Holson, and Lisa Holm. 2015. Cultural Resources Addendum Inventory for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda and Merced Counties, California. Prepared for Western Area Power Administration, Sierra Nevada Region and Aspen Environmental Group. Prepared by Pacific Legacy Inc. On file at the Northwest Information Center, Rohnert Park, CA, and at the Central California Information Center, Turlock, CA. Bennyhoff, James A. and David A. Fredrickson. 1994. “A Proposed Integrative Taxonomic System for Central California Archaeology.” In Toward a New Taxonomic Framework for Central California Archaeology: Essays by James A. Bennyhoff and David A. Fredrickson, assembled and edited by Richard E. Hughes. Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility 52:15-24. Berkeley, California. Berglund B., Lindvall T. (eds.). 1995. Community Noise. Archives of the Center for Sensory Research; 2:1 195, updated version of the document published by the World Health Organization in 1995. Bond, Sally, Sally Sims, and Peter Dent. 2006. Towers, Turbines, and Transmission Lines: Impacts on Property Value. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing. BOR (U.S. Bureau of Reclamation). 2013. San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area Final Resource Management Plan/General Plan and Final Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report. http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=22642. Accessed 13 June 2014. _____. 2010a. Consolidated Place of Use Habitat Mitigation Plan and Monitoring and Reporting Program. December 2010. _____. 2010b. Conservation Buyer Program: Simon Newman Ranch. http://www.nature.org/aboutus/private-lands-conservation/conservation-buyer/properties/simon-newman-ranch.xml. Accessed 10 September 2014. CCWD (Contra Costa Water District) Staff Report. 2015. Update to Rangeland Management Program. Dated January 29, 2015. CDFA (California Department of Food and Agriculture). 2013. California Agricultural Statistics Review 2013-2014. http://www.cdfa.ca.gov/statistics/pdfs/2013/FinalDraft2012-2013.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2014. CDFW (California Department of Fish and Wildlife). 2013a. Lower Cottonwood Creek Wildlife Area. https://www.dfg.ca.gov/lands/wa/region4/docs/LowerCottonwoodCreekMap-Info.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2014. _____. 2013b. O’Neill Forebay Wildlife Area. https://www.dfg.ca.gov/lands/wa/region4/oneillforebay. html. Accessed 11 June 2014. CDOC (California Department of Conservation). 2013a. The Land Conservation (Williamson) Act. http:// www.conservation.ca.gov/dlrp/lca/Pages/Index.aspx. Accessed 9 June 2014. _____. 2013b. Prime Farmland as Mapped by FMMP. http://www.conservation.ca.gov/dlrp/fmmp/ overview/Pages/prime_farmland_fmmp.aspx Accessed 9 June 2014. _____. 2010e. Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2010: Geographic Area: Stanislaus County. http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/state_census_data_center/census_ 2010/documents/DP2010-Stanislaus_County.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2014. _____. 2002. Number of Farms, Land Area and Average Size of Farm: California. http://www.dof.ca. gov/HTML/FS_DATA/STAT-ABS/documents/G8.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2014. CDOF (California Department of Finance). 2010a. Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State. http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/reports/estimates/e-5/2011-20/ documents/E-5_2014_Internet_Version.xls. Accessed 11 June 2014. _____. 2010b. Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2010: Geographic Area: Merced County. http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/state_census_data_center/census_2010/ documents/DP2010-Merced_County.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2014. _____. 2010c. Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2010: Geographic Area: Alameda County. http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/state_census_data_center/census_2010/ documents/DP2010-Alameda_County.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2014. _____. 2010d. Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2010: Geographic Area: San Joaquin County. http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/state_census_data_center/census_ 2010/documents/DP2010-San_Joaquin_County.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2014. CDWR (California Department of Water Resources). 2003. California's Groundwater, Bulletin 118. http://www.water.ca.gov/groundwater/bulletin118/update2003.cfm. Accessed 20 June 2014. CEDD (California Employment Development Department). 2010. Employment by Industry Data. http:// www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/LMID/Employment_by_Industry_Data.html. Accessed 11 June 2014. CGS (California Department of Conservation – California Geological Survey). 2014. Regulatory Maps. http://www.quake.ca.gov/gmaps/WH/regulatorymaps.htm. Accessed 20 June 2014. _____. 2012. Special Report 199: Update of Mineral Land Classification for Portland Cement Concrete- Grade Aggregate in the Stockton-Lodi Production-Consumption Region, San Joaquin and Stanislaus Counties, California. By Smith, J.D., and Clinkenbeard, J.P. ftp://ftp.consrv.ca.gov/ pub/dmg/pubs/sr/SR_199/SR_199_Text.pdf. Accessed 18 September 2014. _____. 1999. Open-File Report 99-08: Mineral Land Classification of Merced County, California. By Clinkenbeard, J.P. ftp://ftp.consrv.ca.gov/pub/dmg/pubs/ofr/OFR_99-08/OFR_99-08_Text.pdf. Accessed 18 September 2014. _____. 1993. Special Report 173: Mineral Land Classification of Stanislaus County, California. By Higgins, C.T., and Dupras, D.L. ftp://ftp.consrv.ca.gov/pub/dmg/pubs/sr/SR_173/SR_173_Text.pdf. Accessed 18 September 2014. City-data.com. 2014. http://www.city-data.com/city/Patterson-California.html. Accessed 20 June 2014. CNPS (California Native Plant Society). 1998. Policy on Mitigation Guidelines Regarding Impacts to Rare, Threatened and Endangered Plants. http://www.cnps.org/cnps/archive/mitigation.pdf. Accessed 16 Sept 2014. CVRWQCB (California Regional Water Quality Control Board – Central Valley). 2011. Fourth Edition of the Water Quality Control Plan for the Sacramento River and San Joaquin River Basins. http:// www.waterboards.ca.gov/rwqcb5/water_issues/basin_plans/sacsjr.pdf. Accessed 20 June 2014. CWCB (State of California Wildlife Conservation Board). 2012. Draft Conservation Easement Deed. Dated December 21, 2012. DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 2008. Environmental Justice Strategy. http://energy.gov/sites/prod/ files/EJ_Strategy_FINAL.pdf. Accessed 8 April 2015. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2013. Geographic Area of Focus: San Joaquin Valley. http:// www.epa.gov/region9/strategicplan/sanjoaquin.html. Accessed 9 June 2014. Falzarano, Sarah and Levy, Laura. 2007. Sound levels of helicopters used for administrative purposes at Grand Canyon National Park. Overflights and Natural Soundscape Program. NPS Report No. GRCA-07-05. Federal Register. 1994. Executive Order 12898 of February 11, 1994: Federal Actions To Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations. http://www. archives.gov/federal-register/executive-orders/pdf/12898.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2014. FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2014. National Flood Hazard Layer: Map Viewer. http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?webmap= cbe088e7c8704464aa0fc34eb99e7f30. Accessed 20 June 2014. FHWA (Federal highway Administration). 2006. Roadway Construction Noise Model User’s Guide, Washington D.C. http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/49000/49100/49175/rcnm.pdf. Accessed 24 September 2014. FTA (Federal Transit Administration). 2006. Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment. http://www.fta.dot.gov/documents/FTA_Noise_and_Vibration_Manual.pdf. Accessed 24 September 2014. Holland, RF. 1986. Preliminary descriptions of the terrestrial natural communities of California. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, California 156 pp. Holm, Lisa, Amy Kovak, Shanna Streich, Rhea Sanchez, Elena Reese, and John Holson. 2014b. Cultural Resources Inventory for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California. Prepared by Pacific Legacy, Inc. for Aspen Environmental Group and Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region. Holm, Lisa, Elena Reese, Starla Lane, and John Holson. 2014a. Cultural Resources Background and Field Strategy Report for the San Luis Transmission Project (SLTP), Alameda, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Merced Counties, California. Prepared by Pacific Legacy, Inc. for Aspen Environmental Group and Western Area Power Administration Sierra Nevada Region. ICF (ICF International). 2014. Assessment of Climate Change Risks to Energy Reliability in the WECC Region. Prepared for Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC). December 26, 2014. Idcide.com. 2014. http://www.idcide.com/weather/ca/patterson.htm. Accessed 20 June 2014. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013. Summary for Policymakers, Working Group I (WGI). In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. MCAG (Merced County Association of Governments). 2011. Regional Transportation Plan. http://www. mcagov.org/ArchiveCenter/ViewFile/Item/269. Accessed 18 June 2014. Mtnhouse.k12.ca.us. 2014. Mountain House Elementary School District: Homepage. http://www. mtnhouse.k12.ca.us/?q=welcome. Accessed 20 June 2014. NASS (U.S. Department of Agriculture – National Agriculture Statistics Service). 2013. CropScape: Cropland Data Layer. http://nassgeodata.gmu.edu/CropScape/. Accessed 10 June 2014. NIEHS (National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences). 2002. EMF Electric and Magnetic Fields Associated with the Use of Electric Power, Questions & Answers. http://www.niehs.nih.gov/ health/materials/electric_and_magnetic_fields_associated_with_the_use_of_electric_power_ questions_and_answers_english_508.pdf. Accessed 8 August 2014. NRCS (U.S. Department of Agriculture: Natural Resources Conservation Services). 2014. Map Viewer: USA Soil Survey. http://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?webmap= 0edea1c7bbb84ba5842d20483af11679. Accessed 14 June 2014. _____. 2013. Farmland Protection Policy Act. http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/ national/landuse/fppa/. Accessed 10 June 2014. OHP (Office of Historic Preservation). 2015. “California Environmental Quality Act.” http://ohp.parks. ca.gov/?page_id=21721. Accessed 14 May 2015. OSHA (U.S. Department of Labor: Occupational Safety & Health Administration). 2013. Appendix I: A. Physics of Sound. http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/noise/health_effects/physics.html. Accessed 12 August 2014. Papenfuss, T., and J. Parham. 2013. Four new species of California legless lizards (Anniella). Breviora 536: 1-17. SJC (San Joaquin County). 2011a. San Joaquin County Community Profile. Public Health Services Department. http://www.sjcphs.org/disease/documents/FINAL%20Updated%20Health%20 Status%204-1-11.pdf. Accessed 14 June 2014. SJCOG (San Joaquin Council of Governments). 2011a. Preserve Management Plan for the Tracy 580 Business Park Preserve. _____. 2011b. I-580 Interregional Multi-Modal Corridor Study. http://www.sjcog.org/DocumentCenter/ View/44. Accessed 18 June 2014. _____. 2000. San Joaquin County multi-species habitat conservation and open space plan. http://www. sjcog.org/DocumentCenter/View/5. Accessed 16 Sept 2014. SJVAPCD (San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District). 2009. Climate Change Action Plan. http:// www.valleyair.org/Programs/CCAP/CCAP_menu.htm. Accessed 18 June 2014. _____. 2015. Guidance for Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts. http://www.valleyair.org/ transportation/GAMAQI-Mitigation-Measures.pdf. Accessed 4 June 2015. Society for California Archaeology. 2015. “A Glossary of Proper Names in California Prehistory: Chronological and Cultural Units.” http://scahome.org/about-ca-archaeology/glossary-of-terms/chronologicaland-cultural-units/. Accessed 14 May 2015. Suter, A.H. 2009. Noise and its Effects. Washington D.C., Administrative Conference of the United States. http://www.nonoise.org/library/suter/suter.htm. Accessed 20 June 2014. SWRCB (California Environmental Protection Agency – State Water Resources Control Board). 2010. Integrated Report (Clean Water Act Section 303(d) List / 305(b) Report) – Statewide. http:// www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/tmdl/integrated2010.shtml. Accessed 20 June 2014. Thalheimer, Erich. 2000. Construction noise control program and mitigation strategy at the Central Artery/Tunnel Project. Noise Control Engineering Journal. Volume 48, Number 5, 1 September 2000, pp. 157-165(9). http://ince.publisher.ingentaconnect.com/content/ince/ncej. Accessed 24 September 2014. USACOE (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers). 2008. Orestimba Creek Hydrology: A Reevaluation Based on Updated Peak and Volume Frequency Curves. http://www.stancounty.com/ER/PARKS/pdf/ correspondence/2012/orestimba-study/C-1%20Hydrology.pdf. Accessed 20 June 2014. U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Policy and International Affairs (DOE-PI) and National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). 2013. U.S. Energy Sector Vulnerabilities to Climate Change and Extreme Weather. July 2013. USFWS (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). 1999. Conservation guidelines for the valley elderberry longhorn beetle. Sacramento, CA. Dated July 9. _____. 2011. San Joaquin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica) 5-year review: summary and evaluation. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, Sacramento. USGS (U.S. Geological Survey). 2014. National Hydrography Dataset. http://nhd.usgs.gov/. Accessed 20 June 2014. _____. 2009. Minerals Yearbook: California. http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/state/2009/ myb2-2009-ca.pdf. Accessed 20 June 2014. _____. 2005. Mineral Resources Online Spatial Data: California Geologic Map Data. http://mrdata.usgs. gov/geology/state/state.php?state=CA. Accessed 20 June 2014. U.S. Global Change Research Program. 2014. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment, J.M. Melillo, Terese (T.C.) Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, eds., Ch. 20: Southwest, pp. 462-486. VTA (Valley Transportation Authority). 2010. Fact Sheet: Highways; SR-152 Trade Corridor Study Project. http://www.vta.org/sfc/servlet.shepherd/version/download/068A0000001Fbxs. Accessed 19 June 2014. Wakabayashi, J., and D.L. Smith. 1994. Evaluation of Recurrence Intervals, Characteristic Earthquakes and Slip-Rates Associated with Thrusting Along the Coast Range–Central Valley Geomorphic Boundary. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 84:1960-1970. Zuidema, P.A., Sayer, J.A., and Dijkman, W. 1997. Forest fragmentation and biodiversity: The case for intermediate-sized conservation areas. Environmental Conservation 23: 290-297. Chapter 10 Index  — A — Access road: ES-2, ES-6, ES-9, 2-1, 2-3–2-5, 2-9– 2-10, 2-13–2-15, 2-17–2-18, 2-35–2-36, 3-1, 3-102, 3-108, 3-117, 3-17, 3-93, 4-100, 4-102, 4-11, 4-19–4-21, 4-125, 4-127, 4-129–4-130, 4-143–4-144, 4-22–4-24, 4-26–4-27, 4-33, 4-36, 4-39, 4-50, 4-56–4-58, 4-62–4-64, 4-3, 4-4–4-6, 4-10, 4-63–4-68, 4-73–4-77, 4-78, 4-83, 4-88–4-90, 4-91, 4-93–4-94, 6-8–6-9, 6-13, 6-15, 6-27, 6-33 ACE: See Altamont Corridor Express ACHP: See Advisory Council on Historic Preservation ACOE: See Army Corps of Engineers Advisory Council on Historic Preservation: 3-42, 3-56 Agricultural Services Center: 3-9 Agriculture: 2-17, 2-32–2-33, 2-35, 2-37, 3-14, 3-2–3-3, 3-9, 3-37, 3-40, 3-50–3-52, 3-81– 3-83, 3-89, 4-135–4-136, 4-143–4-144, 4-3, 4-4–4-6, 4-10, 4-49, 4-52, 4-82, 6-24 Air quality: ES-5, ES-9, ES-12, 1-8, 2-14, 2-32– 2-33, 2-35, 2-37, 3-11–3-13, 3-15–3-16, 4-100–4-102, 4-10–4-21, 4-131, 4-135–4-136, 4-141, 4-143, 4-145, 6-2 Alameda County: ES-1, ES-12, 1-1, 2-1, 2-3, 3-104–3-107, 3-108, 3-114–3-116, 3-122, 3-12–3-13, 3-21–3-29, 3-34, 3-2–3-3, 3-9, 3-42, 3-51–3-54, 3-60, 3-77, 3-80, 3-90, 3-93– 3-94, 3-98, 4-107, 4-134, 4-138, 4-25–4-26, 4-31, 4-36, 4-49, 4-60, 4-4, 4-71, 4-90, 6-7, 6-12 Altamont Corridor Express: 3-114 Amplitude modulation: 4-98, 6-32 ASC: See Agricultural Services Center — B — BAAQMD: See Bay Area Air Quality Management District Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act: 3-21, 3-30–3-31, 3-35, 4-26 Bay Area Air Quality Management District: 3-12–3-13, 4-10, 4-12, 4-17 BGEPA: See Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act Biological resources: 2-15–2-16, 2-27, 2-32, 2-35, 2-37, 2-41, 3-124, 3-17, 3-37–3-38, 3-40–3-42, 4-131, 4-136–4-137, 4-143–4-144, 4-22, 4-25, 4-60–4-64 — C — CAA: See Clean Air Act CAAQS: See California Ambient Air Quality Standards CAISO: See California Independent System Operator California Ambient Air Quality Standards: 3-11–3-12 California Department of Conservation: 3-2– 3-4, 4-7, 4-9 California Department of Fish and Wildlife: ES-4, 3-135, 3-17–3-18, 3-21, 3-32, 3-35– 3-36, 3-40, 3-80, 3-98, 3-103, 4-137, 4-28– 4-29, 4-31–4-32, 4-35–4-36, 4-40–4-47, 4-50, 4-57, 4-80–4-81, 5-1, 6-3–6-5, 6-7–6-8, 6-11– 6-12, 6-16–6-23, 6-28, 6-31 California Department of Parks and Recreation: ES-4, ES-6, 3-115, 3-122, 3-80, 3-98, 3-101– 3-103, 4-101, 4-134, 4-79, 5-1, 6-35 California Endangered Species Act: 3-21, 3-27, 3-35, 3-40, 4-60 California Environmental Quality Act: ES-1, ES-7–ES-8, ES-13, 1-1, 1-6–1-7, 2-4, 2-18, 2-28–2-30, 2-39, 3-42, 3-58–3-60, 3-92, 4-1, 4-100, 4-102–4-105, 4-106–4-109, 4-111– 4-113, 4-115–4-120, 4-122, 4-124, 4-12, 4-14–4-21, 4-127–4-130, 4-131, 4-137–4-138, 4-141, 4-143, 4-144–4-145, 4-25, 4-27–4-28, 4-51, 4-59, 4-62–4-64, 4-4, 4-6, 4-10, 4-62, 4-64–4-67, 4-71, 4-74–4-77, 4-79–4-83, 4-88– 4-90, 4-91, 4-93–4-94, 4-95–4-96, 4-98–4-99, 6-1, 6-30 California Independent System Operator: ES-3, ES-8, ES-10, 1-2–1-4, 2-25, 2-29, 2-38, 4-108 California Native Plant Society: 3-17, 3-21, 4-29, 6-5 California Natural Diversity Database: 3-17, 3-23, 3-25–3-26, 3-31, 4-25 California Outdoor Recreation Plan: 3-104 California Rare Plant Rank: 3-21, 3-27, 4-25– 4-26, 4-28–4-29, 6-4–6-5 Carbon monoxide: 3-11–3-12, 3-14–3-16, 4-12, 4-19–4-21 CAS: See Corrective Action Study CDFW: See California Department of Fish and Wildlife CDPR: See California Department of Parks and Recreation Central Segment: ES-7, ES-9–ES-10, 2-19, 2-21, 2-32, 2-38, 2-41, 3-104, 3-113, 3-22, 3-24, 3-38, 3-55–3-56, 3-77, 3-85, 3-90, 4-103– 4-104, 4-115, 4-120, 4-127, 4-129, 4-132– 4-134, 4-15, 4-19, 4-2, 4-26, 4-52, 4-58, 4-60– 4-62, 4-63, 4-68, 4-6–4-7, 4-9, 4-76, 4-82, 4-88, 4-93 Central Valley Project: ES-2–ES-3, 1-2, 1-4–1-6, 3-52, 3-80, 4-132–4-133, 4-80 Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board: 3-124, 3-127 CEQ: See Council on Environmental Quality CEQA: See California Environmental Quality Act CESA: See California Endangered Species Act Clean Air Act: 3-11, 3-15–3-16 Clean Water Act: 3-127, 3-135, 3-35, 3-39–3-40, 4-126 CNDDB: See California Natural Diversity Database CNEL: See Community Noise Equivalent Level CNPS: See California Native Plant Society Community Noise Equivalent Level: 3-84, 3-89– 3-90 CORP: See California Outdoor Recreation Plan Corrective Action Study: 4-133 Council on Environmental Quality: 3-16, 3-62, 4-131, 4-19 CRPR: See California Rare Plant Rank Cultural resources: ES-6, 2-16, 2-32–2-33, 2-35, 2-37, 3-42–3-43, 3-54, 3-56–3-62, 4-137, 4-143, 4-62–4-66, 4-68–4-70 Cumulative impacts: 4-131, 4-135–4-143, 4-19 CVP: See Central Valley Project CVRWQCB: See Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board CWA: See Clean Water Act — D — Department of Energy: ES-1, 1-1, 1-5, 3-16, 3-57, 3-62, 4-18, 4-94 Department of Toxic Substances Control: 3-97 Department of Transportation: 3-96, 4-110– 4-111, 4-83–4-84, 4-94, 6-36 Diesel particulate matter: 3-15–3-16, 4-16 Disturbances: ES-6, ES-9–ES-10, 2-5, 2-9–2-10, 2-13–2-17, 2-27–2-28, 2-33–2-34, 2-36–2-38, 2-41, 3-42, 3-79, 3-92, 4-126–4-127, 4-129, 4-136–4-140, 4-143, 4-143, 4-22, 4-24, 4-27– 4-28, 4-30, 4-32, 4-34, 4-37–4-48, 4-50–4-52, 4-55–4-56, 4-61–4-63, 4-3, 4-5–4-7, 4-9–4-10, 4-62, 4-64–4-67, 4-70, 4-73–4-76, 4-90–4-91, 6-4, 6-6, 6-8, 6-10, 6-13–6-24, 6-26–6-27, 6-29–6-31 DOC: See California Department of Conservation DOE: See Department of Energy DOT: See Department of Transportation DPM: See Diesel particulate matter DTSC: See Department of Toxic Substances Control — E — East County Area Plan: 3-60, 3-9, 3-90, 4-4 East County Specific Plan: 3-122, 3-80 ECAP: See East County Area Plan ECSP: See East County Specific Plan EDD: See Employment Development Department EIR: See Environmental Impact Report EIS: See Environmental Impact Statement Electromagnetic fields: ES-5, 3-93, 3-95–3-97, 4-108, 4-3, 4-98 EMF: See Electromagnetic fields Employment Development Department: 3-105–3-106 Environmental Impact Report: ES-1–ES-8, ES-10, 1-1, 1-4–1-8, 2-1, 2-16, 2-18–2-19, 2-25, 2-28–2-30, 2-39, 2-41, 3-1, 3-114, 3-17, 3-42–3-43, 3-91, 4-1, 4-117, 4-132–4-134, 4-14, 4-18, 4-144–4-146, 4-25, 4-62, 4-71, 5-1, 6-1 Environmental Impact Statement: ES-1–ES-8, ES-10, 1-1, 1-4–1-8, 2-1, 2-16, 2-18–2-19, 2-25, 2-28–2-30, 2-39, 2-41, 3-1, 3-17, 3-42– 3-43, 3-91, 4-1, 4-117, 4-132–4-134, 4-14, 4-18, 4-143–4-144, 4-146, 4-25, 4-62, 4-71, 5-1, 6-1 Environmental justice: 2-32–2-33, 2-35, 2-37, 3-62, 3-64, 4-138, 4-71–4-72 Environmental Protection Agency: ES-1, 1-1, 2-14, 3-11, 3-13, 3-135, 3-2, 3-88, 3-97, 4-10– 4-11, 4-13–4-14, 4-17, 4-56, 4-88, 4-94, 6-2, 6-27 Environmental Protection Measure: 2-1, 2-14– 2-15, 4-100, 4-106, 4-11, 4-110, 4-114, 4-125–4-126, 4-142, 4-22–4-23, 4-4, 4-62, 4-71, 4-73, 4-78, 4-83, 4-90, 4-94 EPA: See Environmental Protection Agency EPM: See Environmental Protection Measure — F — Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program: 3-3 Farmland Protection Policy Act: 3-4 Federal Emergency Management Agency: 3-124, 3-127, 3-135 Federal Endangered Species Act: 3-21, 3-26, 3-34–3-35, 3-38 FEMA: See Federal Emergency Management Agency FESA: See Federal Endangered Species Act Fine particulate matter: 3-11–3-13, 4-10, 4-12– 4-13, 4-17, 4-19–4-21, 4-135 FMMP: See Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program Foothill Pasture: 3-81, 3-83, 4-82 FPPA: See Farmland Protection Policy Act Frequency modulation: 4-98 — G — General aviation: 3-114–3-115, 4-132 Geology: ES-9, 2-16, 2-32–2-33, 2-35, 2-37, 3-68, 3-77–3-78, 3-91–3-92, 4-138, 4-143, 4-73–4-74, 4-76–4-77, 4-93, 6-35 GHG: See Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gases: 3-14–3-16, 4-10, 4-18–4-19, 4-136 — H — Habitat Conservation Plan: 4-60–4-61 Hazardous Air Pollutant: 4-136, 4-16 Hazardous Waste Control Law: 3-97 HCP: See Habitat Conservation Plan HWCL: See Hazardous Waste Control Law Hydrologic Region: 3-124 — I — IEEE: See Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers: 3-77 — K — Key Observation Point: 3-118, 4-120–4-123 — L — Land use: ES-5, ES-7, ES-9, ES-14, 2-17, 2-27– 2-28, 2-30–2-32, 2-34–2-35, 2-37, 3-115, 3-122, 3-2–3-4, 3-9–3-10, 3-51, 3-79–3-83, 3-85, 3-88–3-90, 4-100, 4-107, 4-117–4-118, 4-120, 4-122, 4-12, 4-132, 4-135, 4-138– 4-139, 4-143–4-145, 4-3, 4-4, 4-6, 4-73, 4-75, 4-78–4-83, 4-83, 4-88, 4-94, 4-96, 4-98, 6-2 Large Parcel Agriculture: 3-9, 4-4 Level of Service: 3-113–3-114, 4-111 — M — MBTA: See Migratory Bird Treaty Act Megawatt: 1-2–1-4, 4-132–4-133 Memorandum of Agreement: 2-16, 3-42, 4-63– 4-64, 4-68 Merced County: ES-1–ES-2, 1-1–1-2, 2-1, 3-104– 3-107, 3-114, 3-116–3-117, 3-119, 3-122, 3-22–3-27, 3-29, 3-33, 3-2–3-3, 3-9, 3-42, 3-45–3-46, 3-49–3-54, 3-60, 3-79–3-81, 3-83, 3-90, 3-94, 3-98, 4-107, 4-132–4-135, 4-138, 4-60, 4-71, 4-88, 4-90, 5-1 Migratory Bird Treaty Act: 3-33, 3-35, 3-39, 4-45–4-46, 6-21 Mitigation monitoring: ES-14, 4-92–4-93, 6-1– 6-2, 6-34–6-35 MLD: See Most Likely Descendant MMRP: See Mitigation monitoring MOA: See Memorandum of Agreement Most Likely Descendant: 3-59, 4-67, 6-31 — N — NAAQS: See National Ambient Air Quality Standards NAHC: See Native American Heritage Commission NASA: See National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASS: See National Agricultural Statistics Service National Aeronautics and Space Administration: 3-115 National Agricultural Statistics Service: 3-2–3-3 National Ambient Air Quality Standards: 3-11– 3-13, 3-15 National Environmental Policy Act: ES-1, ES-7, ES-11, 1-1, 1-5–1-7, 2-4, 2-18, 2-28–2-29, 3-106, 3-16, 3-42, 3-62, 4-1, 4-131, 4-143– 4-144, 4-19, 4-25, 4-91, 4-94, 6-1 National Flood Insurance Program: 3-135 National Historic Preservation Act: 2-16, 3-42, 3-56–3-57, 4-63, 5-1 National Hydrography Dataset: 3-124, 4-126– 4-127, 4-129 National Marine Fisheries Service: 3-21, 3-38 Native American Heritage Commission: ES-5, 3-59, 4-66–4-67, 5-2, 6-31 Native Plant Protection Act: 3-40 Natural Resources Conservation Service: 3-4, 3-68 NEPA: See National Environmental Policy Act NHD: See National Hydrography Dataset NHPA: See National Historic Preservation Act NIFP: See National Flood Insurance Program NMFS: See National Marine Fisheries Service No action: ES-7–ES-8, ES-10, 2-25, 2-29–2-30, 2-38–2-39, 2-41, 4-10, 4-105, 4-109, 4-113, 4-124, 4-130, 4-145–4-146, 4-21, 4-64, 4-70, 4-72, 4-77, 4-83, 4-90, 4-94, 4-99 Noise: ES-7, ES-9, ES-11, 2-17, 2-30, 2-32–2-37, 2-41, 3-82, 3-84–3-85, 3-88–3-91, 3-96, 4-100–4-102, 4-108, 4-140–4-141, 4-143, 4-24, 4-27, 4-44, 4-47, 4-3, 4-63, 4-66, 4-81, 4-83–4-90, 6-19, 6-22–6-23, 6-32 North Segment: ES-7, ES-9–ES-10, 2-19, 2-32, 2-38, 2-41, 3-104, 3-113, 3-12, 3-19, 3-32, 3-38, 3-56, 3-85, 4-103, 4-107, 4-114, 4-127, 4-132, 4-134, 4-138, 4-15, 4-2, 4-25, 4-50, 4-52, 4-58, 4-60, 4-4, 4-7, 4-9, 4-63, 4-71 NPPA: See Native Plant Protection Act NRCS: See Natural Resources Conservation Service — O — OATT: See Open Access Transmission Tariff Occupational Safety and Health Administration: 3-88, 3-96, 4-94, 4-97 Off-highway vehicle: ES-6–ES-7, ES-11, 2-31, 3-117, 3-98, 3-101–3-102, 4-101–4-104, 4-108, 4-139, 4-141, 4-143, 4-79–4-80, 6-35– 6-36 Office of Historic Preservation: 3-42, 3-59– 3-60, 5-1, 6-30 OHP: See Office of Historic Preservation OHV: See Off-highway vehicle Open Access Transmission Tariff: ES-3, 1-3–1-5 Open Space: 3-113, 3-122, 3-81 OSHA: See Occupational Safety and Health Administration — P — PAID: See Planned Agricultural Industrial Development Paleontological Resources Protection Act: 3-92 Paleontological resources: ES-9, ES-14, 2-16, 2-32–2-34, 2-36–2-37, 3-91–3-92, 4-140, 4-143, 4-62, 4-90–4-94, 6-33–6-34 Particulate matter: 3-11–3-13, 3-16, 4-10, 4-12–4-14, 4-17, 4-19–4-21, 4-135, 4-143, 6-2 Peak particle velocity: 4-88 PFYC: See Potential Fossil Yield Classification Planned Agricultural Industrial Development: 3-9 PM10: See Particulate matter PM2.5: See Fine particulate matter Potential Fossil Yield Classification: 4-90–4-91, 6-33 PRC: See Public Resources Code Programmatic Agreement: 2-16, 3-42, 3-9, 4-63–4-66, 4-68 PRPA: See Paleontological Resources Protection Act Public Resources Code: 3-58–3-59, 3-92, 4-145 — R — RCRA: See Resource Conservation and Recovery Act Regional Preservation Official: 4-67, 6-30–6-31 Regional Transportation Plan: 3-114, 3-116 Regional Water Quality Control Board: 2-17, 3-135, 3-35–3-37, 3-39, 4-126, 4-24, 4-56, 4-59, 6-27, 6-29 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act: 3-97 Right-of-way: ES-4, 1-5, 2-1, 2-9–2-10, 3-116, 3-81–3-82, 4-144, 4-5, 4-54, 4-73, 4-78–4-79, 4-91, 6-25, 6-33 ROW: See Right-of-way RPO: See Regional Preservation Official RTP: See Regional Transportation Plan RWQCB: See Regional Water Quality Control Board — S — Safe Drinking Water Act: 3-135 San Joaquin County Multi-Species Conservation and Open Space Plan: 4-60 San Joaquin County: ES-1, ES-9, ES-12–ES-13, 1-1, 1-4–1-6, 2-1, 2-3, 2-19, 2-27, 2-30, 2-33– 2-36, 3-104–3-107, 3-108, 3-114–3-116, 3-11–3-14, 3-16, 3-119, 3-122–3-123, 3-124, 3-127, 3-132, 3-135–3-136, 3-17, 3-22–3-26, 3-28–3-29, 3-31–3-34, 3-37–3-38, 3-41–3-42, 3-2–3-3, 3-42, 3-44–3-55, 3-60–3-61, 3-79– 3-81, 3-83, 3-85, 3-88, 3-90–3-91, 3-91, 3-93– 3-94, 3-98, 3-102–3-103, 4-107, 4-117–4-118, 4-120, 4-122, 4-12–4-13, 4-15–4-16, 4-132– 4-134, 4-137–4-138, 4-143, 4-25–4-26, 4-33, 4-36, 4-48–4-50, 4-60–4-61, 4-63, 4-63, 4-65– 4-66, 4-71, 4-82, 4-88–4-89, 4-90, 5-1, 6-9, 6-12, 6-24–6-25 San Joaquin Valley Air Basin: 3-11–3-13, 3-16, 4-12–4-13, 4-16 San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District: 3-12, 3-16, 4-10, 4-12–4-14, 4-17– 4-18, 6-2 San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area: ES-7, 2-34, 2-36, 3-120, 3-124, 3-82–3-83, 3-98, 3-101–3-104, 4-100–4-105, 4-134, 4-139, 4-141, 4-143, 4-79, 4-96, 6-35 San Luis Segment: ES-7–ES-10, 2-22–2-23, 2-30–2-31, 2-33, 2-35, 2-38, 2-41, 3-113, 3-38, 3-56, 3-80, 3-88, 4-103–4-104, 4-117, 4-120, 4-127, 4-129, 4-132–4-134, 4-15, 4-20, 4-2, 4-26, 4-52, 4-58, 4-60–4-63, 4-63, 4-69, 4-76, 4-82, 4-89, 4-93, 4-9–4-10 San Luis Unit: ES-2–ES-3, ES-6, ES-8, ES-10, 1-2– 1-4, 2-25, 2-29, 2-38, 3-52 SCADA: See Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition SDWA: See Safe Drinking Water Act SHPO: See State Historic Preservation Officer Sierra Nevada Region: 1-5 SIP: See State Implementation Plan SJMSCP: See San Joaquin County Multi-Species Conservation and Open Space Plan SJVAB: See San Joaquin Valley Air Basin SJVAPCD: See San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District SLRSRA: See San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area SLU: See San Luis Unit SMARA: See Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 Society of Vertebrate Professionals: 4-90–4-92, 6-33–6-34 Socioeconomics: 2-32, 2-34, 2-36, 2-38, 3-104– 3-107, 3-62, 4-106, 4-108–4-109, 4-138, 4-141–4-142, 4-143 South Segment: ES-8–ES-10, 2-19, 2-24, 2-36– 2-38, 2-41, 3-113, 3-38, 3-56, 3-77, 3-88, 4-102–4-103, 4-105, 4-118, 4-122, 4-127, 4-130, 4-133–4-134, 4-15, 4-20, 4-2, 4-26, 4-52, 4-58, 4-60, 4-64, 4-63, 4-69, 4-6–4-7, 4-9–4-10, 4-77, 4-82, 4-90, 4-93 Species of Special Concern: 3-21, 3-28–3-35, 4-25–4-26, 4-49 SRA: See State Recreation Area SSC: See Species of Special Concern Stanislaus County: ES-1, 1-1, 2-1, 3-104–3-107, 3-108, 3-114–3-116, 3-119, 3-122, 3-135, 3-22–3-26, 3-29, 3-31, 3-34, 3-2–3-3, 3-42, 3-49–3-54, 3-60, 3-77, 3-79–3-81, 3-83, 3-90, 3-94, 3-98, 4-107, 4-115–4-116, 4-132, 4-138, 4-60, 4-71, 4-88, 4-90, 5-1 State Historic Preservation Officer: 2-16, 3-42, 3-56, 3-60, 4-62–4-66, 4-68, 5-1 State Implementation Plan: 4-10, 4-17 State Recreation Area: 3-117, 3-122, 3-82, 3-98, 3-101–3-102, 4-108, 4-118–4-120, 4-122, 4-124 State Water Project: 1-6, 3-52, 3-82, 4-132 State Water Resources Control Board: 3-124, 3-127, 3-135, 4-80 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition: 2-13 Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975: 3-77 SVP: See Society of Vertebrate Professionals SWP: See State Water Project SWRCB: See State Water Resources Control Board — T — TAC: See Transmission Access Charges TCP: See Traditional Cultural Property Threshold Limit Value: 3-95 Total dissolved solids: 3-132, 3-135 Total maximum daily load: 3-127 Traditional Cultural Property: 3-44, 3-54, 3-58, 3-60, 4-62, 4-66–4-67 Traffic: See Transportation Transmission Access Charges: 1-2, 1-4 Transportation: ES-14, 2-5, 2-15–2-17, 2-32, 2-34, 2-36, 2-38, 3-108–3-116, 3-118, 3-14, 3-49, 3-51–3-54, 3-88, 3-90, 3-93, 3-96–3-97, 4-108, 4-110–4-113, 4-126, 4-13, 4-136, 4-139–4-140, 4-142, 4-143, 4-145, 4-2, 4-22– 4-23, 4-32, 4-5, 4-85–4-87, 4-94–4-95, 4-99, 6-2, 6-8, 6-32, 6-36 — U — U.S. Army Corps of Engineers: 1-5, 2-18, 3-124, 3-127, 3-35–3-36, 3-39–3-40, 4-125, 4-128, 4-24, 4-56, 4-59, 6-27, 6-29 U.S. Department of Agriculture: 3-2–3-4, 3-37 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: 3-11, 3-13, 3-15, 3-39, 4-126, 4-37, 4-39, 4-49, 6-13, 6-15, 6-24 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: ES-4, 3-17, 3-20– 3-21, 3-38, 4-28–4-32, 4-34, 4-36–4-42, 4-46, 4-48, 4-50, 4-57, 4-61, 4-81, 5-1, 6-3–6-8, 6-10, 6-12–6-16, 6-18, 6-21–6-24, 6-28, 6-31 U.S. Geological Survey: 3-124, 3-127, 3-17, 3-68, 3-77 UCMP: See University of California Museum of Paleontology Union Pacific Railroad: 3-108, 3-119, 4-112 Universal Transverse Mercator: 4-91, 6-33 University of California Museum of Paleontology: 4-90 UPRR: See Union Pacific Railroad UR: See Urban Reserve Urban Reserve: 3-81, 3-83, 4-82 USACE: See U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USDA: See U.S. Dartment of Agriculture USEPA: See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency USFWS: See U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service USGS: See U.S. Geological Survey UTM: See Universal Transverse Mercator — V — Visual resources: ES-9, 2-30, 2-32, 2-34–2-36, 2-38, 3-118, 3-120, 3-122, 4-100, 4-114, 4-117, 4-120, 4-122, 4-124, 4-141–4-143, 4-143–4-144 — W — Water resources: ES-1–ES-2, ES-6, ES-9, 1-1– 1-2, 1-5–1-6, 2-17–2-18, 2-32–2-34, 2-36, 2-38, 3-115, 3-124, 3-14, 3-82, 4-125, 4-127, 4-129–4-130, 4-133, 4-143, 4-143, 4-145 