FINAL
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
(ERRATUM TO THE DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT)

Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3
Fort Wainwright, Alaska

November 2013

This page intentionally left blank.

Printed on recycled paper

Final
Environmental Impact Statement
(Erratum to the Draft Environmental Impact Statement)

Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3
Fort Wainwright, Alaska

IMCOM

SOLOI(ttl • P"lt.Mf\J£• • CIVILJ4NS

APPROVED BY:

3
Wesley . P tter
Acting Ga rison Manager

Date

f

Oc..:t- ZCJ t3

This page intentionally left blank.

To the Reader:
This document follows the public comment period, which was held from June 21, 2013, to August 5,
2013, for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 at
Fort Wainwright, Alaska. Because public and agency comments on the Draft EIS did not result in the
modification of the alternatives or the environmental analysis in the Draft EIS, the full text of the Draft
EIS has not been reprinted. Instead, the content of this document is meant to be used in conjunction
with the Draft EIS, and these two documents together constitute the Final EIS for the Disposition of
Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, Alaska.
Federal and United States (U.S.) Department of the Army (Army) regulations allow for an abbreviated
Final EIS when few changes result from comments on a Draft EIS. The relevant section of these
regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] §1503.4 and 32 CFR §651.45 (h)) state that if
changes in response to public comments are minor and confined to factual corrections or explanations
of why comments do not warrant further agency response, they may be written on errata sheets instead
of rewriting, printing, and distributing the entire revised EIS.
The Final EIS provides information regarding the preferred alternative, public involvement and
National Historic Preservation Act consultation pursuant to release of the Draft EIS, revisions to the
Draft EIS, and Army responses to written and verbal comments received during the public review.
The Final EIS will be distributed to all individuals, agencies, and organizations that received a copy of
the Draft EIS, made comments on the Draft EIS, or indicated that they would like to receive a copy of
the Final EIS. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency will publish an announcement of receipt of
the Notice of Availability for this Final EIS in the Federal Register. The Army will observe a 30-day
waiting period following the Federal Register publication before making a final decision. The Final EIS
will be available for public review at the Noel Wien Library in Fairbanks, Alaska, and online at:
http://www.wainwright.army.mil/env/NEPA/Current.html.

Questions or requests for additional copies of the Final EIS should be forwarded to:
Direct Mail:
Mr. Matthew Sprau
Directorate of Public Works
Attn: IMFW-PWE (Sprau)
1060 Gaffney Road #4500
Fort Wainwright, AK 99703-4500;
FAX: (907) 361-9867
Email: matthew.h.sprau.civ@mail.mil
For Further Information:
Please contact Ms. Linda Douglass, Public Affairs Office (PAO), IMPC–FWA–PAO (Douglass), 1060
Gaffney Road #5900, Fort Wainwright, Alaska 99703–5900; telephone (907) 353–6701,
email: linda.douglass@us.army.mil

FINAL
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3
Lead/Responsible Agency:

United States Army Installation Management Command

Title of the Proposed Action:

Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3, Fort Wainwright, Alaska

Designation:

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Prepared by:

United States Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska

Cooperating Agency:

None

Abstract:
This Final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) analyzes the impacts from demolition of two historic
World War II-era hangars at Fort Wainwright, Alaska. The Final EIS also looks at other long-term
disposition options and a “no action” alternative. Both buildings have been found to be unsafe for
occupancy and have no remaining military purpose. The hangars are contributing resources1 within the
Ladd Field National Historic Landmark and Ladd Air Force Base Cold War Historic District, and their
loss would be a significant impact to cultural resources. All other impacts would be less than
significant. Mitigation measures are described to minimize adverse impacts on cultural resources. The
preferred alternative is demolition of Hangars 2 and 3. The United States Department of the Army
(Army) will use the Final EIS to ensure that the environmental information needed for informed
decision making is available. The Army will issue a decision, in the form of a Record of Decision, in
early 2014.

1

A contributing resource can be a building, site, structure, or object that adds to the historical or traditional cultural
associations, historic architectural qualities, or archaeological values for which a historic district or historic property is
significant.

This page intentionally left blank.

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ACHP
ADEC
Army

Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation
U.S. Department of the Army

BLM

Bureau of Land Management

CERCLA
CFR

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act
Code of Federal Regulations

DOI

Department of the Interior

EIS

Environmental Impact Statement

FNSB

Fairbanks North Star Borough

Ladd Field NHL

Ladd Field National Historic Landmark

MOA

Memorandum of Agreement

NEPA
NHPA
NOA
NPS

National Environmental Policy Act
National Historic Preservation Act
Notice of Availability
National Park Service

PAO

Public Affairs Office

SHPO

State Historic Preservation Office

TYHS

Tanana Yukon Historical Society

U.S.
USAG FWA
USEPA

United States
United States Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska
United States Environmental Protection Agency

Acronyms and Abbreviations

iii

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

This page intentionally left blank.

iv

Acronyms and Abbreviations

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... iii
LIST OF APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................. vi
1.0

PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE................................................................................................... 1-1

2.0

PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT PURSUANT TO THE DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
STATEMENT .............................................................................................................................. 2-1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

2.6
3.0

Public and Agency Meeting Announcements ................................................................. 2-1
Government to Government Actions .............................................................................. 2-2
Public Meeting ................................................................................................................ 2-2
Agency Meeting .............................................................................................................. 2-2
Public and Agency Comments ........................................................................................ 2-3
2.5.1 Public Comments ............................................................................................... 2-3
2.5.2 Agency Comments ............................................................................................. 2-4
National Historic Preservation Act Consultation ............................................................ 2-5

ERRATA SHEET: REVISIONS TO BE MADE TO THE DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT STATEMENT .............................................................................................................. 3-1
3.1
3.2

Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 3-1
EIS Text Changes Based on Substantive Concerns ........................................................ 3-1

Table of Contents

v

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A—National Historic Preservation Act Section 106 Memorandum of Agreement
Appendix E—Draft EIS Comments and Army Responses
Note: Only appendices containing new or updated information are included in this Final Environmental
Impact Statement.

vi

Table of Contents

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

1.0

PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE

As identified in the Draft Environmental Impact Statement, the United States Department of the Army’s
preferred alternative is Alternative 1, Demolition of Hangars 2 and 3. Demolition would involve
removal of the hangars and their supporting infrastructure, including demolition of existing and
abandoned utilities not belonging to Doyon Utilities (the utility provider for the installation); demolition
of existing privately owned vehicle parking areas, lighting, head bolt outlets, and power source;
demolition of the small, open, flammable liquids storage facility that is located between Hangars 2 and
3; and removal of concrete building slabs and foundations. Once demolition of the hangars is complete,
concrete would be added to the building and infrastructure footprints to maintain consistency with the
adjacent airfield, which is designated as an aircraft parking apron.

Chapter 1.0

1-1

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

This page intentionally left blank.

1-2

Chapter 1.0

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

2.0

2.1

PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT PURSUANT TO THE DRAFT
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT

Public and Agency Meeting Announcements

Following the initial scoping process from November 16, 2011, to January 17, 2012, a Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) was prepared and distributed for public review and comment. In
accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), the United States (U.S.)
Department of the Army (Army) filed the Draft EIS with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) and a Notice of Availability (NOA) for the Draft EIS was published in the Federal Register
on June 21, 2013 (Volume 78, Number 120). Publication of the NOA began a 46-day public comment
period that extended from June 21, 2013, to August 5, 2013. The Army used the public comment period
to allow members of the public and federal, state, and local agencies to review the Draft EIS
alternatives and analysis.
As part of the public comment process, the U.S. Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska (USAG
FWA) held a public meeting and an agency meeting. A notice advertising the public meeting, which
was held on July 10, 2013, was published in the Fairbanks Daily News-Miner eight times leading up to
the meeting with the first publication coinciding with the publication of the NOA in the Federal
Register on June 21, 2013. The notice was also published on June 22, June 23, June 26, June 30, July 3,
July 7, and July 10, 2013. The public meeting notice was also posted on the Fort Wainwright
environmental website (http://www.wainwright.army.mil/env/NEPA/Current.html).
The USAG FWA mailed letters on June 18, 2013, to a number of federal, state, and local agencies
informing them of the Draft EIS agency meeting to be held on July 11, 2013, providing them a copy of
the Draft EIS and soliciting their comments on the Draft EIS. The agencies notified were: the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP); Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation
(ADEC); Alaska Department of Fish and Game; Alaska Department of Natural Resources; Alaska
Department of Transportation and Public Facilities; Alaska State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO);
the Bureau of Land Management (BLM); BLM Alaska Fire Service; the Department of the Interior
(DOI); Fairbanks North Star Borough (FNSB); FNSB Historic Preservation Commission; Joint Base
Elmendorf-Richardson, Alaska; the Mayor of the City of Fairbanks; the Mayor of FNSB; the Mayor of
the City of North Pole; National Trust for Historic Preservation; National Park Service (NPS); the
Tanana Valley State Fair Association; Tanana Yukon Historical Society (TYHS); USEPA; and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.

Chapter 2.0

2-1

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

2.2

Government to Government Actions

In addition to federal, state, and local agencies, the USAG FWA sent letters to six federally recognized
Alaska Native tribes, inviting them to attend the public meeting and providing them with a copy of the
Draft EIS. Letters were mailed on June 18, 2013, to the Village of Dot Lake, Healy Lake Village,
Native Village of Tanacross, Native Village of Tetlin, Nenana Native Association, and Northway
Village.

2.3

Public Meeting

The USAG FWA held one public meeting on July 10, 2013, in the Jade Room of the Princess Riverside
Lodge in Fairbanks, Alaska, from 6:00 to 8:00 p.m. Sixteen informational banners were set up around
the room, and the USAG FWA staff was available to answer questions about the project. An
informational handout and public comment form were also handed out to attendees. At 6:30 p.m., the
USAG FWA staff gave a presentation to provide an overview of the project, the alternatives analyzed
along with those considered but dismissed from further analysis, and the impacts that would result from
implementing the alternatives. A court reporter recorded the presentation and another was available to
record public comments throughout the meeting. Three people from the public attended and signed in at
the meeting.

2.4

Agency Meeting

The USAG FWA held one agency meeting on July 11, 2013, in the Jade Room of the Princess
Riverside Lodge, in Fairbanks, Alaska, from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. The same informational banners
used for the public meeting were set up around the room, and after a short presentation, the USAG
FWA staff and agency representatives discussed the alternatives and the potential impacts as analyzed
in the Draft EIS. Four representatives from two agencies attended and signed in at the meeting,
including staff from the FNSB Department of Community Planning, representing the FNSB Historic
Preservation Commission, and representatives from the TYHS. Additionally, three representatives from
two agencies participated in the meeting via teleconference, including staff from the Alaska Army
National Guard and the NPS.
On July 30, 2013, the FNSB Historic Preservation Commission held a meeting to discuss the Draft EIS
for the Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, Alaska, and invited the USAG FWA to
attend. Two USAG FWA staff members attended the meeting to only answer questions related to the
project; no official comments on the project were received.

2-2

Chapter 2.0

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

2.5

Public and Agency Comments

2.5.1

Public Comments

Public comments on the Draft EIS were received during the public meeting and via email during the
public comment period. The general discussion points of the comments received at the public meeting
included:


Support for the demolition of the hangars because they have no useful purpose in the military
mission, they are taking up space for current missions, and no funding is available to repair or
renovate them.



Support for the Army to preserve the history of the hangars and be more proactive in the
preservation and reuse of the building materials.



Opposition to the NEPA process in reference to the level of analysis needed and the cost of that
analysis.

In addition to the comments received during the public meeting, three additional comment letters were
received via email from members of the public. They are summarized below.
All three commenters expressed support for Alternative 1: Demolition of Hangars 2 and 3. One
commenter noted that the hangars are unsafe, unusable, and maintaining them would drain Army funds.
The commenter also noted that the land space at Fort Wainwright is precious, and the demolition of the
hangars would allow future development on the airfield. The second commenter noted that the two
hangars have not been in use due to years of arctic conditions and wear and tear, safety concerns, and
lack of expensive modifications; this commenter also expressed that military funds should be invested
in future developments or combat readiness. The third commenter expressed support for demolishing
the hangars because of safety issues.
No other public comments were received by the end of the public comment period on August 5, 2013.
All public comments received on the Draft EIS and the Army’s responses to those comments are
presented in Appendix E.

Chapter 2.0

2-3

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

2.5.2

Agency Comments

Agency comments on the Draft EIS were received during the agency meeting and via letter and email.
During the agency meeting, agency representatives provided feedback on the Proposed Action. The
general discussion points and substantive comments received at this agency meeting included:


Demolishing the hangars would be a loss for the historic nature of the Ladd Field National
Historic Landmark (Ladd Field NHL) and the community.



The hangars have architectural importance that should be maintained.



The Army should preserve the history of the hangars and be more proactive in the preservation
and reuse of the building materials. The site has the possibility of being a major environmental
impact area and clean up would cost more than rehabilitating the hangars.



The Army should communicate with other nations (e.g., Russia) to discuss preservation
methods.



Concern was expressed regarding the continuation of the National Historic Landmark
designation if the hangars are demolished.

In addition to the comments made and recorded during the agency meeting, five correspondences with
comments were received from federal, state, and local agencies. These comments are summarized
below with the full correspondences provided in Appendix E.
By separate emails, the BLM Alaska Fire Service and the DOI both indicated that they have no
comments on the Draft EIS regarding Hangars 2 and 3. The ADEC also replied via email that it
reviewed the environmental contamination sections of the Draft EIS and did not have any concerns.
The FNSB Historic Preservation Commission expressed concern that the Army’s preferred alternative
for the disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 is demolition and stated it prefers preservation of the remaining
buildings that are part of Ladd Field NHL. If buildings contributing to Ladd Field NHL continue to be
demolished in the future, the FNSB Historic Preservation Commission recommends the dissolution of
Ladd Field NHL. The agency also provided comments regarding procedural matters and perceived
inaccuracies presented in the Draft EIS, including noting the Programmatic Agreement for Aviation
Stationing at Fort Wainwright includes adhering to the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation of Historic Properties. The FNSB Historic Preservation Commission also believes a
variety of maintenance activities and storage of aircraft can still be conducted, specifically in Hangar 3.

2-4

Chapter 2.0

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK
Lastly, the FNSB Historic Preservation Commission recommends the adoption of the following
additional mitigation measures:


Completing extensive photographic documentation of the exterior and interior of the buildings;



Recycling and reuse, to the extent possible, of the materials;



Augmenting the existing “Lend-Lease Memorial” in downtown Fairbanks; and



Conducting a comprehensive review of the remaining hangars at other strategic Lend-Lease
locations.

The USEPA expressed its comments regarding the environmental impacts analysis as well as the
adequacy of the Draft EIS in meeting procedural and public disclosure requirements of NEPA. The
USEPA stated that it appreciates the USAG FWA’s effort to consult with potentially affected and
interested federally recognized tribes and believes the USAG FWA considered a wide range of
alternatives that were appropriately screened to determine the action alternatives for full analysis. The
USEPA gave the Draft EIS a rating of EC-1 (Environmental Concerns – Adequate Information). The
primary concern continues to be the management of known Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation, and Liability Act, or CERCLA, sites (FTWW-081, CC-FTWW-103, and FTWW-348)
and yet to be discovered contamination in the project area, both issues that were clearly identified in the
Draft EIS.
No other agency comments were received by the end of the public comment period on August 5, 2013.
All agency comments received on the Draft EIS and the Army’s responses to those comments are
presented in Appendix E.

2.6

National Historic Preservation Act Consultation

As noted above under Section 2.5.2, Agency Comments, the FNSB Historic Preservation Commission
made several comments on the Draft EIS recommending additional mitigation measures to reduce the
potential adverse effects of the Proposed Action on the hangars and the Ladd Field NHL. As part of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 106 consultation process, the USAG FWA held a
NHPA Section 106 consulting party meeting after the Draft EIS public comment period ended on
August 20, 2013, to discuss the comments received on the Draft EIS and determine whether any
changes to the memorandum of agreement (MOA) were required. Agencies attending the meeting
included the ACHP, Alaska SHPO, Eielson Air Force Base, FNSB Historic Preservation Commission,

Chapter 2.0

2-5

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK
NPS, and TYHS. As a result of the meeting on August 20, 2013, two additional mitigation measures
were agreed upon and included in the Final MOA (Appendix A). For public outreach, the USAG FWA
agreed to provide all public outreach documentation and recordation documentation of Hangars 2 and 3
created by the Cultural Resources Office to the FNSB to be used to augment any of its public outreach
objectives. Also, during the re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL, the USAG FWA agreed to work with
the Alaska SHPO and the NPS as subject matter experts on state and national historic properties to
obtain new and relevant information on other historic properties associated with the Lend-Lease
Operations.

2-6

Chapter 2.0

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

3.0

3.1

ERRATA SHEET: REVISIONS TO BE MADE TO THE DRAFT
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
Introduction

This errata sheet documents changes to the text of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for
the Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, Alaska, as the result of substantive comments
received since the document was released to the public on June 21, 2013. An interdisciplinary team
reviewed these comments to identify any substantive comments. Substantive comments were
considered to be comments that:


question, with a reasonable basis, the accuracy of information in the EIS;



question, with a reasonable basis, the adequacy of environmental analysis;



present reasonable alternatives other than those presented in the EIS; and



cause changes or revisions in the proposal.

For ease of reference, changes to the EIS text are noted by section, page number, and line number. Text
within a paragraph that has been deleted is shown by a strikeout and added text is underlined.
Typographical, spelling, and punctuation errors are not changed unless necessary to make the passage
understandable.

3.2

EIS Text Changes Based on Substantive Concerns

All markings and references to draft, in the May 2013 Draft EIS, are no longer applicable.
Page ii, line 12: make the following edits:
Appendix E—Draft EIS Comments and Army Responses (only to be included in the Final EIS)
Page xxi, line 6: make the following edits:
Appendix E—Draft EIS Comments and Army Responses (only to be included in the Final EIS)
Section 3.3.2.2, Alternative 1: Demolition of Hangars 2 and 3, page 3-34, line 2: insert the following
sentence after “…and newspapers.”
The USAG FWA would also provide all public outreach documentation and recordation
documentation of Hangars 2 and 3 created by the Cultural Resources Office to the FNSB to be

Chapter 3.0

3-1

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK
used to augment any of its public outreach objectives within two years of execution of the
MOA.
Section 3.3.2.2, Alternative 1: Demolition of Hangars 2 and 3, page 3-34, line 2, first Bullet, line 3:
insert the following sentence after “…from previous demolitions and additions.”
The USAG FWA would work with the Alaska SHPO and the NPS as subject matter experts on
state and national historic properties to obtain new and relevant information on other historic
properties associated with the Lend-Lease Operations for the re-evaluation.
Section 3.9.7.1, Cultural Resources, page 3-105, first Bullet, line 6: insert the following sentence
after “…and newspapers.”
The USAG FWA would also provide all public outreach documentation and recordation
documentation of Hangars 2 and 3 created by the Cultural Resources Office to the FNSB to be
used to augment any of its public outreach objectives within two years of execution of the
MOA.
Section 3.9.7.1, Cultural Resources, page 3-105, second bullet, line 3: insert the following sentence
after “…from previous demolitions and additions.”
The USAG FWA would work with the Alaska SHPO and the NPS as subject matter experts on
state and national historic properties to obtain new and relevant information on other historic
properties associated with the Lend-Lease Operations for the re-evaluation.
Section 3.10, Summary of Environmental Impacts and Mitigation, page 3-110, first bullet, line 6:
insert the following sentence after “…newspapers.”
The USAG FWA would also provide all public outreach documentation and recordation
documentation of Hangars 2 and 3 created by the Cultural Resources Office to the FNSB to be
used to augment any of its public outreach objectives within two years of execution of the
MOA.
Section 3.10, Summary of Environmental Impacts and Mitigation, page 3-110, second bullet, line
3: insert the following sentence after “…from previous demolitions and additions.”
The USAG FWA would work with the Alaska SHPO and the NPS as subject matter experts on
state and national historic properties to obtain new and relevant information on other historic
properties associated with the Lend-Lease Operations for the re-evaluation.

3-2

Chapter 3.0

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK
Section 5.0, Distribution List, page 5-3, line 36: insert Bill Brophy after Rod Beuson; line 38: insert
Alton Curtis and Karl Gohlke after Scott Calder.
Section 5.0, Distribution List, page 5-2, line 17: replace Jennifer Curtis and full contact information
with Christine Reichgott, USEPA Region 10, 1200 6th Avenue, Suite 900, Seattle, WA 98101-3140.
Appendix A: National Historic Preservation Act Section 106 Agreement: replace the entirety of
Appendix A with the attached Appendix A: National Historic Preservation Act Section 106 Agreement,
which is the final memorandum of agreement.
Appendix E: Draft EIS Comments: replace the entirety of Appendix E with the attached Appendix E:
Draft EIS Comments and Army Responses.

Chapter 3.0

3-3

Final Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition
of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, AK

This page intentionally left blank.

3-4

Chapter 3.0

APPENDIX A: National Historic Preservation Act Section 106
Memorandum of Agreement

This page intentionally left blank.

FW-MOA-1401
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
INSTALLATION MANAGEMENT COMMAND
HEADQUARTERS, U.S. ARMY GARRISON FORT WAINWRIGHT
1060 GAFFNEY ROAD #6000
FORT WAINWRIGHT, ALASKA 99703-6000

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
AND
THE ALASKA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER
AND
THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
REGARDING
THE DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3
WHEREAS, the United States Department of the Army, acting through the United States Army
Garrison Fort Wainwright (USAG FWA), proposes to demolish Hangar 2 (Building 3008) and
Hangar 3 (Building 3005),1 or maintain the status quo with No Action; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA has determined that this is an Undertaking subject to review
under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), 16 U.S.C. § 470(f), and its
implementing regulations, 36 C.F.R. § 800; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA initiated consultation with the Alaska State Historic Preservation
Officer (SHPO) on 3 October 2011 pursuant to 36 C.F.R. § 800; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA defined the Undertaking's Area of Potential Effect (APE) as the
Ladd Field National Historic Landmark (Ladd Field NHL) and the Ladd Air Force Base Cold
War Historic District (Cold War Historic District) (Attachment A); and
WHEREAS, Hangars 2 and 3 are contributing resources of the Ladd Field NHL and the Cold
War Historic District; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA determined that the Undertaking will have an adverse effect on
the Ladd Field NHL which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places (National
Register) and Cold War Historic District2 which is eligible for listing on the National Register;
and
WHEREAS, the Ladd Field NHL was designated in 1985 with twenty-six contributing
resources,3 of which six resources have been demolished or destroyed, and with the expected loss
of Hangars 2 and 3, eighteen contributing resources will remain; and
1

The Alaska Historic Resource Survey (AHRS) identifier for Hangar 2 is FAI-485, and the identifier of Hangar 3 is
FAI-482.
2
The AHRS identifier for the Ladd Field NHL is FAI-236, and the identifier for the Cold War Historic District is
FAI-1288.
3
Two facilities, Building 2007 and Building 2106 were incorrectly identified as contributing resources in the 1985
nomination. The two facilities are Cold War hangars that were built after Ladd Field NHL’s period of significance.

Page 1 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
WHEREAS, the National Park Service (NPS) pursuant to 36 C.F.R. § 65.1(c) administers the
National Historic Landmarks program on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA notified and invited the NPS Alaska Region Office to consult on
this Undertaking on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior on 15 November 2011 pursuant to 36
C.F.R. § 800.10(c), and the NPS accepted the invitation to consult and sign this Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) as a concurring party; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA notified and invited the Upper Tanana tribes, the Fairbanks North
Star Borough (FNSB) Historic Preservation Commission, Bureau of Land Management (BLM),
and the Tanana-Yukon Historical Society (TYHS) to consult regarding the Undertaking on 15
November 2011 pursuant to 36 C.F.R. § 800.3(f) and all but the Upper Tanana tribes accepted
the invitation to consult, and FNSB Historic Preservation Commission and TYHS agreed to sign
this MOA as concurring parties; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA consulted with the Fort Wainwright Cultural Resources Working
Group, a group of interested parties and individuals who meet with the USAG FWA Cultural
Resources staff typically twice a year to discuss and provide input on cultural resources projects
at Fort Wainwright; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 C.F.R. § 800.6(a)(1), the USAG FWA notified the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) of its adverse effect determination on 15 November
2011 providing the required documentation, and the ACHP chose to participate in accordance
with 36 C.F.R. § 800.6(a)(1)(iii); and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA provided the public with information on the Undertaking and an
opportunity to consult through the USAG FWA Environmental Website, at a public meeting on
14 December 2011, and through the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) process; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA sought partnership with other federal and state agencies
including the BLM, NPS Alaska Region, Department of Interior National Business Center,
Alaska National Guard, and State of Alaska Division of Forestry to rehabilitate or transfer
ownership of the hangars on 6 December 2011 and 23 February 2012, and received no interested
replies; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA previously proposed demolition of the hangars and agreed to
mitigation measures through the executed Memorandum of Agreement among the U.S.
Department of the Army, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and the Alaska State
Historic Preservation Officer Regarding United States Army Alaska Demolition of Buildings in
the Ladd Field National Historic Landmark signed on 23 May 2001; and
WHEREAS, as a result of this previous mitigation for demolition, the Army determined that a
reduced amount of mitigation is appropriate to resolve adverse effects of this Undertaking and
consulted with the SHPO concerning this determination; and

Page 2 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA reaffirms its responsibility to develop the Historic Buildings
Assessment Report and update the Historic American Building Survey Level 1 documentation
which are both projects that USAG FWA previously agreed to produce to mitigate past adverse
effects to Hangars 2 and 34; and
WHEREAS, this MOA only addresses the first step in that process of official re-evaluation of
the Ladd Field NHL which is the submittal of the re-evaluation to the NPS Alaska Region; and
WHEREAS, outside of the responsibilities detailed in this MOA, it is the USAG FWA’s longterm goal to officially submit the findings of the re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL to the
National Historic Landmarks Program for approval per 36 CFR § 65.8; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA completed in April 2012 the Reuse Study of FWA’s Hangars 2
and 3 which included six options for reuse and rehabilitation with associated cost estimates as
part of the mitigation in the Programmatic Agreement among the U.S. Department of the Army,
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and the Alaska State Historic Preservation
Officer Regarding Aviation Stationing signed on 28 September 2009; and
WHEREAS, during the early stages of the Section 106 consultation, the USAG FWA
considered four possible disposition options: rehabilitation of one or both hangars, demolition of
one or both hangars, rehabilitation of one hangar and demolition of one, and no action (i.e.
maintaining the status quo) concerning both hangars; and
WHEREAS, on 23 May 2012, the USAG FWA Cultural Resources Manager, NPS Alaska
Region Historical Architect, SHPO Architectural Historian, and USAG FWA Structural and
Electrical Engineers met at Fort Wainwright for a site visit to discuss the NPS Alaska Region
and SHPO suggestions on ways to possibly reduce the rehabilitation costs of Hangars 2 and 3;
and
WHEREAS, through further analysis, the USAG FWA found that rehabilitation of one or both
hangars was not fiscally viable, and the Section 106 consultation and the NEPA EIS were
adjusted accordingly; and
WHEREAS, the USAG FWA reaffirms its desire to be a good steward of the Ladd Field NHL,
the Cold War Historic District, and all other historic properties under its care; and
NOW, THEREFORE, the USAG FWA, the SHPO, and the ACHP agree that the Undertaking
will be implemented in accordance with the following stipulations in order to take into account
the effect of the Undertaking on the historic properties.
4

The Historic American Building Survey Level 1 documentation is mitigation in the Programmatic Agreement
among the U.S. Department of the Army, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and the Alaska State
Historic Preservation Officer Regarding Aviation Stationing, and per the agreement, the USAG FWA will complete
the project in 2013 or early spring 2014. The Historic Buildings Assessment Report is mitigation in the
Memorandum of Agreement among the U.S. Department of the Army, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
and the Alaska State Historic Preservation Officer Regarding the Removal of the Overhangs and Stairwells on
Hangars 2 and 3, and per the agreement, the USAG FWA will complete the project in 2016.

Page 3 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
STIPULATIONS
USAG FWA shall ensure that the following measures are carried out:
I.

MITIGATION FOR THE DEMOLITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3
A. Public Outreach.

1.
In pursuit of more visibility and appreciation for the Ladd Field NHL, the USAG
FWA Cultural Resources staff will be available upon request to present lectures to local
Fairbanks groups (military and/or non-military) on Fort Wainwright’s World War II history.
This availability will be noted on the USAG FWA’s Environmental website and emails will be
sent out to local groups within one month of the execution of this MOA.
2.
The USAG FWA will continue to engage the public through the use of previously
developed publications by making information and tools available for teachers and other
educators, including the Teaching with Historic Places lesson plan on Ladd Field and its role in
World War II.
3.
In pursuit of more visibility and appreciation for the Ladd Field NHL, the USAG
FWA will submit, at minimum, three articles concerning the historic preservation of Fort
Wainwright’s Ladd Field NHL to local or state publications, possibly including, but not limited
to, local, non-profit and statewide newspapers, websites, various social media, and newsletters
within one year of executing this MOA and two articles a year, every year, for a subsequent four
years.
4.
The USAG FWA will provide all public outreach documentation and recordation
documentation of Hangars 2 and 3 created by the Cultural Resources Office to Fairbanks North
Star Borough to be used to augment any of their public outreach objectives within two years of
execution of this agreement.
For five years from the execution of this MOA, the USAG FWA will update and
5.
seek input twice a year from consulting parties on these public outreach projects detailed in
Stipulation I.A starting six months after the execution of this MOA.
B. Re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL.
The USAG FWA will complete a re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL, through
1.
preparation of a revised draft NHL nomination, including an analysis of cumulative effects on
the Ladd Field NHL from previous demolitions and additions. The USAG FWA will work with
the SHPO and NPS as subject matter experts on state and national historic properties to obtain
new and relevant information on other historic properties associated with the Lend-Lease
Program for the re-evaluation.

Page 4 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
2.
Within four years of the demolition of Hangars 2 and 3, a draft of the Ladd Field
NHL re-evaluation will be submitted to the consulting parties for a 30-day calendar review. The
USAG FWA will consider any comments on the draft received from the consulting parties.
3.
The USAG FWA will submit a final version of the re-evaluation to the consulting
parties no less than a year after submitting the first draft.
4.
The re-evaluation will include submitting the appropriate documentation to the
NPS Alaska Region within five years of the demolition of Hangars 2 and 3.
C. Stewardship of the Ladd Field NHL.
1.
With the expected loss of Hangars 2 and 3, the USAG FWA will refocus the
efforts of its Directorate of Public Works (DPW) staff on effective stewardship through focused
and purposeful management of the remaining contributing resources that comprise the Ladd
Field NHL.
2.
The USAG FWA will utilize existing and currently planned documentation to
further historic preservation objectives and goals including, but not limited to, utilizing the
already developed Design Guidelines for the Ladd Field NHL, the educational PowerPoint
presentations on historic preservation subjects, and the currently planned but not yet developed
Historic Buildings Assessment Report.5
3.
Within one year of completing the Historic Buildings Assessment Report for the
Ladd Field NHL, recommendations from the report will be submitted for consideration in the
DPW Annual Work Plan6.
D. Mitigation for the No Action Option for Hangars 2 and 3.
Mitigation for the No Action Option for Hangars 2 and 3 is treated the same as
demolition detailed in Stipulations I.A-C except any stipulation’s timeframe that is based on
demolition will instead be based on the execution of this MOA.
II.

SUMMARY REPORT

A. Once a year every spring following the execution of this MOA until it expires or is
terminated, the USAG FWA shall provide all consulting parties a summary report via email and
mail detailing all work undertaken pursuant to this MOA.

5

The Historic Buildings Assessment Report will detail maintenance and repair needs for the NHL and Cold War
Historic District buildings.
6
The Annual Work Plan is DPW’s yearly list of possible repair and maintenance projects for Fort Wainwright
buildings.

Page 5 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
B. The summary report shall include progress on the following: demolition progress, public
outreach, status of the re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL, and stewardship efforts regarding
the Ladd Field NHL.
C. In addition, each summary report shall include any scheduling changes proposed, any
problems encountered, and any disputes and objections received in the USAG FWA's efforts to
carry out the stipulations of this MOA.
D. Upon notification of any summary report, the consulting parties can request, within 30
days, a meeting for further clarification, if needed.
III. POST REVIEW DISCOVERIES
If potential historic properties are discovered or unanticipated effects on historic
properties occur, the USAG FWA will implement the discovery plan included as Attachment B
of this MOA.
IV. DISPUTE RESOLUTION
A. Should any signatory party to this MOA object at any time to any actions proposed or the
manner in which the terms of this MOA are implemented, the USAG FWA will consult with
such party to resolve the objection. If the USAG FWA determines that such objection cannot be
resolved:
1.
The USAG FWA will forward all documentation relevant to the dispute,
including the USAG FWA’s proposed resolution, to the ACHP. The ACHP will provide the
USAG FWA with its advice on the resolution of the objection within 30 calendar days of
receiving adequate documentation. Prior to reaching a final decision on the dispute, the USAG
FWA will prepare a written response that takes into account any timely advice or comments
regarding the dispute from the ACHP and the signatories, and provide them with a copy of this
written response. The USAG FWA will then proceed according to its final decision.
If the ACHP does not provide its advice regarding the dispute within the 302.
calendar day time period, the USAG FWA may make a final decision on the dispute and proceed
accordingly. Prior to reaching such a final decision, the USAG FWA will prepare a written
response that takes into account any timely comments regarding the dispute from the signatories
to the MOA, and provide the signatories and the ACHP with a copy of such written response.
3.
The USAG FWA will be responsible for carrying out all other actions that are not
the subject of the dispute.
B. If an objection pertaining to this MOA is raised by a member of the public at any time
during implementation of any stipulation in this MOA, the USAG FWA will notify the
signatories to this MOA and take into account the objection.

Page 6 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
V.

AMENDMENT

This MOA may be amended when such an amendment is agreed to in writing by all
signatories. The amendment will be effective on the date a copy is signed by all of the
signatories and submitted to the ACHP.
VI. TERMINATION
A. If any signatory believes that the terms of this MOA are not being honored or cannot be
carried out, or that an amendment to its terms should be made, that signatory will immediately
consult with the other signatories to consider and develop amendments to the MOA per
Stipulation IV.
B. If this MOA is not amended as provided for in Stipulation IV, the USAG FWA, the
SHPO, or the ACHP may propose in writing to terminate this MOA with an explanation of the
reasons for termination. If the signatories have found no alternative solution to termination
within 30 calendar days after receipt of the written notice, the MOA shall be terminated. If this
MOA is terminated and prior to work continuing on the Undertaking, the USAG FWA must
either (a) execute a new MOA pursuant to 36 C.F.R. § 800.6, or (b) request, take into account,
and respond to the comments of the ACHP under 36 C.F.R. § 800.7 and will notify the
signatories as to the course of action it will pursue.
VII. ANTI-DEFICIENCY ACT
All requirements set forth in this MOA requiring the expenditure of the USAG FWA
funds are expressly subject to the availability of appropriations and the requirements of the AntiDeficiency Act (31 U.S.C. § 1341). No obligation undertaken by the USAG FWA under the
terms of this MOA will require or be interpreted to require a commitment to expend funds not
obligated for a particular purpose.
VIII. DURATION
This MOA will become effective upon execution by the signatories and will remain in
effect until terminated or twelve years after its execution. If all stipulations are not completed
prior to such time, the USAG FWA may consult with the signatories to reconsider the terms of
the MOA and amend it in accordance with Stipulation V. Amendment.
EXECUTION of this MOA by the USAG FWA, the SHPO, and the ACHP and implementation
of its terms evidence that the USAG FWA has taken into account the effects of this Undertaking
on historic properties and afforded the ACHP an opportunity to comment.

Page 7 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
AND
THE ALASKA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER
AND
THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
REGARDING
THE DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3

Signatories:
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

FOR~
By:

1

D:P0TTER
Deputy to the Garrison Commander

Date:

(

Ocf

~or)

Page 8 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
AND
THE ALASKA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER
AND
THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
REGARDING
THE DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3

Signatories:
UNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Page 9 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
AND
THE ALASKA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER
AND
THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
REGARDING
THE DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3

Signatories:
ALASKA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER

By: ~~~ ,
State Historic Preservation Officer
Date:

LJG+

\0 )2 0

\3

Page 10 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
AND
THE ALASKA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER
AND
THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
REGARDING
THE DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3

Concurring Parties:

National ParkS
By: - - - - - -7 - + - r -- -- ;- - - - - - - SUEE.
Alaska Regional Director
Date:

J...ve....bt-t-

Date:

f\Jo 1/

7-'S""I Vi?

1, 20 13

FNSB Commission on Historic Preservation

By: OJ ~ ~
CLAUS-M. ASKE
Chair

Date: ~ !)'

nw

~b r~

Page 11 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
Attachment A

Area of Potential Effect for the Undertaking

Page 12 of 13

FW-MOA-1401
Attachment B
POST REVIEW AND UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERIES PLAN
A. In the course of conducting approved activities, the USAG FWA and/or their contractors
shall not intentionally or knowingly affect (such as remove, disturb, or cause to be
removed or disturbed) any historic properties outside the approved scope of work.
B. In the event that a previously unidentified archaeological site is discovered during the
execution of this undertaking, all ground disturbing activity shall immediately cease in
the area of the discovery until the USAG FWA archaeologist or other USAG FWA
personnel who meet The Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards
for Archeologists can evaluate the archaeological site. Construction work may continue
in the project area outside the archaeological resource area. The USAG FWA shall notify
the SHPO and appropriate Alaska Native tribes within 3 business days of discovery. The
USAG FWA shall ensure that any archaeological work that may be necessary shall be
completed in accordance with the NHPA and the Archaeological Resources Protection
Act. The SHPO and/or the Alaska Native tribes, if they so request, may immediately
inspect the work site to determine the nature and area of the affected archaeological site.
Within 10 business days of the original notification of the discovery, the USAG FWA, in
consultation with the SHPO and interested Alaska Native tribes, will determine the
National Register eligibility of the resource and will propose action to resolve possible
adverse effects to any affected National Register-eligible archaeological sites. Work may
resume in affected areas after approval by the USAG FWA Cultural Resources Manager
and the SHPO.
C. If human remains are inadvertently discovered; the USAG FWA shall notify the SHPO
within 24 hours of discovery. The USAG FWA shall cease all work by their contractors
and ensure that the remains are secured from further disturbance or vandalism until after
the appropriate law enforcement authorities have ensured that the remains are not related
to any crime, and until a plan for treatment has been developed. If the USAG FWA
determines that the remains are Native American, the Garrison Commander shall
immediately undertake any actions necessary under the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act, as amended. If the USAG FWA determines that the
remains are not Native American, and do not warrant criminal investigation, the USAG
FWA shall immediately notify the SHPO and consult with the SHPO to identify
descendants or other interested parties, if any. The USAG FWA, in consultation with the
SHPO and any interested parties, shall develop a plan for the respectful treatment and
disposition of the remains. Work may resume in affected areas after approval by the
USAG FWA Cultural Resources Manager and the SHPO.
D. If during the course of the undertaking there are any unforeseen or unanticipated effects
to historic properties other than the identification of a previously unknown archaeological
site, the USAG FWA shall initiate consultation pursuant to 36 C.F.R. § 800.13(b)(3) to
resolve the unforeseen effects.

Page 13 of 13

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX E: Draft EIS Comments and Army Responses

This page intentionally left blank.

Table E-1 provides the United States Department of the Army’s (Army’s) responses to comments received during the public review period for the
Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, Alaska. All correspondence providing
comments during the public comment period for the Draft EIS is provided after the table, along with the transcripts from the public and agency
meetings.
Table E-1: Army Responses to Public and Agency Comments on the Draft EIS
Comment
Number

Comment

Public_1.1

I strongly endorse Alternative 1, demolition of Hangars #2 and #3. I have
experience with the infrastructure of Fort Wainwright dating back to
1964. The hangars are unsafe, unusable, and maintenance is a terrible
drain of precious funds. This action is considerably overdue.

Public_1.2

Land space at Fort Wainwright is very precious, especially on Ladd
Airfield. Demolition of the old outdated hangars will allow future
development on the airfield so vitally needed for combat readiness of our
aviation soldiers and support of their war-fighting brethren.

Public_2.1

I firmly support Alternative #1, Demolition of Hangers #2 & #3; this
action is long overdue. Of the four Ft Wainwright WW II hangers, one
has already burned to the ground and one (#2) had electrical fire that
caused significant damage to the structure. As noted in the study, the two
(#2 & #3) hangers are not in use do to years of arctic condition wear and
tear, safety concerns and the lack of expensive modifications. These
deficiencies have all contributed in compromising structural integrity of
both buildings. It is time for the replacement of these hangers.

Public_2.2

I firmly support Alternative #1, Demolition of Hangers #2 & #3; this
action is long overdue. While both buildings are not in use they still
require an annual maintenance cost of $700,000. With the constriction of
military funds, it is important to invest in future developments for combat
readiness of our aviation teams and their equipment. The demolition of
the outdated hangars must be replaced with modern facilities to house our
multimillion dollar aircrafts; aircrafts that support our American Soldiers.

Public_2.3

Execute Alternative #1 and get Ft Wainwrights’ Aviation Brigade into
the 21st Century. American Soldiers fighting for America’s freedom
expect us to resource their ability to train, fight and maintain with most

Response to Comment

Comments noted. Thank you for your input.

Comments noted. Thank you for your input.

Comment
Number

Comment

Response to Comment

modern up to date equipment and facilities. One percent of the American
population are in the military fighting for the freedom of the remaining
99%. The 1% deserve nothing but the best!

Public_3

Those hangers were old when I was at Ft. Wainwright in 67-68. We had a
gym in an unnumbered hanger that was condemned by the flood in 67.
Probably best to take the hangers down before they fall down and
damage someone or something. Good Luck.

Comment noted. Thank you for your input.

Public_4

The study cost over one million dollars to do. The American taxpayer has
paid over a million dollars to make a decision to take down two hangars
that are falling apart that someone in elementary school can probably
spend 10 minutes and have it figured out. Another gross waste of
American taxpayer funds and it's all being done because of regulations
that are out of control.

Comment noted. Thank you for your input.

Public_5

It appears that the hangars have no useful purpose in the military mission
for Fort Wainwright and, instead, are taking up space that could be used
for the mission in support of what is current. The buildings are draining
resources that are badly needed in other positions, and useful other
positions. The hangars are going to continue to deteriorate. There are no
funds available for repairs, for any type of renovations. So what's going
to happen is they are going to deteriorate, become a safety hazard, a
health hazard, and are going to cost much more because there's not going
to be reuse of the materials if we wait till it falls. Financially, a contractor
could come in and reuse that material, which is going to decrease the cost
on it. The military shouldn't have to fund this when they have a shortage
of funds and we have a strategic mission that is very, very needed.

Comment noted. Thank you for your input.
As part of the Proposed Action and to meet the Army’s goal of
not exceeding 50 percent of C&D materials being disposed of
in a landfill, non-hazardous materials would be diverted from
landfills to the greatest extent possible by recycling and reusing
materials.

Comment noted. Thank you for your input.

Public_6

So I encourage the demolition of Hangars 2 and 3. I would hope that
there would be a historical record, possibly 3D videos of the buildings so
that historically the atmosphere, the space, the structure can be kept for
historical purposes; at the same time, it would not impact the mission that
is needed at Fort Wainwright.

With regard to documentation of the hangars, a HABS, Level
1, documentation effort, in accordance with the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Architectural and Engineering
Documentation, is scheduled to take place in fall 2013 or
spring 2014. HABS, Level 1, documentation includes 1) a full
set of measured drawings depicting existing or historic
conditions; 2) photographs with large-format negatives of
exterior and interior views along with photocopies with large
format negatives of select existing drawings or historic views

Comment
Number

Comment

Response to Comment
where available; and 3) a written history and description of the
resources. In addition to these Secretary of Interior
requirements, the USAG FWA will also include video
documentation; however, the video documentation will not be
three-dimensional.

Now, architecturally, the importance of the hangars towards today, we
shouldn't lose that. We should maintain that.

As noted in the Draft EIS in Section 2.3.3, Viability Analysis,
rehabilitating the hangars is not economically feasible.
However, as part of a stipulation from a prior MOA, a HABS,
Level 1, documentation effort, which will include a full set of
measured drawings, photographs, and a written history, as well
as video documentation, is scheduled to take place in fall 2013
or spring 2014. Through this effort, the architectural nature of
the hangars will be documented. See response to the Public-5
comment for a complete description of what HABS, Level 1,
documentation entails.

TYHS_2

You know that if those buildings are destroyed, they could have a
mitigation of great environmental impact right off the -- we act too soon
to develop areas. And one of the problems Fort Wainwright had, for
instance, they build a new military housing in an area that was polluted
and that is still polluted. Kids shouldn't play out there. So we build first
and then have to go back later. This site of those hangars has the
possibility of being a major environmental impact area. The clean-up
would cost -- I don't know much -- well, more than it would cost to
rehabilitate those hangars.

It is noted in the Draft EIS in Section 3.4, Hazardous
Materials/Hazardous Waste, that there is the potential for
contamination due to the hangars’ age and historical use. As
part of the demolition contract, surveys would be conducted to
determine the presence of any hazardous materials. Any
hazardous materials found would be properly remediated.
Through its various planning processes, the Army has
developed preliminary cost estimates for the
rehabilitation/reuse of the hangars and for demolition of the
hangars. Taking into consideration all aspects of construction
and demolition, including potential contamination of materials
and the proper disposal of them, the Army estimated the cost of
rehabilitation/reuse of each hangar to be approximately $48
million to $60 million while the cost of demolishing the
hangars would be approximately $6.3 million combined. See
Chapter 2 of the Draft EIS.

NPS_1

And one of the things that really bothers me about NEPA and Section
106 is in the NEPA document there it states that the impact to the NHL
with the demolition of the two hangars is a moderate impact. And there
really hasn't been anything done yet to say that that's the case. That's
something that's still down the road. So it's really kind of a flaw in the

Because a formal re-evaluation of the NHL will not be
completed for several years, the USAG FWA used its
professional expertise as architectural historians to examine the
effects from demolishing the hangars to complete the Draft EIS
and to meet NEPA requirements for the analysis. As discussed

TYHS_1

Comment
Number

Comment

Response to Comment

document to say at this point that that's the potential outcome. Because it
could be a severe impact to the NHL, including loss to the NHL.

in Section 3.3.2.2 of the Draft EIS, the USAG FWA recognizes
that the loss of the hangars will have an adverse impact on the
Ladd Field NHL, although the demolition of the hangars is not
expected to impact its designation as an NHL.

FNSB
HPC_1

So, that being said, I would like to see a little bit more work done for the
mitigation, you know, some actual active preservation that is possibly for
reuse of the materials of the buildings. I've seen the estimates of how
many dump trucks it's going to take to haul that off to a landfill and in a
place where we're located, you know, so far from some useful resources
and the cost of resources being what they are and the inherent, you know,
unique quality and the nature of those materials, I feel that there's
probably still a pretty viable volume of materials that could be reused
elsewhere in the community on different projects. They were talking
about building a new school, they're talking about -- I mean, it might be
really interesting to retain some of those.

As noted in the Draft EIS in Section 3.7, Sustainability, on
pages 3-60 and 3-63, the Army has to meet federal statutes that
require certain amounts of C&D waste be diverted from
landfills. Although materials in the hangars contain lead-based
paint and asbestos as well as other hazardous materials, nonhazardous materials would be diverted from landfills to the
greatest extent possible by recycling and reusing materials in
compliance with the Army’s goal of not exceeding 50 percent
of C&D materials being disposed of in a landfill.

FNSB
HPC_2

But if things like that [historic graffiti] were encountered, I mean, I
would like to see them maybe documented and, you know, those panels
or walls may be, you know, retained for some kind of purpose or
something like that, like an actual, you know, physical -- you know, what
can we salvage from the building in terms of not just taking photos, but
additional photos. I'll have some written comments provided before the
deadline definitely indicating, you know, our position and kind of things
we've evaluated just for kind of that active preservation. But I think the
borough would really like to see those kinds of things focused on just to
retain vestiges of the historic nature of those buildings are able to be
retained and not just buried.

There is no known graffiti in the hangars. However, as
stipulated in a prior MOA, a HABS, Level 1, documentation
effort for Hangars 2 and 3 is scheduled to take place in fall
2013 or spring 2014. If any graffiti or other features are found
during the HABS, Level 1, effort, they will be preserved
through photographic and video documentation. See response
to Public_5 comment for a full description of what a HABS,
Level 1, documentation effort includes.

FNSB
HPC_3

In regards to the Russian side, is anyone aware of any, you know, what's
left there? You know, obviously, they probably had maybe not the similar
hangars, but they must have had structures. So are you considering that in
some of your future work and interpretation to, you know, actually create
this similar bridge that -- of communication between the two nations and
have the opportunity to, you know, really, you know, connect?

A discussion of properties located in Russia is outside the
scope of the EIS.
However, re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL is a stipulation
contained within the NHPA Section 106 MOA for this project.
During the NHL re-evaluation process, the USAG FWA will
review the documentation to see what information is readily
available; however, the USAG FWA cannot do research on
buildings (i.e., survey buildings) that are not located on the
installation, and the USAG FWA is limited in what primary

Comment
Number

Comment

Response to Comment
research can be conducted at other locales. There are
connections to sister city groups from which the USAG FWA
can obtain information, and recent research for other locales
will be referred to as much as possible.
Additionally, the following text is being added to Stipulation
I.B.1 of the MOA: “The USAG FWA will work with the SHPO
and NPS as subject matter experts on state and national historic
properties to obtain new and relevant information on other
historic properties associated with the Lend-Lease Program for
the re-evaluation.”

FNSB
HPC_4

And consider it in this re-evaluation or, you know, the HABS reevaluation or is the HABS re-evaluation going to focus strictly on the
built environment to.....

The HABS, Level 1, documentation for Hangars 2 and 3 to be
conducted as part of a prior MOA will follow the Secretary of
the Interior’s Standards for Architectural and Engineering
Documentation, and thus would not include information about
facilities located in Russia or elsewhere. See the response to the
Public-5 comment for what is contained in the HABS, Level 1,
documentation. However, this information, to the extent
possible, will be included in the re-evaluation of the Ladd Field
NHL as stipulated in the NHPA Section 106 MOA for this
project. See response to the FNSB-HPC-3 comment.

FNSB
HPC_5

The history associated with the buildings. It's not necessarily the quality
of this fantastic, unique building. That's the original designation. So it
seems like if you're going to stay with that kind of nomination, you know,
and in keeping with the original nomination, you know, it could be
expanded upon.

See response to the FNSB-HPC-3 comment.

FNSB
HPC_6

While we understand the difficult fiscal and engineering constraints
imposed by the age and condition of the structures, we feel that the
hangars provide immeasurable and irreplaceable historic value to the
Ladd Field National Historic Landmark (NHL) and are essential elements
of the NHL. We also realize that the NHL has a life of its own. Of the
original 26 structures within the NHL at the time of designation (1985),
only 18 remain. At the present rate of structural loss within the NHL,
there is the possibility that by June 17, 2079, all structures within the
NHL would be gone, less than 100 years from the original nomination
date. As a preservation Commission, we would prefer the buildings that

As discussed in the Draft EIS Section 2.3.3, Viability Analysis,
it is not economically feasible to rehabilitate and preserve
Hangars 2 and 3. As discussed in the Draft EIS in Section
3.3.2.2 and concluded on page 3-33, while the loss of the
hangars would adversely impact the Ladd Field NHL and the
Ladd Air Force Base Cold War Historic District, the two
districts would still retain their integrity. In addition, as part of
the NHPA Section 106 MOA for the project, the USAG FWA
would complete a re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL with a
draft of the re-evaluation provided to the consulting parties

Comment
Number

Comment
once constituted Ladd Field are preserved for future generations and not
demolished. If that is not possible, we recommend the dissolution of the
Ladd Field NHL.

Response to Comment
within four years of the hangars being demolished. To help
mitigate further impacts on the NHL, per the MOA, the USAG
FWA would refocus the efforts of its Directorate of Public
Works staff on effective stewardship through focused and
purposeful management of the remaining contributing
resources that comprise the Ladd Field NHL.

FNSB
HPC_7

Katharine Kerr, National Park Service, indicated in Case Digest, Fall
2009, that "Programmatic Agreement for Aviation Stationing at Fort
Wainwright" was executed on September 28, 2009, as a closed case. The
review was instigated by a proposed increase in aviation stationing at
FWA that would include construction of a number of facilities and
increase in soldiers and helicopters. One adverse effect included a
potential change-in-use of Hangars 2 and 3. The Programmatic
Agreement, therefore, included adhering to the Secretary of Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties for adaptive re-use to
the maximum extent possible, not demolition or no action, leading to
inevitable collapse.

In Stipulation V.D. of the Programmatic Agreement for
Aviation Stationing at Fort Wainwright, it states: “Contingent
on funding, the CARP will be implemented to provide for the
interim preservation of Hangars 2 and 3.” However, funding
was not available to implement the CARP, so the condition of
the hangars continued to deteriorate. In compliance with
Stipulation V.A. of the Programmatic Agreement, the USAG
FWA completed a Reuse Study for Hangars 2 and 3 and in
compliance with Stipulation V.C. The reuse study was used in
the planning stages of this project. However, the Reuse Study
used cost estimates from the 2008 CARP that needed to be
updated for this project. As described in the Draft EIS in
Chapter 2, part of the updates to the costs involved a military
construction planning charrette for rehabilitating and reusing
one hangar to support an Unmanned Aircraft System mission.
As a result of the charrette, it was determined that the cost to
rehabilitate and reuse one hangar would actually be
approximately $48 million to $60 million, nearly twice the cost
estimated in the CARP for rehabilitating and reusing a hangar.
Therefore, as described in Section 2.3.2, Viability Analysis of
the Draft EIS, rehabilitation and reuse of even one hangar was
not considered to be economically feasible.

FNSB
HPC_8

The "inability to meet the functional requirements as maintenance
facilities for modern aircraft" is mentioned at several junctures within the
DEIS. The Commission takes exception to that determination relative to
Hangar 3, believing a variety of maintenance activities and storage of
aircraft could still be conducted within the hangar as it is not necessary to
utilize hoists anchored to structural beams to perform maintenance tasks
on aircraft.

It is not the inability to utilize hoists that makes the hangars
unable to meet the functional requirements as maintenance
facilities for modern aircraft; it is their unsafe condition. As
discussed in Section 1.1.3 of the DEIS, both Hangars 2 and 3
have been assessed for their structural integrity. The Army
found that most of the wooden members in both hangars
display weaknesses and the wooden bowstring trusses meet
nine of the top eleven reasons why bowstring trusses fail.

Comment
Number

Comment

Response to Comment
Consequently, these buildings have been condemned and
subsequently recorded as “non-functional.” Conducting any
type of maintenance or storage activities in the facilities is a
serious risk to life, health, and safety of Soldiers and personnel,
as well as a serious risk to the equipment that would be stored
in them. Section 1.1.3 also describes the most recent definition
of functional workspace requirements taken from Army
Pamphlet 415-28.

After review of the proposed mitigation measures for the demolition, we
feel that not enough of the historic integrity will be retained through
"active preservation" methods. We recommend the adoption of additional
mitigation measures as follows:

FNSB
HPC_9

FNSB
HPC_10

• Extensive photo documentation of the exterior and interior of the
buildings. Using high resolution photography, we'd like as much as
possible documented about the construction methods and materials,
structural design, interior and exterior aesthetics, and any historical
graffiti or unique artifacts. Additionally, the documentation should be
made available at locations other than Fort Wainwright, such as the Noel
Wien Library or an exhibit at the Morris Thompson Cultural Center in
Fairbanks. The exhibit would document the history of the hangars and
why they were significant at the time of the war effort.

After review of the proposed mitigation measures for the demolition, we
feel that not enough of the historic integrity will be retained through
"active preservation" methods. We recommend the adoption of additional
mitigation measures as follows:

The USAG FWA recommends no additional mitigation to
address this request because Hangars 2 and 3 have already been
extensively photographed. In 1986, a HABS, Level II, was
conducted on both buildings. In 2010, the buildings were
resurveyed using the USAG FWA’s standard methodology for
surveys of historic buildings. Both surveys included
photography. Also, the buildings were extensively
photographed during the removal of the overhangs per the
MOA and have been periodically photographed by the USAG
FWA Cultural Resources staff as part of routine operations.
Lastly, this fall or early next spring, a HABS, Level I, will be
conducted of both buildings; this is the highest level of
documentation using HABS standards and will include
photography.
However, the USAG FWA will provide recordation
documentation to FNSB for use in augmenting their public
outreach objectives. Toward this, the following stipulation has
been added to I.A. of the MOA for this project: “USAG FWA
will provide all public outreach documentation and recordation
documentation of Hangars 2 and 3 created by the Cultural
Resources Office to Fairbanks North Star Borough to be used
to augment any of their public outreach objectives within two
years of execution of this agreement.”
As noted in the Draft EIS in Section 3.7, Sustainability, on
pages 3-60 and 3-63, the Army has to meet federal statutes that
require certain amounts of C&D waste be diverted from
landfills. Although materials in the hangars contain-lead based
paint and asbestos, as well as other hazardous materials, non-

Comment
Number

FNSB
HPC_11

Comment
• Recycling and reuse, to the extent possible, of the materials. Most of the
demolished materials are currently slated for deposition in the FNSB
Solid Waste Landfill. We feel that there is a unique opportunity to make
viable materials available for reuse in new construction either on Fort
Wainwright or elsewhere in the community. Some of the materials may
have intrinsic historic value in addition to the construction value. We
suggest the remainder of the debris be disposed of through a recycling
provider, to the extent possible, and only the materials that can neither be
reused nor recycled then be disposed of in the landfill.

hazardous materials would be diverted from landfills to the
greatest extent possible by recycling and reusing materials in
compliance with the Army’s goal of not exceeding 50 percent
of C&D materials being disposed of in a landfill.

After review of the proposed mitigation measures for the demolition, we
feel that not enough of the historic integrity will be retained through
"active preservation" methods. We recommend the adoption of additional
mitigation measures as follows:

The following stipulation has been added to I.A. of the MOA
for this project: “The USAG FWA will provide all public
outreach documentation and recordation documentation of
Hangars 2 and 3 created by the Cultural Resources Office to
Fairbanks North Star Borough to be used to augment any of
their public outreach objectives within two years of execution
of this agreement.”

• Augment the existing "Lend-Lease Memorial" in Downtown Fairbanks.
Using the last of the photos and materials obtained, update the memorial
to indicate the disposition of the Hangars and use the new photos to
supplement the display.
After review of the proposed mitigation measures for the demolition, we
feel that not enough of the historic integrity will be retained through
"active preservation" methods. We recommend the adoption of additional
mitigation measures as follows:

FNSB
HPC_12

EPA_1

Response to Comment

• Comprehensive review of the remaining hangars at other strategic lendlease locations. The Memorandum of Agreement mitigation measure C("Re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL") should incorporate the results
of a review of remaining hangars at other lend-lease locations in order to
comprehensively evaluate the cumulative effects of any further potential
structural losses within the NHL.
We commend the U.S. Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska (USAGFWA) for an extremely clear, thorough and user-friendly document. We
especially appreciate the inclusion of color maps and diagrams, tabs, an
index, and useful appendices in the hard copy. We also recognize the
notable effort by USAG-FWA to consult with potentially affected and
interested federally-recognized tribes. Finally, we believe the EIS
considered a wide range of alternatives and appropriately screened out

The following language has been added to Stipulation I.B.1 of
the MOA. “The USAG FWA will work with the SHPO and the
NPS as subject matter experts on state and national historic
properties to obtain new and relevant information on other
historic properties associated with the Lend-Lease Program for
the re-evaluation.”

Comment noted. Thank you for your input

Comment
Number

Comment

Response to Comment

those alternatives not meeting rational criteria to result in the USAGFWA preferred alternative (Alternative 1).

EPA_2

EPA_3

ADEC_1

We have given the EIS a rating of EC-1(Environmental ConcernsAdequate Information). A description of our rating system is enclosed.
Based on review, and as identified in our scoping comments, our primary
concern continues to be the management of known CERCLA sites
(FTWW-018, CC-FTWW-103, and FTWW-348) as well as yet-to-bediscovered contamination in the project area. The EIS clearly identifies
the likelihood of additional contamination surrounding and beneath the
hangar project area, as well as beneath other structures being demolished
in the project area.
We strongly encourage USAG FWA to work closely with our Federal
Facilities program (Deb Yamamoto, EPA Region 10 Federal Facilities
Site Cleanup Manager, 206-553-7216 or yamamoto.deb@epa.gov) as
results of sampling become available and if any changes to institutional
controls or the CERCLA Record of Decision are contemplated.

I skimmed the environmental contamination section yesterday and
didn't have any concerns.

Comment noted. Thank you for your input.
The USAG FWA will continue to manage known CERLCA
sites in accordance with the institutional controls and
appropriate CERCLA ROD. The USAG FWA will also work
with the USEPA as necessary as the project moves forward.

Comment noted. Thank you for your input.

Notes: C&D – construction and demolition, CARP - Condition Assessment and Rehabilitation Plans, CERCLA - Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act, EIS – environmental impact statement, EPA – Environmental Protection Agency, FNSB – Fairbanks North Star Borough,
HABS – Historic American Buildings Survey, M – million, MOA – Memorandum of Agreement, NPS – National Park Service, NEPA – National
Environmental Policy Act, NHL –National Historic Landmark, ROD – record of decision, SHPO – State Historic Preservation Office, U.S. – United States,
USAG FWA – United States Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska, USEPA – Environmental Protection Agency.

This page intentionally left blank.

1
FORT WAINWRIGHT, ALASKA
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3
TRANSCRIPT OF PUBLIC HEARING
Before Lisa Graham and Matthew Sprau
Hearing Moderators
Princess Lodge
Jade Room
Fairbanks, Alaska
July 10, 2013
6:30 o'clock p.m.

2
P R O C E E D I N G S

1

COL. RONALD JOHNSON:

2

Okay.

So I'm Col. Johnson and

3

I'm the commander at Fort Wainwright, Alaska.

4

anybody here who is a private concerned citizen that has

5

nothing to do with Fort Wainwright, environmental, DPW,

6

anything like that?

7

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

8

COL. RONALD JOHNSON:

9
10

So is there

Does government count?
Okay.

Ma'am, so I think you are

the lone member of the audience and you're going to get a
special treat time.

It's all.....

11

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

Oh, everybody knows me already.

12

COL. RONALD JOHNSON:

13

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

14

COL. RONALD JOHNSON:

This is all just for you.

I want to talk about the fire.
Okay.

All right.

So I'm going

15

to make my introductory remarks very short and I'm going to let

16

the crew that put the brief together actually talk to you.

17

this is another of a series of meetings that we've had where

18

we're getting public comment from concerned citizens, reference

19

the NEPA process, Chapter 106 requirements, and this applies to

20

hangars -- historic hangars on Fort Wainwright, Hangars 2 and

21

3.

22

But

And so as we said before, we've gone through all this

23

process of what's -- and we're working toward a final

24

disposition of what's going to happen to those hangars.

25

two things that I talked about, the NEPA process and Chapter

These

3

1

106, kind of lay out, here's a road map of events that have to

2

occur before you can make a final determination as to what's

3

the disposition.

4

comment, you've got to listen to what's going on, you've got to

5

consider a whole bunch of stuff before you make a decision and

6

execute it.

And one of those is you've got to get public

And so they'll talk to you a lot more specifically

7
8

about what does all that mean, and where we're at, and what

9

alternatives have we looked at, and where are we at in this

10

process, and what's the next step.

11

remarks and I'll let you guys actually get into the briefing.

12

So thanks.

Thanks for coming.

MR. SPRAU:

13

So there's my introductory

All right.

So I was told to tell you that

14

if I'm not loud enough, just do something with your hand and

15

I'll get louder.

So how is that?

16

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

17

MR. SPRAU:

18

MS. GRAHAM:

19

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

20

MR. SPRAU:

21
22

right.

How's that?

Is that good?

I don't think the mike is on.

Oh, sorry.
Hold that down.

We want to see how loud you can get.

I can get loud.
Good?

There you go.

Yeah, there you go.

You think so?

So thank you, Col. Johnson.

All

All right.

My name is Matt Sprau.

23

I'm the National Environmental Policy Act coordinator at Fort

24

Wainwright and I'd like to welcome you to tonight's public

25

meeting for the disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 Draft

4

1
2

Environmental Impact Statement.
Tonight's meeting is a joint presentation between

3

myself and Ms. Lisa Graham, our cultural resource manager.

4

We'll be talking about two environmental laws.

5

National Environmental Policy Act is what I'll be talking about

6

and the Draft Environmental Impact Statement and Lisa will be

7

talking about the National Historic Preservation Act,

8

specifically the Section 106 process.

9

Sorry.

The

Both processes are important because they require

10

federal agencies to consider the impacts of their actions prior

11

to making decisions.

12

concurrently so as to support the sharing of information and

13

assist us in assessing the full scope of the proposed action.

14

These processes are being conducted

I also wanted to let you know that for your comments to

15

be considered as part of the public record and incorporated

16

into the final EIS, you'll have to submit them to either the

17

court reporter, which is in the back of the room, or filling

18

out one of the comment sheets and leaving it here with us

19

tonight, or taking it home with you and mailing, emailing, or

20

faxing your comments to me.

21

are submitted in either one of these ways so that they are

22

incorporated into the public record and become part of the --

23

contribute to the NEPA and Section 106 process.

24
25

It's important that your comments

So the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA,
requires federal agencies to consider their environmental

5

1

impacts of proposed actions prior to making decisions.

2

the scoping phase of this EIS, we received input from

3

interested members of the public and agencies and with this

4

input, along with internal research by Army staff, we developed

5

this Draft EIS and we created these alternatives for the

6

proposed actions and we were able to assess the impacts of

7

those alternatives on various resource areas.
So this part of the NEPA process, the Draft EIS comment

8
9

During

period, allows the members of the public another opportunity

10

for input and to ultimately be involved in the Army's

11

decision-making process.

12

matter experts will be available at the banners to take any

13

questions you may have.

14

Section 106 requirements for public input, which Lisa will talk

15

about now.
MS. GRAHAM:

16

After the presentation, the subject

Tonight's meeting also fulfills the

Good evening, everyone.

My name is Lisa

17

Graham.

18

I help the Army manage historic resources and comply with

19

Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act.

20

I'm the cultural resource manager at Fort Wainwright.

As Matt said, we're here tonight to fulfill

21

responsibilities for two processes that are very similar.

22

NEPA, or the National Environmental Policy Act, looks at

23

impacts of our undertakings, our projects, on the entire

24

environment, where Section 106 narrows in and looks at impacts

25

on cultural resources.

Section 106 of the National Historic

6

1

Preservation Act says that federal agencies must consider the

2

effects of their undertakings or projects on historic

3

resources.

4

that federal agency must resolve it through a signed Memorandum

5

of Agreement with consulting parties, usually historic

6

preservation groups.

7

Service, the State Historic Preservation Office, and local

8

historical societies.

And in those cases where there's an adverse effect,

So we work with the National Park

We've developed this Memorandum of Agreement as we were

9
10

developing the EIS, so you will find a draft version of it in

11

Appendix A of the EIS.
MR. SPRAU:

12

So the purpose of tonight's meeting is to

13

give you an update on the project and present the analysis on

14

potential environmental impacts of the proposed alternatives,

15

but most importantly it's an opportunity for us to listen to

16

your concerns and to receive your comments regarding the Draft

17

EIS.

18

The comments you submit during this Draft EIS comment

19

period will help the decision-maker, Col. Johnson, the Garrison

20

Commander at Fort Wainwright, make a decision, an informed

21

decision that best supports the Army's mission in Alaska, meets

22

health and safety requirements, and supports historic

23

preservation goals.

24
25

So thank you for joining us tonight.

For tonight's meeting, we'll describe the Ladd Field
history, we'll discuss the existing conditions of Hangars 2 and

7

1

3 and the need for a future management strategy.

2

the alternatives considered, summarize the analysis of the

3

alternatives, and to provide you an update of where we are and

4

where we're going.

5

MS. GRAHAM:

We'll present

But the project area that we're discussing

6

tonight is the main cantonment of Fort Wainwright.

Within the

7

main cantonment, the area that most of our buildings are

8

located, we have two historic districts.

9

district that is significant because of the way it contributes

The first one is a

10

to the Cold War in our understanding of that event.

11

district, and in this case is probably a little more important,

12

is our Ladd Field National Historic Landmark, which is

13

significant for its association with World War II.

14

The second

The area that you see surrounded in the red line is

15

actually the boundary of the National Historic Landmark and you

16

can see Hangars 2 and 3 in the southwestern corner of the

17

National Historic Landmark.

18

name of Fort Wainwright, was founded in 1939 and became

19

operational in 1940 as the home of the Cold Weather Test

20

Detachment.

21

airplanes and the associated equipment in a subarctic

22

environment and they chose Fairbanks, Alaska.

23

Ladd Field was established, we had the beginnings of World War

24

II and Ladd Field gained a very important mission.

25

the transfer point of the Northwest Staging Route.

Ladd Field, which is the historic

The Army Air Corps needed a place to test

But soon after

It became

8

1

We had an agreement with the Soviet Union, along with

2

other allies, to supply them with equipment to help in their

3

efforts against the Germans and the other active powers in

4

Europe during World War II.

5

almost 8,000 planes here in Fairbanks at Ladd Field.

6

flown up by American pilots and at Ladd Field given to Soviet

7

pilots to fly and launch the Russian war front.

From 1942 to 1945, we transferred
They were

8

In 1985, recognizing this important history that

9

happened here at Ladd Field and in Fairbanks, the National Park

10

Service designated Ladd Field a National Historic Landmark.

11

National Historic Landmarks are the most significant properties

12

that we have in the nation.

13

connect us to our collective history.

14

in the United States.

15

They're those properties that
There's only about 2,500

Hangars 2 and 3 are two of about 20 contributing

16

resources to the Ladd Field National Historic Landmark

17

District.

18

buildings were built right prior to the war in support of that

19

Cold Weather Test Detachment.

20

very few buildings that we have that were built directly in

21

support of the war effort.

22

They have a distinct barrel roof design that you can see as you

23

drive along Gaffney toward the airfield.

24

they were maintenance facilities and also acted as a terminal

25

for commercial flying.

They are very significant because most of the

Hangars 2 and 3 are one of the

They were built in 1943 and 1944.

During World War II,

During the Cold War they housed fighter

9

1

intercept squadrons and the photos that you see here, the top

2

photo is a distant historic photo of one of the hangars, and

3

then in the bottom corner we have an interior shot that shows

4

F82 aircraft during the Cold War, and then we have a photograph

5

of the hangars actually being built where you're able to see

6

the trusses in the roof system.

7

The Army has three types of construction: temporary,

8

semi-permanent, and permanent.

And Hangars 2 and 3 were built

9

in a semi-permanent construction, so they had some longevity,

10

but not as long as what you would consider permanent

11

construction.

12

that the Army assumed that these buildings would become

13

unusable by the 1980s and would need a large-scale renovation

14

to continue to be used.

15

small-scale repairs along the way, and so the buildings would

16

start to deteriorate over time, and today many of the systems,

17

the heating, the fire suppression, the electrical systems are

18

out of date.

19

We have documentation from the 1970s that shows

That didn't happen and we only had

In 2011, we also had a fire in Hangar 2.

The buildings

20

now are in a condition where they're unable to be used and they

21

no longer meet the function that we require of an aircraft

22

maintenance facility.

23

Now that I've given you a little bit of the history of

24

the hangars in their current condition, I'll turn it over back

25

to Matt to tell you about the purpose and need of this action.

10

1

MR. SPRAU:

So because of the conditions that Lisa just

2

described to you, the need arose to determine and implement a

3

management strategy that addresses the following objectives:

4

The course of action chosen needs to resolve life, health, and

5

safety concerns, address fiscal constraints, consider land use

6

requirements, and ensure statutory compliance.

7

To accomplish this, we looked at a variety of

8

alternatives that ranged from re-use to demolition to

9

maintaining status quo or our no-action alternative.

We also

10

needed to determine if an alternative was considered reasonable

11

and so for this we developed a viability analysis that vets the

12

alternatives against four screening criteria.

13

the action must directly address the disposition of Hangars 2

14

and 3, it must be compatible with the current and future

15

military mission at Fort Wainwright, it must not be

16

prohibitively expensive, and it must have a reasonably

17

foreseeable funding source or a mechanism for obtaining

18

applicable and timely funding.

19

considered reasonable and legally viable, it had to meet all

20

four of these screening criteria.

And those are

And so for an alternative to be

21

And the alternatives that we considered for this Draft

22

EIS were applicable for either or both of the hangars and they

23

are demolition, rehabilitation, removal and reconstruction on

24

Fort Wainwright to support a resumption, closed layaway,

25

transfer of ownership to non-Army entity, federal, state, or

11

1

private commercial, or to maintain the status quo, which is our

2

no-action alternative.
The re-use options that we analyzed to support the

3
4

various alternatives are an unmanned aircraft system

5

maintenance hangar, an AVCATT simulator training facility, a

6

fixed simulator training facility, a physical fitness center,

7

an Arctic readiness center, general purpose warm storage, a

8

youth center, a museum, and a roller rink.

9

alternatives with the various re-use options and vetted them

And so we took the

10

through the viability analysis and after careful consideration,

11

we eliminated all but two of the alternatives because the

12

alternative was either prohibitively expensive, wasn't

13

compatible with the current or future military mission at Fort

14

Wainwright, or both.

15

So the viability analysis produced two alternatives

16

which we considered reasonable and legally viable, which we

17

carried forward for full analysis.

18

1, the demolition of Hangars 2 and 3 and supporting

19

infrastructure, which is our preferred alternative, and the no-

20

action alternative, which is a requirement of NEPA, but also

21

acts as a baseline which allows us to assess an alternative's

22

impacts.

23

And those are Alternative

So next we analyzed the environmental impacts of the

24

two alternatives considered reasonable and those are summarized

25

here in this table.

The impacts range from short-term minor to

12

1

long-term beneficial, to moderate, to severe, with the severe

2

or the significant impact occurring on cultural resources with

3

the physical loss of the hangars either through demolition or

4

the no-action alternative.

5

impacts assessment with past, current, and future actions that

6

are shown here in the table.

7

quality, safety, transportation, sustainability, environmental

8

justice, and protection of children were not significant, they

9

received a lower level analysis which means that because their

And we also conducted a cumulative

So since the impacts for the air

10

likely impacts were small or could be mitigated, it was

11

unlikely that they would contribute cumulatively either

12

directly or indirectly.

13

significant impact and hazardous materials/hazardous waste had

14

the potential to significantly contribute directly or

15

indirectly, these received a level 2 analysis, which means that

16

we applied more in-depth criteria in evaluating these resource

17

areas.

18

And since the cultural resources had a

For cultural resource analysis, we anticipate a

19

moderate impact to World War II resources in Alaska for both

20

alternatives.

21

resource area, we anticipate a short-term minor, long-term

22

beneficial with the implementation of Alternative 1, the

23

demolition or a minor and not significant impact from

24

implementation of the no-action alternative in regards to the

25

materials used and created to accomplish the proposed action.

And for the hazardous materials/hazardous waste

13

1

MS. GRAHAM:

As I mentioned earlier with Section 106,

2

when you have an adverse effect, you have to resolve that

3

through a Memorandum of Agreement.

4

looking at demolition and the no-action alternative and in

5

consultation with those historic preservation groups I

6

mentioned earlier, we came up with a three-tiered approach.

7

First, we looked at public outreach.

8
9

In this case, we were

With the importance and significance of Ladd Field,
it's integral to our understanding of this history to get that

10

information out to the public and to get information from the

11

public about Ladd Field.

12

So we are making our staff more available for local

13

lectures and doing more publications in local newspapers and

14

things like web sites and Facebook, and just getting the

15

information out about the important history of Ladd Field.

16

The second part of that is doing a re-evaluation of our

17

National Historic Landmark.

The first evaluation was done in

18

the 1980s and we have a lot of new information since that time.

19

So we need to do this re-evaluation to really understand the

20

landmark and where we need to go in the future.

21

out with the third tier of the approach: stewardship within our

22

National Historic Landmark.

It helps us

23

With the potential loss of these buildings, we need to

24

refocus on the elements of the landmark that we have available

25

and look at maintenance and prolonged upkeep of these buildings

14

1

and really focus our efforts on north posts and buildings like

2

Hangar 1 and those are very important to our understanding of

3

what happened here at Ladd Field during World War II.
MR. SPRAU:

4

All right.

So this slide shows the

5

timeline for the EIS and Section 106 processes.

6

currently in the middle of the Draft EIS comment period which

7

will end on August 5th.

8

Memorandum of Agreement in the fall, publishing the Final EIS

9

in early winter 2013, and issuing the Record of Decision in

10

And so we're

We anticipate having a finalized

February of 2014.
So, once again, the main purpose of the meeting tonight

11
12

is to gain your input.

In order to ensure that your comments

13

are incorporated into the Final EIS, please provide your

14

comments to either the court reporter, fill out a comment form

15

and leave it with us here tonight, or mail it to me, e-mail or

16

fax your comments.
And if you haven't grabbed one yet, we have CDs and

17
18

hard copies of documents in the back for you to keep, and also

19

more information can be found on the Fort Wainwright

20

Environmental web page.

21

by August 5th, 2013 in order to be incorporated into the Final

22

EIS.

And so comments should be postmarked

23

And so this concludes the presentation tonight and the

24

subject matter experts will now be available at the banners to

25

take any questions that you may have.

So thank you.

15

1

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

2

(Off record)

Thank you.

3

(END OF PROCEEDINGS)

4

* * * *

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

16
PUBLIC COMMENT

1
2

ANONYMOUS:

The study cost over one million

3

dollars to do.

4

dollars to make a decision to take down two hangars that are

5

falling apart that someone in elementary school can probably

6

spend 10 minutes and have it figured out.

7

of American taxpayer funds and it's all being done because of

8

regulations that are out of control.

9

The American taxpayer has paid over a million

MS. ALTHEA ST. MARTIN:

Another gross waste

This is Althea St. Martin, in

10

Fairbanks, Alaska, commenting on the EIS on Hangars 2 and 3 at

11

Fort Wainwright.

12

purpose in the military mission for Fort Wainwright and,

13

instead, are taking up space that could be used for the mission

14

in support of what is current.

15

It appears that the hangars have no useful

The buildings are draining resources that are badly

16

needed in other positions, and useful other positions.

17

hangars are going to continue to deteriorate.

18

funds available for repairs, for any type of renovations. So

19

what's going to happen is they are going to deteriorate, become

20

a safety hazard, a health hazard, and are going to cost much

21

more because there's not going to be reuse of the materials if

22

we wait till it falls.

23

The

There are no

Financially, a contractor could come in and reuse that

24

material, which is going to decrease the cost on it.

The

25

military shouldn't have to fund this when they have a shortage

17

1

of funds and we have a strategic mission that is very, very

2

needed.

3

So I encourage the demolition of Hangars 2 and 3.

I

4

would hope that there would be a historical record, possibly 3D

5

videos of the buildings so that historically the atmosphere,

6

the space, the structure can be kept for historical purposes;

7

at the same time, it would not impact the mission that is

8

needed at Fort Wainwright.

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

18
C E R T I F I C A T E

1
2

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

3

STATE OF ALASKA

4

I, Elizabeth D'Amour, Notary Public in and for the
State of Alaska, residing at Fairbanks, Alaska, and Court
Reporter for Liz D'Amour & Associates, Inc., do hereby certify:

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

)
) ss.
)

That the annexed and foregoing FORT WAINWRIGHT, ALASKA,
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT ON THE DISPOSITION OF
HANGARS 2 AND 3, TRANSCRIPT OF PUBLIC MEETING was taken before
me on the 10th day of July 2013, beginning at the hour of 6:35
p.m., at the Princess Hotel, Jade Room, Fairbanks, Alaska;
That this hearing, as heretofore annexed, is a true and
correct transcription of the proceedings, taken by me
electronically and thereafter transcribed by me;
That the hearing has been retained by me for the
purpose of filing the same with MR. MATTHEW SPRAU, 1060 Gaffney
Road, #4500, Fort Wainwright, Alaska 99703-4500.
That I am not a relative or employee or attorney or
counsel of any of the parties, nor am I financially interested
in this action.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and
affixed my seal this 23rd day of July 2013.

16
17
______________________________
Elizabeth D'Amour
Notary Public in and for Alaska
My commission expires: 12/28/14

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

S E A L

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:

Bill Brophy
Bill Brophy; Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Bill Brophy; Johnson, Ronald M COL USARMY (US); Meeks, Michael T CIV (US)
RE: Disposition of Hangar #2 and #3 Fort Wainwright, Alaska
Tuesday, June 25, 2013 8:42:37 AM

Correction: First paragraph should read: hangar #2 and #3.
My apology.
Bill Brophy

From: Bill Brophy
Sent: Tuesday, June 25, 2013 8:42 AM
To: 'matthew.h.sprau.ctr@mail.mil'
Cc: Bill Brophy ; Ron Col Johnson (ronald.johnson@us.army.mil); Mike Meeks
(michael.t.meeks4.civ@mail.mil)
Subject: Disposition of Hangar #2 and #3 Fort Wainwright, Alaska

Bill Brophy
301 Snowy Owl Lane
Fairbanks, AK 99712
(907) 457-0232

Mr. Matthew Sprau
Director of Public Works
Attn: IMFW-PWE (Sprau)
1060 Gaffney Road #4500
Fort Wainwright, AK 99703-4500
Sent by email: 25 June 2013

Dear Mr. Sprau, Mr. Mike Meeks, and Col Ron Johnson,
June 2013

25

I strongly endorse Alternative 1, demolition of Hangars #1 and #2. I have experience with
the infrastructure of Fort Wainwright dating back to 1964. The hangars are unsafe, unusable, and
maintenance is a terrible drain of precious funds. This action is considerably overdue.

Land space at Fort Wainwright is very precious, especially on Ladd Airfield. Demolition of the
old outdated hangars will allow future development on the airfield so vitally needed for combat
readiness of our aviation soldiers and support of their war-fighting brethren.

Expedite the Draft EIS process and move into the 21st Century. Execute Alternative #1. Our
soldiers expect us to resource their ability to train and fight.

Please acknowledge receipt of this email so that I know my remarks are entered into
comments for the DEIS. Thanks.

With best regards,
Bill

Bill Brophy
US Army, retired

NOTICE OF CONFIDENTIALITY: This message may contain privileged or confidential information and is
intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named addressee you should not review,
disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. If you received this transmission in error, please notify the
sender immediately by return e-mail and delete this errant message. Finally, the recipient should check
this e-mail and any attachments for the presence of viruses. Usibelli Coal Mine Inc. accepts no liability
for any damage caused by any virus transmitted by this e-mail. Thank you.  

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:

Karl Gohlke
Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Bill Vivlamore
FWW Hgrs 2 & 3 Demo
Tuesday, June 25, 2013 2:57:12 PM

Mr. Matthew Sprau
Directorate of Public Works
Attn: IMFW-PWE
1060 Gaffney Road #4500
Ft Wainwright, Alaska 99703-4500

Dear Mr. Sprau,

I firmly support Alternative #1, Demolition of Hangers #2 & #3; this action is long overdue.
Of the four Ft Wainwright WW II hangers, one has already burned to the ground and one (#2) had
electrical fire that caused significant damage to the structure. As noted in the study, the two (#2 & #3)
hangers are not in use do to years of arctic condition wear and tear, safety concerns and the lack of
expensive modifications. These deficiencies have all contributed in compromising structural integrity of
both buildings. It is time for the replacement of these hangers.

While both buildings are not in use they still require an annual maintenance cost of
$700,000. With the constriction of military funds, it is important to invest in future developments for
combat readiness of our aviation teams and their equipment. The demolition of the outdated hangars
must be replaced with modern facilities to house our multimillion dollar aircrafts; aircrafts that support
our American Soldiers.

Execute Alternative #1 and get Ft Wainwrights’ Aviation Brigade into the 21st Century.
American Soldiers fighting for America’s freedom expect us to resource their ability to train, fight and
maintain with most modern up to date equipment and facilities. One percent of the American population
are in the military fighting for the freedom of the remaining 99%. The 1% deserve nothing but the best!

Please acknowledge receipt of this email to confirm my remarks were received.

Sincerely,

Karl I Gohlke

Karl I. Gohlke
Outside Sales
Frontier Supply Company
981 Van Horn Rd.
Fairbanks, AK. 99701
Tel 907-374-3500
Fax 907-374-3570
Cell 907-378-5615

FPS logo

From:
To:
Subject:
Date:

Alton CURTIS
Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Hangers 2/3
Monday, June 24, 2013 1:15:49 PM

Mr. Sprau: Those hangers were old when I was at Ft. Wainwright in 67-68. We had a gym in an
unnumbered hanger that was condemned by the flood in 67. Probably best to take the hangers down
before they fall down and damage someone or something. Good Luck. Alton Curtis, 05323265.

Public Comments from the Draft EIS Public Meeting
(taken from the public meeting transcript)
PUBLIC COMMENT

1
2

16

ANONYMOUS:

The study cost over one million

3

dollars to do.

4

dollars to make a decision to take down two hangars that are

5

falling apart that someone in elementary school can probably

6

spend 10 minutes and have it figured out.

7

of American taxpayer funds and it's all being done because of

8

regulations that are out of control.

9

The American taxpayer has paid over a million

MS. ALTHEA ST. MARTIN:

Another gross waste

This is Althea St. Martin, in

10

Fairbanks, Alaska, commenting on the EIS on Hangars 2 and 3 at

11

Fort Wainwright.

12

purpose in the military mission for Fort Wainwright and,

13

instead, are taking up space that could be used for the mission

14

in support of what is current.

15

It appears that the hangars have no useful

The buildings are draining resources that are badly

16

needed in other positions, and useful other positions.

17

hangars are going to continue to deteriorate.

18

funds available for repairs, for any type of renovations. So

19

what's going to happen is they are going to deteriorate, become

20

a safety hazard, a health hazard, and are going to cost much

21

more because there's not going to be reuse of the materials if

22

we wait till it falls.

23

The

There are no

Financially, a contractor could come in and reuse that

24

material, which is going to decrease the cost on it.

The

25

military shouldn't have to fund this when they have a shortage

17

1

of funds and we have a strategic mission that is very, very

2

needed.

3

So I encourage the demolition of Hangars 2 and 3.

I

4

would hope that there would be a historical record, possibly 3D

5

videos of the buildings so that historically the atmosphere,

6

the space, the structure can be kept for historical purposes;

7

at the same time, it would not impact the mission that is

8

needed at Fort Wainwright.

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

This page intentionally left blank.

1
FORT WAINWRIGHT, ALASKA
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
DISPOSITION OF HANGARS 2 AND 3
TRANSCRIPT OF AGENCY MEETING
Before Lisa Graham and Matthew Sprau
Hearing Moderators
Princess Lodge
Jade Room
Fairbanks, Alaska
July 11, 2013
10:00 a.m.

2
P R O C E E D I N G S

1

MR. WESLEY POTTER:

2

Good morning, everyone.

On behalf

3

of Col. Johnson, I'd like to welcome everyone here for today's

4

session, a very important session.

5

everybody here for taking time of their -- your schedules to

6

participate in this process.

And also I'd like to thank

7

We have a very interesting presentation to go through

8

and a couple of things that I'd ask of everyone is, you know,

9

do participate.

We've assembled an excellent team of

10

functional experts here.

Do leverage their expertise both

11

during the presentation, during Q and A, and afterwards just

12

throughout the room if you have any questions.
Second thing I'd ask is that they will explain the

13
14

process as far as documenting your comments or concerns, you

15

know.

16

So please pay attention to that when they talk about that part

17

of the process.

It's very important that we capture that information.

Again, thank you for your participation.

18

I look

19

forward to your input and your comments as we work through

20

this.

21

Thanks.
MR. SPRAU:

All right.

Thank you, Mr. Potter.

22

first off, if I'm not loud enough, please let me know.

23

to speak a little quieter, so I'll try to get into the

24

microphone so you can hear me.

25

My name is Matt Sprau.

Just
I tend

I'm the National Environmental

3

1

Policy Act coordinator at Fort Wainwright.

I'd like to welcome

2

you to today's agency meeting for the disposition of Hangars 2

3

and 3 Draft Environmental Impact Statement.
So today's meeting will be a joint presentation between

4
5

myself and Ms. Lisa Graham, our cultural resource manager at

6

Fort Wainwright.

7

I'll be talking about the National Environmental Policy Act and

8

the Draft Environmental Impact Statement and Lisa will be

9

covering the National Historic Preservation Act, specifically

We'll be covering two environmental laws.

10

the Section 106 process.

Both processes are important because

11

they require federal agencies to consider the impacts of their

12

actions prior to implementing those actions.

13

have been -- are being conducted concurrently in order to

14

assist us in sharing information and be able to assess the full

15

scope of the project.

And the processes

We have a court reporter here with us today who will be

16
17

capturing everything that's said, any comments, any concerns,

18

so that your input is incorporated into the Final EIS and the

19

Section 106 processes.
So the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA,

20
21

requires federal agencies to consider the environmental impacts

22

of their actions prior to making decisions to implement those

23

actions.

24

input from interested agencies and members of the public and

25

with this input and internal research by Army staff, we were

During the scoping phase of the EIS, we received

4

1

able to create the scope of the Draft EIS, create alternatives

2

for the proposed action, and analyze the impacts of those

3

alternatives on various resource areas.
This part of the NEPA process, the Draft EIS comment

4
5

period, allows the public and agencies another opportunity for

6

input so that they're ultimately involved in the Army's

7

decision-making process.

8

open it up for questions or comments concerning the Draft EIS

9

and the Section 106 process.

After the presentation today, we'll

Tonight's meeting also fulfills

10

the public requirement input for Section 106, which Lisa will

11

talk about.
MS. GRAHAM:

12

Good morning, everyone.

As Matt said, my

13

name is Lisa Graham.

14

Wainwright.

15

comply with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation

16

Act.

17

I'm the cultural resource manager at Fort

I help the Army manage historic properties and

Also as Matt said, we're here today to fulfill our

18

responsibilities to two processes that are very similar.

But

19

where NEPA, the National Environmental Policy Act, takes that

20

broad view looking at impacts to the entire environment,

21

Section 106 narrows in and looks at the impact to cultural

22

resources.

23

the effects of its undertakings on historic properties.

24

those rare cases where there's an adverse effect, the federal

25

agency must resolve it through a signed Memorandum of

Section 106 says the federal agency must consider
In

5

1

Agreement, an agreement that they consult on with a number of

2

local state and national historic preservation groups, many of

3

whom are here tonight [sic].

4

presentation is very similar to what we've talked about through

5

those consultation meetings.

6

conducting Section 106 concurrently with the development of the

7

EIS, we have a Draft Memorandum of Agreement in Appendix A of

8

the EIS for your review.

9

MR. SPRAU:

And so what you'll hear in this

And being that we have been

So the purpose of tonight's [sic] meeting

10

is to give you an update on the project and present the

11

analysis of the potential environmental impacts from the

12

alternatives that were considered for the Draft EIS.

13

importantly, it's another opportunity for us to listen to your

14

concerns and to receive your comments regarding the Draft EIS

15

and the Draft Memorandum of Agreement.

16

But most

The comments you submit during the Draft EIS comment

17

period will ultimately help the decision-maker, Col. Johnson,

18

the Garrison Commander at Fort Wainwright, make an informed

19

decision that best supports the Army's mission in Alaska,

20

supports historic preservation goals, and meets health and

21

safety requirements.

22

thank you for your input throughout the whole process.

23

So thank you for joining us today, and

For today's meeting, we'll go over the Ladd Field

24

history, we'll discuss the existing conditions of Hangars 2 and

25

3 and the need for a future management strategy.

We'll present

6

1

the alternatives considered, summarize the analysis and the

2

potential environmental impacts of those alternatives, and

3

we'll give you a time line of where we're at and where we're

4

going.

5

MS. GRAHAM:

The project area that we're discussing

6

tonight is the Fort Wainwright main post where most of the

7

buildings are.

8

two historic districts, a district that is significant for its

9

association with the Cold War and then another district that

Within the main post, or cantonment, we have

10

has a bit more significance, it's our Ladd Field National

11

Historic Landmark, and it's significant for its association

12

with World War II.

13

You can see the National Historic Landmark here with

14

the red line as a boundary.

15

on slide 7.

16

southwestern corner of the map.

17

1931 and became -- or 1939 and became operational in 1940 as

18

the home for the Cold Weather Test Detachment.

19

Corps needed a place to test their planes and the associated

20

equipment in a subarctic environment and they chose Fairbanks.

21

But soon after the establishment of Ladd Field, World War II

22

began and Ladd Field gained a new, very significant mission.

23

They became the transfer point for the Lend-Lease Operations in

24

the Northwest Staging Route.

25

And for folks on the phone, we're

And also you can see Hangars 2 and 3 in the
Ladd Field was established in

The Army Air

So the United States had an agreement with the Soviet

7

1

Union, along with other ally nations, to supply them with

2

material in support of their war efforts.

3

1945, we supplied the Soviet Union with almost 8,000 planes

4

here at Ladd Field.

5

through Canada to Ladd Field, to a waiting Soviet pilot who

6

would fly them on to the Soviet war front.

7

So from 1942 to

American pilots would fly those planes up

Recognizing this historic significance, in 1985, the

8

National Park Service made Ladd Field a National Historic

9

Landmark.

Landmarks are the most significant and historic

10

resources that we have in the nation.

They connect us as a

11

people to our collective history, and there's only about 2,500

12

in the nation.

13

Hangars 2 and 3 are two of the contributing resources

14

to the Ladd Field National Historic Landmark; two of about 20

15

buildings and structures.

16

most of the buildings that make up the landmark were actually

17

built in support of that Cold Weather Test Detachment.

18

it's one of the few hangars, both of these, that were built

19

during the war to support the war effort.

20

built in 1943 and 1944.

21

distinctive.

22

the airfield.

23

They are very significant because

And

Hangars 2 and 3 were

They have barreled roofs that are very

You can see them as you drive down Gaffney toward

During World War II, they were maintenance facilities.

24

They also acted as a terminal for commercial flights, and

25

during the Cold War they housed fighter intercept squadrons.

8

1

The photos that you see here, and for the folks on the phone,

2

we're on slide 10, include a distance photo of an historic view

3

of one of the hangars; an interior photograph that shows F82

4

aircraft inside one of the hangars; and also a photograph of

5

both Hangars 2 and 3 being built, so you're able to see the

6

trusses in the roof system.

7

The Army has three types of construction: temporary,

8

semi-permanent, and permanent.

9

semi-permanent construction, so they had a decent longevity

10

over a number of decades, but they weren't built to last as

11

long as your general permanent builds.

12

from the 1970s that shows at the Army expected that Hangars 2

13

and 3 would become unusable by the early 1980s and that they

14

would need a large-scale renovation to continue to be used.

15

That large-scale renovation did not happen; it was small-scale

16

repairs over time.

17

the systems failing within the building, including the heating,

18

the fire suppression, and the electrical system.

19

had a fire in Hangar 2, which added to that overall

20

deterioration of the building.

21

buildings are unfit for current military functions and they're

22

unsafe for occupancy.

23

Hangars 2 and 3 were built as

We have documentation

So what we ended up with today is many of

In 2011, we

So today we find that these

So now that you have a little bit of the history of

24

these buildings and their current condition, I'll turn it back

25

over to Matt to tell you about the purpose and need of this

9

1
2

undertaking.
MR. SPRAU:

We're on slide 12, for those on the phone.

3

Because of the current state of the hangars that Lisa just

4

described, the need arose to determine and implement a

5

management strategy for these hangars that addresses the

6

following objectives.

7

action that resolves life, health, and safety concerns,

8

addresses fiscal constraints, considers land use requirements,

9

and ensures the statutory compliance.

So to develop and implement a course of

10

To accomplish this, we looked at a variety of

11

alternatives that ranged from re-use to demolition to

12

maintaining status quo or our no-action alternative.

13

needed to determine if an alternative is considered reasonable

14

and so for this we developed this viability analysis that vets

15

the alternatives against four screening criteria.

16

screening criteria are: the action must directly address the

17

disposition of Hangars 2 and 3, it must be compatible with the

18

current and future military mission at Fort Wainwright, it must

19

not be prohibitively expensive, and it must have a reasonably

20

foreseeable funding source or a mechanism for obtaining

21

applicable and timely funding.

22

considered reasonable and legally viable, it had to meet all

23

four of these screening criteria.

24
25

We also

And so the

And so for an alternative to be

So the alternatives that were considered as part of
this Draft EIS were for either or both of the hangars.

So they

10

1

were the demolition, rehabilitation, the removal and

2

reconstruction of the hangars on Fort Wainwright to support a

3

reuse option, closed layaway, transfer of ownership to non-Army

4

entities, federal, state, or private commercial, and to

5

maintain the status quo or our no-action alternative.
The re-use options that were analyzed to support these

6
7

various alternatives were an unmanned aircraft system

8

maintenance hangar, an AVCATT simulator training facility, a

9

fixed simulator training facility, physical fitness center, an

10

Arctic readiness center, general purpose warm storage facility,

11

a youth center, a museum, and a roller rink.

12

the alternatives with the various re-use options and we vetted

13

them through this viability analysis and after careful

14

consideration, we eliminated all but two alternatives because

15

they were either prohibitively expensive, could not meet the

16

current and future military mission at Fort Wainwright, or

17

both.

18

And so we took

So the viability analysis produced two alternatives

19

that were considered reasonable and legally viable.

We're on

20

slide 16.

21

demolition of Hangars 2 and 3 and supporting infrastructure,

22

which is our preferred alternative, and the no-action

23

alternative, which is a requirement of NEPA, but also acts as a

24

baseline for allowing us to assess an alternative's impacts

25

from a proposed action.

These alternatives are the Alternative 1, the

11

1

Next we analyzed the environmental impacts of the two

2

alternatives considered reasonable on various resource areas,

3

which are summarized here in this table on slide 17.

4

impacts range from short-term minor, long-term beneficial, to

5

moderate, to severe.

6

occurs on cultural resources with the physical loss of the

7

hangars either through demolition or implementation of the no-

8

action alternative.

9

impacts assessment of the alternatives with past, current, and

So the

The severe or the significant impact

And so we also conducted a cumulative

10

future military actions and actions that are occurring off-

11

post, which you can see here in the table on slide 18 that help

12

us assess the overall impacts of the alternatives.

13

since the impacts for air quality, safety, transportation,

14

sustainability, environmental justice, and protection of

15

children were not significant, they received a lower level

16

analysis which means that because the likely impacts are small

17

or could be mitigated, it was unlikely that they would

18

contribute significant direct or indirect cumulative impacts.

19

And since the cultural resources resulted in the significant

20

impact and hazardous waste/hazardous materials resulted in the

21

potential for significantly contributing direct or indirect

22

impacts, these received a level 2 analysis, so a higher-level

23

analysis applying more in-depth criteria to assess the

24

cumulative impacts.

25

And so

From this what we came up with was that moderate

12

1

impacts to World War II resources in Alaska could be expected

2

from implementation of both alternatives and the short-term

3

minor, long-term beneficial, and minor impacts could be

4

expected for materials used and created to accomplish the

5

proposed action with the implementation of both alternatives

6

for hazardous materials/hazardous waste.
MS. GRAHAM:

7

We're on slide 19.

As I mentioned earlier

8

with Section 106, when you have an adverse effect, you must

9

develop a Memorandum of Agreement to resolve that adverse

10

effect.

11

first start with public outreach.

12

of a Ladd Field is incredibly important, but that doesn't mean

13

much if it's not known by the local community and those people

14

that can actually help with the preservation and the

15

understanding of this important resource.

16

Memorandum of Agreement, our cultural resource staff will be

17

made available to local groups for lectures and we're

18

developing publications for local newspapers and web sites, and

19

different media outlets.

20

In this case, we have a three-tiered approach.

We

The history and significance

So as part of this

The second tier of the approach is a re-evaluation of

21

the National Historic Landmark.

It was nominated as a landmark

22

in the mid eighties and since that time we have a lot of new

23

information on it, and this will actually help in the third

24

tier, a refocus on the north post and the NHL together.

25

the possible demolition or the no-action alternative resulting

With

13

1

in possible loss of the hangars, we need to refocus our efforts

2

on the remaining elements within the NHL.

3

recommitment by the Army for stewardship of these resources.

4

MR. SPRAU:

Okay.

And that's a

We're on slide 20.

So this slide

5

shows the EIS and the Section 106 time line.

6

in the Draft EIS comment period, or roughly the middle of a

7

comment period, which ends on August 5th.

8

finalizing the Memorandum of Agreement this fall, publishing

9

the Final Environmental Impact Statement this December, and

10
11

We're currently

We anticipate

issuing the Record of Decision by February of 2014.
We're on slide 21.

So, once again, the main purpose of

12

today's meeting is to gain your input and receive your

13

comments.

14

record any input that you may have and also, if you would like

15

to you, you can leave comments using the comment form which is

16

here with us tonight, leave it here or submit comments to me

17

either mailed, e-mailed, or fax.

18

So the court reporter is here with us today to

And so I think the majority of everybody here with us

19

tonight [sic] has a copy of the EIS, but just in case you need

20

more copies or don't have one, you can pick one up here with us

21

or let me know and I'll get more copies to you.

22

information can be found on the Fort Wainwright Environmental

23

Division web page and we just found out that the web page is

24

down right now, so it should be up fairly soon, but if you go

25

to it and you get an "access denied" don't worry about it.

Also more

14

1

Just contact me; I'll get you any information that you may

2

need.
But in order for your comments to be incorporated into

3
4

the Final EIS, please get them to me by August 5th or

5

postmarked by August 5th, 2013.
And so this concludes today's presentation.

6

We're

7

going to open it up for questions, comments that you may have.

8

If -- when you do make a comment, if you don't mind giving your

9

name and position, who you work for so that we can capture it

10

with the court reporter.

11

us today.

And thank you very much for joining

12

So with that, any questions or comments?

13

MS. COOK:

14

hangars.

This has not specifically to do with the

Elizabeth Cook, Tanana-Yukon Historical Society.
Lisa, you speak about the possible re-evaluation of the

15
16

Ladd NHL and speak about, quote, a lot of new information.

17

What are you referring to?

18

MS. GRAHAM:

Well, we know that Building 2077 in the

19

original nomination showed as a World War II building.

20

not; it's a Cold War building.

21

north post that was a World War II building, but didn't show up

22

as one, plus there's about three or four buildings that we need

23

to -- that we have new information on that will be part of that

24

process.

25

It's

And another building in the

And also just from the 1980s, the whole concept of

15

1

landscape, we actually had a person working with us this summer

2

that deals with historic landscape, and so she's helping us

3

with that process.

4

short.

5

attempted to do revision in 2001.

6

information gained through that, but was never made official.

7

And so we can take that information from 2001.

8

information that we gain as professionals just in the last 30

9

years and work through that.

The original nomination is incredibly

You know, it's about four or five pages.

They

There was a lot of

We can take the

As we've talked in the consulting parties, a

10
11

possibility is that the boundary would move up from Montgomery

12

Road to the airfield because there would not be any World War

13

II resources south of the airfield.

14

MS. COOK:

Thank you.

15

MS. GRAHAM:

16

MS. BLAHUTA:

You're welcome.
Well, you know, I hate the 106 process

17

because I know I'm always on the losing side.

I'm Renee

18

Blahuta.

19

What we're looking here is about two dif -- totally different

20

impacts.

21

the National Landmark, but have high significance all standing

22

by itself.

23

hangars are the last remaining two hangars are the last

24

remaining two hangars.

25

Canada to Alaska.

I'm also with the Tanana-Yukon Historical Society.

One is the hangars itself that are contributing to

It's -- as far as to my knowledge, these two

All others were whittled away from

The last one that we lost was a hangar in

16

1

Eielson.
MS. GRAHAM:

2
3

it comes to World War II hangars.

4

MS. BLAHUTA:

5

MS. GRAHAM:

6

So.....
I know there's a couple left in the state,

but they're in terrible condition.
MS. BLAHUTA:

7
8

I agree, we're at a really dire state when

No, no, no.

No, no, no.

they're hit by floods, by fires, by demolition.
AUDIENCE MEMBER:

9
10

MS. BLAHUTA:

11

MS. GRAHAM:

12

MS. BLAHUTA:

There's -There.....

And lots of maintenance.

There is.....
Yes.
Yes.

Very much so.

So we have to look

13

at those hangars as being important all by themselves.

And we

14

have -- nationwide, we have wooden hangars from World War I

15

that are in the national register.

16

possession.

They're their prized

Now, architecturally, the importance of the hangars

17
18

towards today, we shouldn't lose that.

We should maintain

19

that.

20

Jenny Wood individual and she would have been here today

21

talking about it because she was one amongst many women that

22

ferried those planes to Alaska.

And I had to postpone a meeting with the heirs of the --

23

MS. GRAHAM:

24

MS. BLAHUTA:

25

MS. GRAHAM:

And people say that.....

Was that Nancy?
What?
Was that -- her first name is Nancy?

17

1

MS. BLAHUTA:

2

MS. GRAHAM:

I have not met her.

3

MS. BLAHUTA:

Well, she's dead.

4

MS. GRAHAM:

5

MS. BLAHUTA:

6

MS. GRAHAM:

7

Jenny Wood.

Oh, okay.
She's dead, so you'll never.....
I'm sorry, who's the lady that you were

going to bring?

8

MS. BLAHUTA:

9

MS. GRAHAM:

She would be here today.....
Oh, I apologize.

MS. BLAHUTA:

10

I misunderstood.

If she still were alive, she would be

11

here today.

12

generation day by day and in Alaska as well as all over the

13

nation.

14

support here for the hangars, for Ladd Field, for the base

15

because they died out.

16

And we're losing people from the greatest

And so we have less support now -- knowledgeable

MS. GRAHAM:

Yeah.

Well, Natalie and I had an amazing

17

opportunity to meet one of the women that was one that had

18

ferried planes and we met one of the women that was a nurse at

19

Ladd Field in 1941.

20

MS. BLAHUTA:

21

MS. GRAHAM:

22

MS. BLAHUTA:

23

There wasn't anybody.....
It was great.
.....in this community here that was not

involved.

24

MS. GRAHAM:

25

MS. BLAHUTA:

Uh-huh.
Either they worked here or they had

18

1

enlisted or they came here.

So there is so much that took

2

place here.

3

start here ferrying people back and forth.

What happened here, your airlines got their first

4

So it's -- this space is very, very important, but I'd

5

like to have the hangars looked at different as just what they

6

contribute to our knowledge here.

7

concerned, Ladd Field Historic Landmark, of course, those

8

hangars are the corner on this side of the post.

9

base was closed, the people that came here, that brought their

As far as the whole base is

And until the

10

families here because they were here as young men, or women,

11

and they came here and that's the first things they saw was

12

those hangars and this is -- they all would come down and they

13

see those hangars.
MS. GRAHAM:

14

And that's the thing that we recognize, is

15

that this is a significant loss.

16

to.....

It's a significant loss

17

MS. BLAHUTA:

It.....

18

MS. GRAHAM:

.....our National Historic Landmark.

19

MS. BLAHUTA:

It's more significant than you may

20

realize yourself because the landmark itself has been whittled

21

away and there's the numbers in here.

22

MS. GRAHAM:

23

MS. BLAHUTA:

And they will be whittled away in the

MS. GRAHAM:

And that's what we hope to at least, you

24
25

Uh-huh.

future.

19

1

know, try to prevent them from.....
MS. BLAHUTA:

2

Yeah, I know what you hope to do.

3

doesn't always happen that way.

4

a lot of written records.

5

textbook for schools.

6

MS. GRAHAM:

7

MS. BLAHUTA:

It

So we need a much -- you have

You write -- you just completed a

The lesson plan?
Lesson plan.

8

going to listen to it or use it?

9

are very, very busy.

That's great.

But who's

You know, all the teachers

So -- and, you know, it doesn't quite do

10

it.

We're such a visual orientated society.

We need to see

11

and feel to believe.

12

young woman visiting and her grandmother survived the

13

concentration camp in Austria, and it was nothing, you know, it

14

was just her grandmother talking until she went and saw the

15

concentration camp.

It's really strange, last week I had a

And that brought it home to her.

It's amazing, but we have to have those visuals that

16
17

impact.

And this place here, like most of Alaska, or Fairbanks

18

for sure, was temporary, you know, and it became permanent, and

19

that's a challenge.

20

an impact.

But we're here temporary, too, and we make

21

So I think it's well worth looking back.

We have

22

studied those hangars for more years that I can remember.

23

think it was at least 13 years or more.

24

after report and things could have been done then and, you

25

know, funding comes out of a different pocket and so it's just

I

Report after report

20

1

more work.

2

thought.

I think it's worth looking at it and give it some

Which reminds me, Lend-Lease, those soldiers here had

3
4

their hands full training the Russian aviators.

5

aviators were highly educated.

6

just another Siberia, and Siberia was a penal colony.

7

there's lots of different aspects.

of those planes?

I think we've seen some from that time

period.

12

MS. BLAHUTA:

13

MS. GRAHAM:

14

Uh-huh.
But I don't know if I've actually seen the

Lend-Lease planes.

15

MS. BLAHUTA:

16

(indiscernible - laughing).

17

MS. GRAHAM:

18

Well, I have been bombed by one

So you had a very personal memory of

those.

19

MS. BLAHUTA:

20

MS. GRAHAM:

21

MS. BLAHUTA:

22

MR. SPRAU:

23

So

The Lend-Lease planes?

MS. GRAHAM:

10
11

They probably considered Alaska

One more thing, how many of you, if any, have seen some

8
9

The Russian

Very much so.

So it was important.

And I thank you so much for your remarks.
You're welcome.
Lisa, can you just say her name again for

the record.

24

MS. GRAHAM:

25

MR. HILL:

It's Renee Blahuta.
Well, if I may, I'm Jae Hill.

I'm the

21

1

deputy planning director for the borough.

2

this is a loss for the historic nature of the district and for

3

our community and this is part of the nucleus that helped our

4

community grow to what it is today.

5

little sad, but it's understandable that, you know, times

6

change and things will fall down eventually whether we help

7

them or not.

8

I understand that

And so for that it's a

So, that being said, I would like to see a little bit

9

more work done for the mitigation, you know, some actual active

10

preservation that is possibly for reuse of the materials of the

11

buildings.

12

it's going to take to haul that off to a landfill and in a

13

place where we're located, you know, so far from some useful

14

resources and the cost of resources being what they are and the

15

inherent, you know, unique quality and the nature of those

16

materials, I feel that there's probably still a pretty viable

17

volume of materials that could be reused elsewhere in the

18

community on different projects.

19

building a new school, they're talking about -- I mean, it

20

might be really interesting to retain some of those.

21
22

I've seen the estimates of how many dump trucks

They were talking about

Additionally, I know I've seen photos of some historic
graffiti from -- I think it's in Hangar 1.

23

MS. GRAHAM:

24

MR. HILL:

25

MS. GRAHAM:

It's in 1.
There's nothing in 2 or 3?
Not that I've ever seen.

22

1

MR. HILL:

Okay.

But if things like that were

2

encountered, I mean, I would like to see them maybe documented

3

and, you know, those panels or walls may be, you know, retained

4

for some kind of purpose or something like that, like an

5

actual, you know, physical -- you know, what can we salvage

6

from the building in terms of not just taking photos, but

7

additional photos.

8
9

I'll have some written comments provided before the
deadline definitely indicating, you know, our position and kind

10

of the things we've evaluated just for kind of that active

11

preservation.

12

to see those kind of things focused on just to retain what last

13

vestiges of the historic nature of those buildings are able to

14

be retained and not just buried.

15

But I think that the borough would really like

MS. BLAHUTA:

You know that if those buildings are

16

destroyed, they could have a mitigation of great environmental

17

impact right off the -- we act too soon to develop areas.

18

one of the problems Fort Wainwright had, for instance, they

19

build a new military housing in an area that was polluted and

20

that is still polluted.

21

And

Kids shouldn't play out there.

So we build first and then have to go back later.

22

site of those hangars has the possibility of being a major

23

environmental impact area.

24

know much -- well, more than it would cost to rehabilitate

25

those hangars.

This

The clean-up would cost -- I don't

23

1

MS. GRAHAM:

One thing we're also doing, and we're

2

hoping to have it done this fall, is a revision of the HABS

3

that was conducted in the eighties.

4

good process to see if we see any of those cultural aspects of

5

the building, like graffiti, something like that.

6

we're going to go through one last time and.....

7

MR. HILL:

8

MS. GRAHAM:

9

MR. HILL:

10

So that's going to be a

Because

Before demolition?
Uh-huh.

Yeah.

Okay.

MS. BLAHUTA:

The first time I walked in the hangar, it

11

was some -- quite some years ago, I got goose bumps.

12

fantastic.

13

MS. GRAHAM:

14

MS. BLAHUTA:

It was

Uh-huh.
The hangars are just absolutely gorgeous

15

on the inside.

16

about it, I could see the pin-up girls on the background.

17

was just my imagination, okay, took over and it really -- like

18

I said, I got goose bumps because it was so fabulous and

19

significant.

20

a story all by itself.

21

The office area had a metal desk.

Talking
It

The construction, the atmosphere, it really told

MR. HILL:

And I agree with your comment, you know,

22

that you need to be able to see that history and be able to

23

touch it, to show it to people and whatnot.

24

MS. BLAHUTA:

25

MR. HILL:

Oh, absolutely.

I know when I was a child and I was living

24

1

over in Germany during the Cold War and we would, you know,

2

vacation at the Nazi palaces that had been turned into the MWR

3

hotels.

4

know, seen so much history.

5

They're all gone.

6

is just missing now.

7

MS. BLAHUTA:

And so we would go stay in these hotels that had, you
They've all been torn down now.

There's -- all of that entire era of history
It's a tragedy that you can't see it.
Yeah.

And we have -- you know, we here

8

are judged for our lack of cultural heritage.

We are what

9

many people consider as a disposable society.

We just build

10

something and then chunk it and build new.

11

era has passed and it's important for the United States as a

12

whole to value its heritage.

13

MS. MARX:

14

MS. GRAHAM:

15

MS. MARX:

I think that this

I have an aside question for you.
Oh, I apologize, you're.....
Oh, Kathi Marx, Fairbanks North Star

16

Borough.

17

any, you know, what's left there?

18

probably had maybe not the similar hangars, but they must have

19

had structures.

20

In regards to the Russian side, is anyone aware of
You know, obviously, they

I mean.....

MS. GRAHAM:

I know that they did the same thing.

They

21

built runways and had hangars along the route and I've seen

22

pictures of their runways being built, that they were building

23

out in the middle of Siberia.

24

resources that are still there, but I know that the Russian

25

communities are -- do celebrate that history.

I don't know about their

We worked with a

25

1

sister city group that's here in Fairbanks and there's a sister

2

city in Russia and we do a joint celebration.

3

commemorating the Lend-Lease Operations last winter some time.

4

It was really cold went there.

5

AUDIENCE MEMBER:

6

MS. MARX:

Uh-huh.

We did one

November.
So are you considering that in

7

some of your future work and interpretation to, you know,

8

actually create this similar bridge that -- of communication

9

between the two nations and have the opportunity to, you know,

10

really, you know, connect?

11

MS. GRAHAM:

Yeah, it's something that -- actually the

12

lesson plan that Renee mentioned was this project that we

13

worked with, with the sister city.

14

something with Russian school children and children here in

15

Fairbanks.

16

years with that.

17

We're looking at developing

I guess they've done a few things the last few

So I think that's a great opening for us to start

18

talking to people that are over in Russia and looking at what

19

they have and try to work together.

20

MS. MARX:

And consider it in this re-evaluation or,

21

you know, the HABS re-evaluation or is the HABS re-evaluation

22

going to focus strictly on the built environment to.....

23

MS. GRAHAM:

Yes, usually we just would HABS in with

24

the NHL, the nomination, that's going to be focusing on the

25

built environment.

26

1

MS. MARX:

2

MS. GRAHAM:

3

MS. MARX:

Yeah.
But that history.....
Because it originally was the cultural --

4

the reason that -- you know, the designation was a cultural

5

designation.

MS. GRAHAM:

6
7
8
9

You know, it.....
It's the -- yeah, it's the history of

the.....
MS. MARX:

The history associated with the buildings.

It's not necessarily the quality of this fantastic, unique

10

building.

11

if you're going to stay with that kind of nomination, you know,

12

and in keeping with the original nomination, you know, it could

13

be expanded upon.

14
15

That's the original designation.

MS. GRAHAM:

MS. MARX:

17

MS. GRAHAM:

MS. MARX:

20

MS. GRAHAM:

21

big on funding.....

22

MS. MARX:

23

MS. GRAHAM:

25

Yeah.
We put a grant in to look at those

facilities and look at what's left.....

19

24

And then something we've also looked into

is looking into the facilities that were built in Canada.

16

18

So it seems like

What's -- yeah, exactly.
.....but the American government is not

No.
.....us going to another nation.

think there are opportunities.....
MS. MARX:

But I just thought maybe through

But I

27

1

associations, at least kind of make sure that -- you know, that

2

was its original purpose, not -- it wasn't insular.

3
4
5
6
7
8
9

MS. GRAHAM:

And we talked to those preservation

professionals that are in Russia and it came to that.
Do we have any comments or questions from the folks
that we have on the phone?
LIEUTENANT NUTT:
have any at this time.
MS. CLEMMONS:

This is Lieutenant Nutt.

I don't

Thank you, though, for asking.
This is Janet.

I don't know if there

10

are any questions.

11

comes into the record, but if there are any questions about the

12

NHL designation that maybe we could answer.

13

We couldn't quite hear everything that

MS. GRAHAM:

Okay.

So for the folks in the room, the

14

National Park Service oversees all National Historic Landmarks

15

and so they were saying if there are any questions about that

16

original designation, that they could answer those questions.

17

MR. LEWIS:

Lisa, this is Darryl.

I'm with the Park

18

Service in Anchorage.

19

bothers me about NEPA and Section 106 is in the NEPA document

20

there it states that the impact to the NHL with the demolition

21

of the two hangars is a moderate impact.

22

hasn't been anything done yet to say that that's the case.

23

That's something that's still down the road.

24
25

And one of the things that really

And there really

So it's really kind of a flaw in the document to say at
this point that that's the potential outcome.

Because it could

28

1
2

be a severe impact to the NHL, including loss to the NHL.
MR. SPRAU:

Hey, Darryl -- so, Darryl, this is Matt

3

Sprau, the NEPA coordinator.

4

addresses Renee's comment earlier, too, is that for the Draft

5

EIS for this one, we actually ended up with two impacts for

6

cultural resources which is not unique -- I'm sorry, which is

7

unique in the NEPA world.

8
9

And this actually kind of

So we have the fixed -- the significant impact occurs
from the physical loss of the hangars through the

10

implementation of both and then we actually looked at the loss

11

of the hangars and the overall integrity of the NHL to convey

12

its historical significance and how that affects it.

13

And so that's where our moderate impact came out.

14

we actually have two.....

15

MR. LEWIS:

You're cutting out there.

16

MR. SPRAU:

Okay.

17

So we actually have two impacts.

So

Is

this better?

18

MR. LEWIS:

Yeah, that's better.

Thank you.

19

MR. SPRAU:

So we actually have two impacts to the

20

cultural resources section which is unique for NEPA.

And I

21

guess as I mentioned, so the physical loss of the hangars is a

22

significant impact because you're tearing down these historical

23

structures, but then the -- you look at the overall -- how does

24

the tearing down of these structures affect the overall

25

historical significance of Ladd Field.

And so that's where we

29

1

discussed this with Lisa and our cultural resources staff to

2

determine what type of impact that is.

3
4
5

And I don't know if Lisa could describe it better than
I can so.....
MS. GRAHAM:

Sure.

And, Darryl, what we did is -- and

6

I agree that the formal revision, that's years down the road.

7

And we heard from the advisory council that it could take

8

upwards of five or six years from start to finish once we

9

even -- we have a re-evaluation together as a packet.

And so

10

what we did was we utilized the expertise that we have as

11

architectural historians and did our best analysis of what we

12

see within the National Historic Landmark and what we see as

13

professionals looking at all of the aspects of integrity and

14

the significance of the landmark.

15

And so as professionals, we do believe that the

16

landmark will still retain enough integrity to be a National

17

Historic Landmark, but it will be.....

18

MR. LEWIS:

19

MS. GRAHAM:

You're cutting out again, Lisa.
As professionals, we do believe that the

20

National Historic Landmark will retain enough of those seven

21

aspects of integrity to have that integrity and significance.

22

And -- but at the same token, we recognize that with the loss

23

of the hangars, all of that is being impacted, but we do not

24

believe it's to such a degree that the NHL will lose its

25

designation of a landmark.

But we also understand that that

30

1

is -- the official process is years down the road.
MR. LEWIS:

2
3

the Draft EIS just to kind of help inform the EIS?
MS. GRAHAM:

4
5

Do you have that, that you could include in

Yeah, it's actually in Section 2 -- 3, I

thought.

6

MR. SPRAU:

7

MS. GRAHAM:

Three.
Yeah, it's in Section 3.

And what I can

8

do is after this meeting e-mail you the pages with that -- that

9

that information is in.

10

It's in the Affected Environment

section.

11

MS. BLAHUTA:

12

MR. LEWIS:

You're still an optimist.
Okay.

I just -- I'm not trying to be

13

difficult.

14

coming from to come up with the moderate impact to the NHL

15

because it's -- like you said, you know, we're still working on

16

the MOA for this and we haven't really got there yet.

17

I'm just trying to understand where you guys are

MS. GRAHAM:

And what we did was really take the

18

expertise that we had available and the information we had

19

available to assess the situation as what you would do in the

20

Environmental Impact Statement and look at all the information

21

available.

22

Army is committed to keeping the NHL and we would be the ones

23

pushing this evaluation forward.

24

the re-evaluation are the people that are in the ring now and

25

so there really isn't -- from our point of view, there isn't

And the truth is that, as you look at the NHL, the

The people that are writing

31

1

any chance of us losing that NHL nomination.

2

committed to keeping our landmark.

3

LIEUTENANT NUTT:

4

MR. SPRAU:

5

MS. GRAHAM:

6

Okay.

We're very

Thanks, Lisa.

Thank you.
That's for the comment and the question,

Darryl.
MR. SPRAU:

7
8

comments?

9

today.

Any other questions or concerns or

Well, thank you very much, everybody, for joining us

It's been a long process, but combining both of these

10

processes has been a really good experience for myself, I know

11

for Lisa and our cultural resources department, and it's really

12

great working with you and your inputs.

13

MS. GRAHAM:

14

(Off record)

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

15

(END OF PROCEEDINGS)

16

* * * *

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

32
C E R T I F I C A T E

1
2

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

3

STATE OF ALASKA

4

I, Elizabeth D'Amour, Notary Public in and for the
State of Alaska, residing at Fairbanks, Alaska, and Court
Reporter for Liz D'Amour & Associates, Inc., do hereby certify:

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

)
) ss.
)

That the annexed and foregoing FORT WAINWRIGHT, ALASKA,
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT ON THE DISPOSITION OF
HANGARS 2 AND 3, TRANSCRIPT OF AGENCY MEETING was taken before
me on the 11th day of July 2013, beginning at the hour of 10:00
a.m., at the Princess Hotel, Jade Room, Fairbanks, Alaska;
That this hearing, as heretofore annexed, is a true and
correct transcription of the proceedings, taken by me
electronically and thereafter transcribed by me;
That the hearing has been retained by me for the
purpose of filing the same with MR. MATTHEW SPRAU, 1060 Gaffney
Road, #4500, Fort Wainwright, Alaska 99703-4500.
That I am not a relative or employee or attorney or
counsel of any of the parties, nor am I financially interested
in this action.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and
affixed my seal this 23rd day of July 2013.

16
17
______________________________
Elizabeth D'Amour
Notary Public in and for Alaska
My commission expires: 12/28/14

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

S E A L

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:

Caillouet, Debra J (DEC)
Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Malen, Joseph S CIV (US)
RE: EIS for Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3, Fort Wainwright, AK: Invite to Draft EIS Agency Meeting
(UNCLASSIFIED)
Friday, June 21, 2013 11:03:10 AM

I skimmed the environmental contamination section yesterday and didn't have any concerns. I will be
on leave on July 11 and there is no one else able to participate. If there are specific questions that I
might be able to answer, you can give them my information.
Deb Caillouet
Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation
Division of Spill Prevention and Response
Contaminated Sites/Federal Facilities
555 Cordova
Anchorage AK 99501
907-269-0298
-----Original Message----From: Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US) [mailto:matthew.h.sprau.ctr@mail.mil]
Sent: Friday, June 21, 2013 10:56 AM
To: Caillouet, Debra J (DEC)
Subject: EIS for Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3, Fort Wainwright, AK: Invite to Draft EIS Agency
Meeting (UNCLASSIFIED)
Classification: UNCLASSIFIED
Caveats: NONE
Ms. Caillouet,
The US Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska (USAG FWA) has prepared a Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) addressing the potential impacts
associated with the proposed facility disposition options for Hangars 2 and
3 on the Main Post of Fort Wainwright. Hangars 2 and 3 are contributing
resources to the Ladd Field National Historic Landmark (NHL) and Ladd Air
Force Base Cold War Historic District (Cold War Historic District). Because
the hangars are contributing resources to the Ladd Field NHL and Cold War
Historic District their loss would be a significant impact to cultural
resources. All other impacts would be less than significant.
Your agency's participation in a meeting to be held on Thursday July 11,
2013 in Fairbanks regarding the Draft EIS is requested. Meeting details are
listed in the attached invitation, as well as information on the public
meeting.
A copy of the Draft EIS has been sent to you via mail service. The document
can also be viewed and downloaded from:
http://www.wainwright.army.mil/env/NEPA/Current.html
Please let me know if you have any questions.
Very Respectfully,
Matt
Matthew H. Sprau
CSU-CEMML
NEPA Coordinator

U.S. Army Garrison
Fort Wainwright, Alaska
Ph: (907)361-9688
Fax: (907)361-9867
Classification: UNCLASSIFIED
Caveats: NONE

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:

Slaughter, Kent
Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
dmackey@blm.gov
Re: FW: EIS for Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3, Fort Wainwright, AK: Invite to Draft EIS Agency Meeting
(UNCLASSIFIED)
Monday, June 24, 2013 1:06:58 PM

Mr. Sprau,
The BLM Alaska Fire Service has no comment on the DEIS regarding Hangers 2 and 3.
Thank you for requesting our participation.
Kent Slaughter
Manager
BLM Alaska Fire Service
Fort Wainwright, Alaska 99703
907 356-5505

On Fri, Jun 21, 2013 at 2:51 PM, Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US) <matthew.h.sprau.ctr@mail.mil> wrote:
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED
Caveats: NONE
Mr. Slaught,
The email below was intended for Mary Lynch but it was bounced back. I just
learned that she is no longer with BLM-AFS so I'm hoping you can transmit
the letter and invitation to the person who has taken over her
responsibilities.
Thank you,
Matt
Matthew H. Sprau
CSU-CEMML
NEPA Coordinator
U.S. Army Garrison
Fort Wainwright, Alaska
Ph: (907)361-9688
Fax: (907)361-9867

-----Original Message----From: Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Sent: Friday, June 21, 2013 10:18 AM
To: 'mlynch@blm.gov'
Subject: EIS for Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3, Fort Wainwright, AK: Invite
to Draft EIS Agency Meeting (UNCLASSIFIED)

       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED
Caveats: NONE
Ms. Lynch,
The US Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska (USAG FWA) has prepared a Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) addressing the potential impacts
associated with the proposed facility disposition options for Hangars 2 and
3 on the Main Post of Fort Wainwright. Hangars 2 and 3 are contributing
resources to the Ladd Field National Historic Landmark (NHL) and Ladd Air
Force Base Cold War Historic District (Cold War Historic District). Because
the hangars are contributing resources to the Ladd Field NHL and Cold War
Historic District their loss would be a significant impact to cultural
resources. All other impacts would be less than significant.
Your agency's participation in a meeting to be held on Thursday July 11,
2013 in Fairbanks regarding the Draft EIS is requested. Meeting details are
listed in the attached invitation, as well as information on the public
meeting.
A copy of the Draft EIS has been sent to you via mail service. The document
can also be viewed and downloaded from:
http://www.wainwright.army.mil/env/NEPA/Current.html
Please let me know if you have any questions.
Very Respectfully,
Matt
Matthew H. Sprau
CSU-CEMML
NEPA Coordinator
U.S. Army Garrison
Fort Wainwright, Alaska
Ph: (907)361-9688
Fax: (907)361-9867
Classification: UNCLASSIFIED
Caveats: NONE

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED
Caveats: NONE

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Bergmann, Pamela
Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Grace Cochon
ER 13/0447 - U.S. Department of the Interior comments on DEIS for the Disposition of Hangers 2 and 3 at Fort
Wainwright.
Monday, August 05, 2013 2:45:49 PM
ER13-0447 Disposition of Hangers DEIS_DOI Comments.pdf

Mr. Sprau-Our comments on the subject document are attached. I would appreciate you confirming receipt of this
correspondence.
Thank you.
Pamela
-----------------------------Pamela Bergmann
Regional Environmental Officer - Alaska
U.S. Department of the Interior
1689 C Street, Room 119
Anchorage, Alaska 99501-52126
907-271-5011 (work phone)
907-227-3783 (work cell)
pamela_bergmann@ios.doi.gov

United States Department of the Interior
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance
1689 C Street, Room 119
Anchorage, Alaska 99501-5126

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL, NO HARD COPY TO FOLLOW
9043.1
ER 13/0447
PEP/ANC

August 5, 2013

Matthew Sprau
Directorate of Public Works
Attention: IMFW-PWE (Sprau)
1060 Gaffney Road #4500
Fort Wainwright, Alaska 99703-4500
Subject: Comments on the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) for the Disposition of
Hangers 2 and 3 at Fort Wainwright, Alaska
Dear Mr. Sprau:
The U.S. Department of the Interior has reviewed the subject document. We have no comments
to offer at this time.
Thank you for the opportunity to review this DEIS.

Sincerely,

Pamela Bergmann
Regional Environmental Officer - Alaska

From:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Kathy Marx
Sprau, Matthew H CTR (US)
Jae Hill; Bernardo Hernandez; Mary Bork
Commission on Historic Preservation Disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 DEIS Comments
Friday, August 02, 2013 1:51:24 PM
LaddFieldNHLDEISComment_2013_0805.pdf

Hi Matt,

Attached are the Commission’s comments. Thanks Matt.

Kathy Marx
Planner III - Long Range Planning
FNSB Community Planning
907-459-7406

FAIRBANKS NORTH STAR BOROUGH
809 Pioneer

Road '~

P 0 Box 71267:'< Fairbanks , Alaska 99707-1267

(907) 459- 1260

'~FAX

(907) 459- 1255

MEMORANDUM
TO:

Matthew H. Sprau, CSU-CEMML, NEPA Coordinator
US ARMY GARRISON , FORT WAINWRIGHT ALASKA

FROM:

COMMISSION ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION

DATE:

August 5, 2013

SUBJECT:

Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) for the Disposition on Hangars 2
And 3, Fort Wainwright Alaska - Comment

The Fairbanks North Star Borough (FNSB) Commission on Historic Preservation would like to
express its concern that the preferred alternative for the disposition of Hangars 2 and 3 on Fort
Wainwright is demolition . While we understand the difficult fiscal and engineering constraints
imposed by the age and condition of the structures, we feel that the hangars provide immeasurable
and irreplaceable historic value to the Ladd Field National Historic Landmark (NHL) and are essential
elements of the NHL. We also realize that the NHL has a life of its own. Of the original 26 structures
within the NHL at the time of designation (1985), only 18 remain. At the present rate of structural
loss within the NHL, there is the possibility that by June 17, 2079, all structures within the NHL would
be gone, less than 100 years from the original nomination date. As a preservation Commission, we
would prefer the buildings that once constituted Ladd Field are preserved for future generations and
not demolished. If that is not possible, we recommend the dissolution of the Ladd Field NHL.
Upon technical review of the DEIS, the Commission would like to provide the following comments
regarding procedural matters and perceived inaccuracies as presented in the document:
A. Katharine Kerr, National Park Service, indicated in Case Digest, Fall 2009, that "Programmatic
Agreement for Aviation Stationing at Fort Wainwright" was executed on September 28, 2009,
as a closed case . The review was instigated by a proposed increase in aviation stationing at
FWW that would include construction of a number of facilities and increase in soldiers and
helicopters. One adverse effect included a potential change-in-use of Hangars 2 and 3. The
Programmatic Agreement, therefore , included adhering to the Secretary of Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties for adaptive re-use to the maximum extent
possible, not demolition or no action, leading to inevitable collapse .
B. The "inability to meet the functional requirements as maintenance facilities for modern aircraft"
is mentioned at several junctures within the DEIS. The Commission takes exception to that
determination relative to Hangar 3, believing a variety of maintenance activities and storage of
aircraft could still be conducted within the hangar as it is not necessary to utilize hoists
anchored to structural beams to perform maintenance tasks on aircraft.
After review of the proposed mitigation measures for the demolition , we feel that not enough of the
historic integrity will be retained through "active preservation" methods. We recommend the adoption
of additional mitigation measures as follows :

•

Extensive photo documentation of the exterior and interior of the buildings. Using high
resolution photography, we'd like as much as possible documented about the construction
methods and materials, structural design, interior and exterior aesthetics, and any historical
graffiti or unique artifacts. Additionally, the documentation should be made available at
locations other than Fort Wainwright, such as the Noel Wien Library or an exhibit at the Morris
Thompson Cultural Center in Fairbanks. The exhibit would document the history of the
hangars and why they were significant at the time of the war effort.

•

Recycling and reuse, to the extent possible, of the materials. Most of the demolished
materials are currently slated for deposition in the FNSB Solid Waste Landfill. We feel that
there is a unique opportunity to make viable materials available for reuse in new construction
either on Fort Wainwright or elsewhere in the community. Some of the materials may have
intrinsic historic value in addition to the construction value. We suggest the remainder of the
debris be disposed of through a recycling provider, to the extent possible, and only the
materials that can neither be reused nor recycled then be disposed of in the landfill.

•

Augment the existing "Lend-Lease Memorial" in Downtown Fairbanks. Using the last of the
photos and materials obtained, update the memorial to indicate the disposition of the Hangars
and use the new photos to supplement the display.

•

Comprehensive review of the remaining hangars at other strategic lend-lease locations. The
Memorandum of Agreement mitigation measure C- ("Re-evaluation of the Ladd Field NHL")should incorporate the results of a review of remaining hangars at other lend-lease locations in
order to comprehensively evaluate the cumulative effects of any further potential structural
losses within the NHL.

The FNSB appreciates the opportunity to respond to the DEIS and the continued cooperation towards
the retention and preservation of the community's vital historic resources.

Date
Claus M. Naske, Chair
FNSB Commission on Historic Preservation

UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
REGION 10
1200 Sixth Avenue, Suite 900
Seattle, WA 98101-3140

OFFICE OF
ECOSYSTEMS,
TRIBAL AND PUBLIC
AFFAIRS

August 1, 2013
Matthew Sprau, Directorate ofPublic Works
Attention: IMFW-PWE (Sprau)
1060 Gaffney Road #4500
Fort Wainwright, Alaska 99703-4500
Re:

EPA comments on the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for Disposition of Hangars 2 and
3, Fort Wainwright, Alaska, EPA Project# 11-4133-DOD.

Dear Mr. Sprau:
Thank you for the opportunity to review the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the
Disposition ofHangars 2 and 3, Fort Wainwright, Alaska (CEQ #20130173). We have reviewed the EIS
in accordance with our responsibilities under Section 309 of the Clean Air Act and the National
Environmental Policy Act. Section 309 specifically directs the EPA to review and comment in writing
on the environmental impacts associated with all major federal actions as well as the adequacy ofthe
EIS in meeting procedural and public disclo sure requirements ofNEP A.
We commend the U.S. Army Garrison Fort Wainwright, Alaska (USAG-FWA) for an extremely clear,
thorough and user-friendly document. We especially appreciate the inclusion of color maps and
diagrams, tabs, an index, and useful appendices in the hard copy. We also recognize the notable effort
by USAG-FWA to consult with potentially affected and interested federally-recognized tribes. Finally,
we believe the EIS considered a wide range of alternatives and appropriately screened out those
alternatives not meeting rational criteria to result in the USAG-FWA preferred alternative (Alternative
1).

We have given the EISa rating ofEC-1(Environmental Concerns-Adequate Information). A description
of our rating system is enclosed. Based on review, and as identified in our scoping comments, our
primary concern continues to be the management ofknown CERCLA sites (FTWW-018, CC-FTWW103 , and FTWW-348) as well as yet-to-be-discovered contamination in the project area. The EIS clearly
identifies the likelihood of additional contamination surrounding and beneath the hangar project area, as
well as beneath other structures being demolished in the project area. We strongly encourage USAGFWA to work closely with our Federal Facilities program (Deb Yamamoto, EPA Region 10 Federal
Facilities Site Cleanup Manager, 206-553-7216 or yamamoto.deb@epa.gov) as results of sampling
become available and if any changes to institutional controls or the CERCLA Record of Decision are
contemplated.
Again, we appreciate the opportunity to offer comments on the Draft EIS and look forward to working
with you on the final EIS to address the CERCLA-related issues we have identified. Please contact me at

(206) 553-1601 or by electronic mail at r~i-~_b.gg.t_t_g_l;u:i_$.tjn_~@~-P-~--_gQy, or you may contact Jennifer Curtis
of my staff in Anchorage at (907) 271-6324 or curtis.jennifer@eQa.gov with any questions you have
regarding our comments.

Sincere]y, ,

afr"/z::_

_ ./ /

-

~. ~U-·~~ u~~

Christine B. Reichgott, Manager
Environmental Review and Sediments Management Unit
Enclosure

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Rating System for
Draft Environmental Impact Statements
Definitions and Follow-Up Action*
Environmental Impact of the Action
LO - Lack of Objections
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) review has not identified any potential
environmental impacts requiring substantive changes to the proposal. The review may have disclosed
opportunities for application of mitigation measures that could be accomplished with no more than
minor changes to the proposal.
EC - Environmental Concerns
EPA review has identified environmental impacts that should be avoided in order to fully protect the
environment. Corrective measures may require changes to the preferred alternative or application of
mitigation measures that can reduce these impacts.
EO- Environmental Objections
EPA review has identified significant environmental impacts that should be avoided in order to
provide adequate protection for the environment. Corrective measures may require substantial changes
to the preferred alternative or consideration of some other project alternative (including the no-action
alternative or a new alternative). EPA intends to work with the lead agency to reduce these impacts.
EU- Environmentally Unsatisfactory
EPA review has identified adverse environmental impacts that are of sufficient magnitude that they
are unsatisfactory from the standpoint of public health or welfare or environmental quality. EPA intends
to work with the lead agency to reduce these impacts. If the potential unsatisfactory impacts are not
corrected at the final EIS stage, this proposal will be recommended for referral to the Council on
Environmental Quality (CEQ).
Adequacy of the Impact Statement
Category 1- Adequate
EPA believes the draft EIS adequately sets forth the environmental impact(s) ofthe preferred
alternative and those of the alternatives reasonably available to the project or action. No further analysis
of data collection is necessary, but the reviewer may suggest the addition of clarifying language or
information.
Category 2 -Insufficient Information
The draft EIS does not contain sufficient information for EPA to fully assess environmental impacts
that should be avoided in order to fully protect the environment, or the EPA reviewer has identified new
reasonably available alternatives that are within the spectrum of alternatives analyzed in the draft EIS,
which could reduce the environmental impacts of the action. The identified additional information, data,
analyses or discussion should be included in the final EIS.
Category 3- Inadequate

EPA does not believe that the draft EIS adequately assesses potentially significant environmental
impacts of the action, or the EPA reviewer has identified new, reasonably available alternatives that are
outside of the spectrum of alternatives analyzed in the draft EIS, which should be analyzed in order to
reduce the potentially significant environmental impacts. EPA believes that the identified additional
information, data, analyses, or discussions are of such a magnitude that they should have full public
review at a draft stage. EPA does not believe that the draft EIS is adequate for the purposes ofthe
National Environmental Policy Act and or Section 309 review, and thus should be formally revised and
made available for public comment in a supplemental or revised draft EIS. On the basis of the potential
significant impacts involved, this proposal could be a candidate for referral to the CEQ.
*From EPA Manual 1640 Policy and Procedures for the Review of Federal Actions Impacting the
Environment. February, 1987.

This page intentionally left blank.

